<doc id="59453" wikidata="Q1824509" url="?curid=59453" title="Spanish missions in California">
<text>The Spanish missions in California () formed a series of 21 religious outposts or missions established between 1769 and 1833 in what is now the U.S. state of California. The missions were established by Catholic priests of the Franciscan order to evangelize indigenous peoples backed by the military force of the Spanish Empire. The missions were part of the expansion and settlement of New Spain through the formation of Alta California, expanding the empire into the most northern and western parts of Spanish North America. Civilian settlers and soldiers accompanied missionaries and formed settlements like the Pueblo de Los Ángeles.

Indigenous peoples were forced into settlements called reductions, disrupting their traditional way of life and negatively affecting as many as one thousand villages. European diseases spread in the close quarters of the missions, causing mass death. Abuse, malnourishment, and overworking were common. At least 87,787 baptisms and 63,789 deaths occurred. Indigenous peoples often resisted and rejected conversion to Christianity. Some fled the missions while others formed rebellions. Missionaries recorded frustrations with getting indigenous people to internalize Catholic scripture and practice. Indigenous girls were taken away from their parents and housed at &quot;monjeríos&quot;. The missions&#x27; role in destroying Indigenous culture has been described as cultural genocide.

By 1810, Spain&#x27;s king had been imprisoned by the French, and financing for military payroll and missions in California ceased. In 1821, Mexico achieved independence from Spain, yet did not send a governor to California until 1824. The missions maintained authority over indigenous peoples and land holdings until the 1830s. At the peak of their influence in 1832, the coastal mission system controlled approximately one-sixth of Alta California. The First Mexican Republic secularized the missions with the Mexican Secularization Act of 1833, which emancipated indigenous peoples from the missions. Mission lands were largely given to settlers and soldiers, along with a minority of indigenous people.

The surviving mission buildings are the state of California&#x27;s oldest structures and most-visited historic monuments, many of which were restored after falling into near disrepair in the early 20th century. They have become a symbol of California, appearing in many movies and television shows, and are an inspiration for Mission Revival architecture. Concerns have been raised by historians and Indigenous peoples of California about the way the mission period in California is taught in educational institutions and memorialized. The oldest European settlements of California were formed around or near Spanish missions, including the four largest: Los Angeles, San Diego, San Jose, and San Francisco. Santa Barbara, and Santa Cruz were also formed near missions, and the historical imprint reached as far north as Sonoma in what became the wine country.

== Alta California mission planning, structure and culture ==

=== Coastal mission chain, planning and overview ===

Prior to 1754, grants of mission lands were made directly by the Spanish Crown. But, given the remote locations and the inherent difficulties in communicating with the territorial governments, he delegated authority to make grants to the viceroys of New Spain. During the reign of King Charles III, they granted lands to allow establishing the Alta California missions. They were motivated in part by presence of Russian fur traders along the California coast in the mid-1700s.

The missions were to be interconnected by an overland route which later became known as the Camino Real. The detailed planning and direction of the missions was to be carried out by Friar Junípero Serra, O.F.M. (who, in 1767, along with his fellow priests, had taken control over a group of missions in Baja California Peninsula previously administered by the Jesuits). After Serra&#x27;s death, Rev. Fermín Francisco de Lasuén established nine more mission sites, from 1786 through 1798; others established the last three compounds, along with at least five &quot;asistencias&quot; (mission assistance outposts).

=== Shelved plans for additional mission chains ===

Work on the coastal mission chain was concluded in 1823, completed after Serra&#x27;s death in 1784. Plans to build a twenty-second mission in Santa Rosa in 1827 were canceled.

The Rev. Pedro Estévan Tápis proposed establishing a mission on one of the Channel Islands in the Pacific Ocean off San Pedro Harbor in 1784, with either Santa Catalina or Santa Cruz (known as &quot;Limú&quot; to the Tongva residents) being the most likely locations, the reasoning being that an offshore mission might have attracted potential people to convert who were not living on the mainland, and could have been an effective measure to restrict smuggling operations. Governor José Joaquín de Arrillaga approved the plan the following year; however, an outbreak of &quot;sarampión&quot; (measles) killing some 200 Tongva people coupled with a scarcity of land for agriculture and potable water left the success of such a venture in doubt, so no effort to found an island mission was ever made.

In September 1821, the Rev. Mariano Payeras, &quot;Comisario Prefecto&quot; of the California missions, visited Cañada de Santa Ysabel east of Mission San Diego de Alcalá as part of a plan to establish an entire chain of inland missions. The Santa Ysabel Asistencia had been founded in 1818 as a &quot;mother&quot; mission. However, the plan&#x27;s expansion never came to fruition.

=== Mission sites, selection and layout ===
 

In addition to the &quot;presidio&quot; (royal fort) and &quot;pueblo&quot; (town), the &quot;misión&quot; was one of the three major agencies employed by the Spanish sovereign to extend its borders and consolidate its colonial territories. &quot;Asistencias&quot; (&quot;satellite&quot; or &quot;sub&quot; missions, sometimes referred to as &quot;contributing chapels&quot;) were small-scale missions that regularly conducted Mass on days of obligation but lacked a resident priest; as with the missions, these settlements were typically established in areas with high concentrations of potential native converts. The Spanish Californians had never strayed from the coast when establishing their settlements; Mission Nuestra Señora de la Soledad was located farthest inland, being only some thirty miles (48 kilometers) from the shore. Each frontier station was forced to be self-supporting, as existing means of supply were inadequate to maintain a colony of any size. California was months away from the nearest base in colonized Mexico, and the cargo ships of the day were too small to carry more than a few months&#x27; rations in their holds. To sustain a mission, the &quot;padres&quot; required converted Native Americans, called &quot;neophytes&quot;, to cultivate crops and tend livestock in the volume needed to support a fair-sized establishment. The scarcity of imported materials, together with a lack of skilled laborers, compelled the missionaries to employ simple building materials and methods in the construction of mission structures.

Although the missions were considered temporary ventures by the Spanish hierarchy, the development of an individual settlement was not simply a matter of &quot;priestly whim.&quot; The founding of a mission followed longstanding rules and procedures; the paperwork involved required months, sometimes years of correspondence, and demanded the attention of virtually every level of the bureaucracy. Once empowered to erect a mission in a given area, the men assigned to it chose a specific site that featured a good water supply, plenty of wood for fires and building materials, and ample fields for grazing herds and raising crops. The padres blessed the site, and with the aid of their military escort fashioned temporary shelters out of tree limbs or driven stakes, roofed with thatch or reeds (&quot;cañas&quot;). It was these simple huts that ultimately gave way to the stone and adobe buildings that exist to the present.

The first priority when beginning a settlement was the location and construction of the church (&quot;iglesia&quot;). The majority of mission sanctuaries were oriented on a roughly east–west axis to take the best advantage of the sun&#x27;s position for interior illumination; the exact alignment depended on the geographic features of the particular site. Once the spot for the church had been selected, its position was marked and the remainder of the mission complex was laid out. The workshops, kitchens, living quarters, storerooms, and other ancillary chambers were usually grouped in the form of a quadrangle, inside which religious celebrations and other festive events often took place. The &quot;cuadrángulo&quot; was rarely a perfect square because the missionaries had no surveying instruments at their disposal and simply measured off all dimensions by foot. Some fanciful accounts regarding the construction of the missions claimed that tunnels were incorporated in the design, to be used as a means of emergency egress in the event of attack; however, no historical evidence (written or physical) has ever been uncovered to support these assertions.

=== Franciscans and native conscription ===

The Alta California missions, known as reductions (&quot;reducciones&quot;) or congregations (&quot;congregaciones&quot;), were settlements founded by the Spanish colonizers of the New World with the purpose of totally assimilating indigenous populations into European culture and the Catholic religion. It was a doctrine established in 1531, which based the Spanish state&#x27;s right over the land and persons of the Indies on the Papal charge to evangelize them. It was employed wherever the indigenous populations were not already concentrated in native &quot;pueblos&quot;. Indians were congregated around the mission proper through forced resettlement, in which the Spanish &quot;reduced&quot; them from what they perceived to be a free &quot;undisciplined&#x27;&quot; state with the ambition of converting them into &quot;civilized&quot; members of colonial society. The civilized and disciplined culture of the natives, developed over 8,000 years, was not considered. A total of 146 Friars Minor, mostly Spaniards by birth, were ordained as priests and served in California between 1769 and 1845. Sixty-seven missionaries died at their posts (two as &quot;martyrs&quot;: &quot;Padres&quot; Luis Jayme and Andrés Quintana), while the remainder returned to Europe due to illness, or upon completing their ten-year service commitment. As the rules of the Franciscan Order forbade friars to live alone, two missionaries were assigned to each settlement, sequestered in the mission&#x27;s &quot;convento&quot;. To these the governor assigned a guard of five or six soldiers under the command of a corporal, who generally acted as steward of the mission&#x27;s temporal affairs, subject to the priests&#x27; direction.

Indians were initially attracted into the mission compounds by gifts of food, colored beads, bits of bright cloth, and trinkets. Once a Native American &quot;gentile&quot; was baptized, they were labeled a &quot;&quot;, or new believer. This happened only after a brief period during which the initiates were instructed in the most basic aspects of the Catholic faith. But, while many natives were lured to join the missions out of curiosity and sincere desire to participate and engage in trade, many found themselves trapped once they were baptized. On the other hand, Indians staffed the militias at each mission and had a role in mission governance.

To the &quot;padres&quot;, a baptized Indian person was no longer free to move about the country, but had to labor and worship at the mission under the strict observance of the priests and overseers, who herded them to daily masses and labors. If an Indian did not report for their duties for a period of a few days, they were searched for, and if it was discovered that they had left without permission, they were considered runaways. Large-scale military expeditions were organized to round up the escaped neophytes. Sometimes, the Franciscans allowed neophytes to escape the missions, or they would allow them to visit their home village. However, the Franciscans would only allow this so that they could secretly follow the neophytes. Upon arriving to the village and capturing the runaways, they would take back Indians to the missions, sometimes as many as 200 to 300 Indians.

A total of 20,355 natives were &quot;attached&quot; to the California missions in 1806 (the highest figure recorded during the Mission Period); under Mexican rule the number rose to 21,066 (in 1824, the record year during the entire era of the Franciscan missions). During the entire period of Mission rule, from 1769 to 1834, the Franciscans baptized 53,600 adult Indians and buried 37,000. Dr. Cook estimates that 15,250 or 45% of the population decrease was caused by disease. Two epidemics of measles, one in 1806 and the other in 1828, caused many deaths. The mortality rates were so high that the missions were constantly dependent upon new conversions.

Young native women were required to reside in the &quot;monjerío&quot; (or &quot;nunnery&quot;) under the supervision of a trusted Indian matron who bore the responsibility for their welfare and education. Women only left the convent after they had been &quot;won&quot; by an Indian suitor and were deemed ready for marriage. Following Spanish custom, courtship took place on either side of a barred window. After the marriage ceremony the woman moved out of the mission compound and into one of the family huts. These &quot;nunneries&quot; were considered a necessity by the priests, who felt the women needed to be protected from the men, both Indian and &quot;de razón&quot; (&quot;instructed men&quot;, i.e. Europeans). The cramped and unsanitary conditions the girls lived in contributed to the fast spread of disease and population decline. So many died at times that many of the Indian residents of the missions urged the priests to raid new villages to supply them with more women.

==== Death rate at the missions ====
As of December 31, 1832 (the peak of the mission system&#x27;s development) the mission &quot;padres&quot; had performed a combined total of 87,787 baptisms and 24,529 marriages, and recorded 63,789 deaths. The death rate at the missions, particularly of children, was very high and the majority of children baptized did not survive childhood. At Mission San Gabriel, for instance, three of four children died before reaching the age of two.

The high rate of death at the missions have been attributed to several factors, including disease, torture, overworking, malnourishment, and cultural genocide. Forcing native people into close quarters at the missions spread disease quickly. While being kept at the missions, native people were transitioned to a Spanish diet that left them more unable to ward off diseases, the most common being dysentery, fevers with unknown causes, and venereal disease.

The death rate has been compared to that of other atrocities. American author and lawyer Carey McWilliams argued that &quot;the Franciscan padres eliminated Indians with the effectiveness of Nazis operating concentration camps.&quot; 
=== Mission labor ===
At least 90,000 Indigenous peoples were kept in well-guarded mission compounds throughout the state as &quot;de facto&quot; slaves. The policy of the Franciscans was to keep them constantly occupied. Bells were vitally important to daily life at any mission. The bells were rung at mealtimes, to call the Mission residents to work and to religious services, during births and funerals, to signal the approach of a ship or returning missionary, and at other times; novices were instructed in the intricate rituals associated with the ringing the mission bells. The daily routine began with sunrise Mass and morning prayers, followed by instruction of the natives in the teachings of the Roman Catholic faith. After a breakfast of &quot;atole&quot;, the able-bodied men and women were assigned their tasks for the day. The women were committed to dressmaking, knitting, weaving, embroidering, laundering, and cooking, while some of the stronger girls ground flour or carried adobe bricks (weighing 55 lb, or 25 kg each) to the men engaged in building. The men worked a variety of jobs, having learned from the missionaries how to plow, sow, irrigate, cultivate, reap, thresh, and glean. They were taught to build adobe houses, tan leather hides, shear sheep, weave rugs and clothing from wool, make ropes, soap, paint, and other useful duties.

The work day was six hours, interrupted by dinner (lunch) around 11:00 a.m. and a two-hour &quot;siesta&quot;, and ended with evening prayers and the rosary, supper, and social activities. About 90 days out of each year were designated as religious or civil holidays, free from manual labor. The labor organization of the missions resembled a slave plantation in many respects. Foreigners who visited the missions remarked at how the priests&#x27; control over the Indians appeared excessive, but necessary given the white men&#x27;s isolation and numeric disadvantage. Subsequently, the Missions operated under strict and harsh conditions; A &#x27;light&#x27; punishment would&#x27;ve been considered 25 lashings (azotes). Indians were not paid wages as they were not considered free laborers and, as a result, the missions were able to profit from the goods produced by the Mission Indians to the detriment of the other Spanish and Mexican settlers of the time who could not compete economically with the advantage of the mission system.

The Franciscans began to send neophytes to work as servants of Spanish soldiers in the presidios. Each presidio was provided with land, el rancho del rey, which served as a pasture for the presidio livestock and as a source of food for the soldiers. Theoretically the soldiers were supposed to work on this land themselves but within a few years the neophytes were doing all the work on the presidio farm and, in addition, were serving domestics for the soldiers. While the fiction prevailed that neophytes were to receive wages for their work, no attempt was made to collect the wages for these services after 1790. It is recorded that the neophytes performed the work &quot;under unmitigated compulsion.&quot;

In recent years, much debate has arisen about the priests&#x27; treatment of the Indians during the Mission period, and many believe that the California mission system is directly responsible for the decline of the native cultures. From the perspective of the Spanish priest, their efforts were a well-meaning attempt to improve the lives of the heathen natives.

===Franciscan violence against the native population===
The Franciscan arrival to Alta California came with a wave of torture, rape, and murder towards the native population of California. Native Californians, attracted to the Missions by the promise of food and gifts, were forcibly prevented from leaving. Any who attempted to escape was usually given a severe beating and put in shackles. Any form of Native rebellion was met with force due to numerical disadvantage facing the Franciscans.

When Native Women attempted to abort their unborn children – which they had conceived as a byproduct of rape, the Friars would have them beaten, chained in iron, shaved, and stipulated to stand in-front of the altar each mass with a decorated wooden newborn.

This trend of violence was due to the Franciscans&#x27; desire for a greater Hispanicized population in Alta California, both for protection against a foreign invasion and for a labor force to benefit the Spanish Empire. As a result, a higher emphasis of Native reproduction was a duty taken on by the Spanish Fransicans. Tejana born feminist historian Antonia Castañeda wrote about the treatment that would occur in Mission Santa Cruz:

Franciscan Priests would also forbid any form of native culture in the Mission system. This would include but not be limited to, songs, dances, and ceremonies. They objectified the destruction of any form of morality, ideology or personality that characterized the Native life.
Women, in particular, would face a higher degree of punishment. Those who did not comply with the Missions demands would be labeled a witch, dehumanizing them for further violence.

University of Chicago Professor Ramon Guttiriez wrote:

=== Mission industries ===

The goal of the missions was, above all, to become self-sufficient in relatively short order. Farming, therefore, was the most important industry of any mission. Barley, maize, and wheat were among the most common crops grown. Cereal grains were dried and ground by stone into flour. Even today, California is well known for the abundance and many varieties of fruit trees that are cultivated throughout the state. The only fruits indigenous to the region, however, consisted of wild berries or grew on small bushes. Spanish missionaries brought fruit seeds over from Europe, many of which had been introduced from Asia following earlier expeditions to the continent; orange, grape, apple, peach, pear, and fig seeds were among the most prolific of the imports. Grapes were also grown and fermented into wine for sacramental use and again, for trading. The specific variety, called the &quot;Criolla&quot; or &quot;Mission grape&quot;, was first planted at Mission San Juan Capistrano in 1779; in 1783, the first wine produced in Alta California emerged from the mission&#x27;s winery. Ranching also became an important mission industry as cattle and sheep herds were raised.

Mission San Gabriel Arcángel unknowingly witnessed the origin of the California citrus industry with the planting of the region&#x27;s first significant orchard in 1804, though the commercial potential of citrus was not realized until 1841. Olives (first cultivated at Mission San Diego de Alcalá) were grown, cured, and pressed under large stone wheels to extract their oil, both for use at the mission and to trade for other goods. The Rev. Serra set aside a portion of the Mission Carmel gardens in 1774 for tobacco plants, a practice that soon spread throughout the mission system.

It was also the missions&#x27; responsibility to provide the Spanish forts, or &quot;presidios&quot;, with the necessary foodstuffs, and manufactured goods to sustain operations. It was a constant point of contention between missionaries and the soldiers as to how many &quot;fanegas&quot; of barley, or how many shirts or blankets the mission had to provide the garrisons on any given year. At times these requirements were hard to meet, especially during years of drought, or when the much anticipated shipments from the port of San Blas failed to arrive. The Spaniards kept meticulous records of mission activities, and each year reports submitted to the Father-Presidente summarizing both the material and spiritual status at each of the settlements.

Livestock was raised, not only for the purpose of obtaining meat, but also for wool, leather, and tallow, and for cultivating the land. In 1832, at the height of their prosperity, the missions collectively owned:
* 151,180 head of cattle;
* 137,969 sheep;
* 14,522 horses;
* 1,575 mules or burros;
* 1,711 goats; and
* 1,164 swine.

All these grazing animals were originally brought up from Mexico. A great many Indians were required to guard the herds and flocks on the mission ranches, which created the need for &quot;...a class of horsemen scarcely surpassed anywhere.&quot; These animals multiplied beyond the settler&#x27;s expectations, often overrunning pastures and extending well-beyond the domains of the missions. The giant herds of horses and cows took well to the climate and the extensive pastures of the Coastal California region, but at a heavy price for the California Native American people. The uncontrolled spread of these new herds, and associated invasive exotic plant species, quickly exhausted the native plants in the grasslands, and the chaparral and woodlands that the Indians depended on for their seed, foliage, and bulb harvests. The grazing-overgrazing problems were also recognized by the Spaniards, who periodically had extermination parties cull and kill thousands of excess livestock, when herd populations grew beyond their control or the land&#x27;s capacity. Years with a severe drought did this also.

Mission kitchens and bakeries prepared and served thousands of meals each day. Candles, soap, grease, and ointments were all made from tallow (rendered animal fat) in large vats located just outside the west wing. Also situated in this general area were vats for dyeing wool and tanning leather, and primitive looms for weaving. Large &quot;bodegas&quot; (warehouses) provided long-term storage for preserved foodstuffs and other treated materials.

Each mission had to fabricate virtually all of its construction materials from local materials. Workers in the &quot;carpintería&quot; (carpentry shop) used crude methods to shape beams, lintels, and other structural elements; more skilled artisans carved doors, furniture, and wooden implements. For certain applications bricks (&quot;ladrillos&quot;) were fired in ovens (kilns) to strengthen them and make them more resistant to the elements; when &quot;tejas&quot; (roof tiles) eventually replaced the conventional &quot;jacal&quot; roofing (densely packed reeds) they were placed in the kilns to harden them as well. Glazed ceramic pots, dishes, and canisters were also made in mission kilns.

Prior to the establishment of the missions, the native peoples knew only how to utilize bone, seashells, stone, and wood for building, tool making, weapons, and so forth. The missionaries established manual training in European skills and methods; in agriculture, mechanical arts, and the raising and care of livestock. Everything consumed and otherwise utilized by the natives was produced at the missions under the supervision of the padres; thus, the neophytes not only supported themselves, but after 1811 sustained the entire military and civil government of California. The foundry at Mission San Juan Capistrano was the first to introduce the Indians to the Iron Age. The blacksmith used the mission&#x27;s forges (California&#x27;s first) to smelt and fashion iron into everything from basic tools and hardware (such as nails) to crosses, gates, hinges, even cannon for mission defense. Iron in particular was a commodity that the mission acquired solely through trade, as there was no mining infrastructure or industry in the region.

No study of the missions is complete without mention of their extensive water supply systems. Stone &quot;zanjas&quot; (aqueducts, sometimes spanning miles, brought fresh water from a nearby river or spring to the mission site. Open or covered lined ditches and/or baked clay pipes, joined with lime mortar or bitumen, gravity-fed the water into large cisterns and fountains, and emptied into waterways where the force of the water was used to turn grinding wheels and other simple machinery, or dispensed for use in cleaning. Water used for drinking and cooking was allowed to trickle through alternate layers of sand and charcoal to remove the impurities. One of the best-preserved mission water systems is at Mission Santa Barbara.

== History ==

Beginning in 1492 with the voyages of Christopher Columbus, the Kingdom of Spain sought to establish missions to convert indigenous people in &quot;Nueva España&quot; (&quot;New Spain&quot;), which consisted of the Caribbean, Mexico, and most of what is now the Southwestern United States) to Catholicism. This would facilitate colonization of these lands awarded to Spain by the Catholic Church, including that region later known as &quot;Alta California&quot;.

=== Early Spanish exploration ===

Only 48 years after Columbus discovered the Americas for Europe, Francisco Vázquez de Coronado set out from Compostela, New Spain on February 23, 1540, at the head of a large expedition. Accompanied by 400 European men-at-arms (mostly Spaniards), 1,300 to 2,000 Mexican Indian allies, several Indian and African slaves, and four Franciscan friars, he traveled from Mexico through parts of the southwestern United States to present-day Kansas between 1540 and 1542. Two years later on 27 June 1542, Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo set out from Navidad, Mexico and sailed up the coast of Baja California and into the region of Alta California.

=== Secret English claims ===

Unknown to Spain, Sir Francis Drake, an English privateer who raided Spanish treasure ships and colonial settlements, claimed the Alta California region as Nova Albion for the English Crown in 1579, a full generation before the first English landing in Jamestown in 1607. During his circumnavigation of the world, Drake anchored in a harbor just north of present-day San Francisco, California, establishing friendly relations with the Coastal Miwok and claiming the territory for Queen Elizabeth I. However, Drake sailed back to England and England (and later Britain) never pressed for any sort of claim regarding the region.

=== Russian exploration ===

However, it was not until 1741 that the Spanish monarchy of King Philip V was stimulated to consider how to protect his claims to Alta California. Philip was spurred on when the territorial ambitions of the Russian Empire were expressed in the Vitus Bering expedition along the western coast on the North American continent.

=== Spanish expansion ===

California represents the &quot;high-water mark&quot; of Spanish expansion in North America as the last and northernmost colony on the continent. The mission system arose in part from the need to control Spain&#x27;s ever-expanding holdings in the New World. Realizing that the colonies required a literate population base that the mother country could not supply, the Spanish government (with the cooperation of the Church) established a network of missions to convert the indigenous population to Christianity. They aimed to make converts and tax-paying citizens of those they conquered. To make them into Spanish citizens and productive inhabitants, the Spanish government and the Church required the indigenous people to learn Spanish language and vocational skills along with Christian teachings.

Estimates for the pre-contact indigenous population in California are based on a number of different sources and vary substantially, from as few as 133,000, to 225,000, to as many as 705,000 representing more than 100 separate tribes or nations.

On January 29, 1767, Spain&#x27;s King Charles III ordered the new governor Gaspar de Portolá to forcibly expel the Jesuits, who operated under the authority of the Pope and had established a chain of fifteen missions on the Baja California Peninsula. &quot;Visitador General&quot; José de Gálvez engaged the Franciscans, under the leadership of Friar Junípero Serra, to take charge of those outposts on March 12, 1768. The &quot;padres&quot; closed or consolidated several of the existing settlements, and also founded Misión San Fernando Rey de España de Velicatá (the only Franciscan mission in all of Baja California) and the nearby Visita de la Presentación in 1769. This plan, however, changed within a few months after Gálvez received the following orders: &quot;Occupy and fortify San Diego and Monterey for God and the King of Spain.&quot; The Church ordered the priests of the Dominican Order to take charge of the Baja California missions so the Franciscans could concentrate on founding new missions in Alta California.

=== Mission period (1769–1833) ===

On July 14, 1769, Gálvez sent the Portolá expedition out from Loreto to explore lands to the north. Leader Gaspar de Portolá was accompanied by a group of Franciscans led by Junípero Serra. Serra&#x27;s plan was to extend the string of missions north from the Baja California peninsula, connected by an established road and spaced a day&#x27;s travel apart. The first Alta California mission and presidio were founded at San Diego, the second at Monterey.

En route to Monterey, the Rev. Francisco Gómez and the Rev. Juan Crespí came across a Native settlement wherein two young girls were dying: one, a baby, said to be &quot;dying at its mother&#x27;s breast,&quot; the other a small girl suffering of burns. On July 22, Gómez baptized the baby, naming her &quot;Maria Magdalena&quot;, while Crespí baptized the older child, naming her &quot;Margarita&quot;. These were the first recorded baptisms in Alta California. Crespi dubbed the spot &quot;Los Cristianos&quot;. The group continued northward but missed Monterey Harbor and returned to San Diego on January 24, 1770. Near the end of 1769 the Portolá expedition had reached its most northerly point at present-day San Francisco. In following years, the Spanish Crown sent a number of follow-up expeditions to explore more of Alta California.

Spain also settled the California region with a number of African and mulatto Catholics, including at least ten of the recently re-discovered Los Pobladores, the founders of Los Angeles in 1781.

== Organization ==

The original intent was for each mission to be turned over to a secular clergy and all the common mission lands distributed amongst the native population within ten years after its founding. This policy was based upon Spain&#x27;s experience with the more advanced tribes in Mexico, Central America, and Peru.

In time, it became apparent to the Rev. Serra and his associates that the natives on the northern frontier in Alta California required a much longer period of acclimatization. None of the California missions ever attained complete self-sufficiency, and required continued (albeit modest) financial support from mother Spain.

=== Financial support ===

Mission development was financed out of &quot;El Fondo Piadoso de las Californias&quot; (&quot;The Pious Fund of the Californias&quot; to enable the missionaries to propagate the Catholic faith in the area then known as California. The fund originated in 1697 and consisted of voluntary donations from individuals and religious bodies in Mexico to members of the Society of Jesus.

With the onset of the Mexican War of Independence in 1810, support from the Pious Fund largely disappeared. Missions and converts were left on their own.

===Indigenous labor===

In 1800, native labor comprised the backbone of the colonial economy. Possibly &quot;the worst epidemic of the Spanish Era in California&quot; occurred between March and May 1806 when a measles epidemic and related complications killed one-quarter of the mission native population in the San Francisco Bay Area.

In 1811, the Spanish Viceroy in Mexico sent an &quot;interrogatorio&quot; (questionnaire) to all of the missions in Alta California regarding the customs, disposition, and condition of the Mission Indians. The replies varied greatly in the length, spirit, and even the value of the information provided. They were collected and prefaced by the Father-Presidente with a short general statement or abstract; the compilation was thereupon forwarded to the viceregal government. The contemporary nature of the responses, no matter how incomplete or biased some may be, are nonetheless of considerable value to modern ethnologists.

=== Russian settlements ===

Russian colonization of the Americas extended as far south as present-day Graton, Point Arena, and Tomales Bay. Chernyk, the farming community near Graton, was about from present-day Sonoma, California. It had a barracks, agricultural buildings, fields of grain and vegetables, an orchard and a vineyard. Their primary location was at Fort Ross (&quot;krepost&#x27; rus&quot;), an agricultural, scientific, and fur trading settlement located on the coast. When they exterminated the sea otter and seal populations, they failed in the ambition to supply Russia&#x27;s Alaskan settlements from California and left the area.

===Pirate attacks===

In November and December 1818, several of the missions were attacked by Hipólito Bouchard, &quot;California&#x27;s only pirate.&quot; A French privateer sailing under the flag of Argentina, &quot;Pirata Buchar&quot; (as Bouchard was known to the locals) worked his way down the California coast, conducting raids on the installations at Monterey, Santa Barbara, and San Juan Capistrano, with limited success. Upon hearing of the attacks, many mission priests (along with a few government officials) sought refuge at Mission Nuestra Señora de la Soledad, the mission chain&#x27;s most isolated outpost. Ironically, Mission Santa Cruz (though ultimately ignored by the marauders) was ignominiously sacked and vandalized by local residents who were entrusted with securing the church&#x27;s valuables.

=== Expansion stopped ===

By 1819, Spain decided to limit its &quot;reach&quot; in the New World to Northern California due to the costs involved in sustaining these remote outposts; the northernmost settlement therefore is Mission San Francisco Solano, founded in Sonoma in 1823.

An attempt to found a twenty-second mission in Santa Rosa in 1827 was aborted. In 1833, the final group of missionaries arrived in Alta California. These were Mexican-born (rather than Spaniards), and had been trained at the Apostolic College of Our Lady of Guadalupe in Zacatecas. Among these friars was Francisco García Diego y Moreno, who would become the first bishop of the Diocese of Both Californias. These friars would bear the brunt of the changes brought on by secularization and the U.S. occupation, and many would be marked by allegations of corruption.

===Chumash revolt===

The Chumash people revolted against the Spanish presence in 1824. The Chumash planned a coordinated rebellion at three missions. Due to an incident with a soldier at Mission Santa Inés, the rebellion began on Saturday, February 21. The Chumash withdrew from Mission Santa Inés upon the arrival of military reinforcements, then attacked Mission La Purisima from inside, forced the garrison to surrender, and allowed the garrison, their families, and the mission priest to depart for Santa Inés. The next day, the Chumash of Mission Santa Barbara captured the mission from within without bloodshed, repelled a military attack on the mission, and then retreated from the mission to the hills. The Chumash continued to occupy Mission La Purisima until a Mexican military unit attacked people on March 16 and forced them to surrender. Two military expeditions were sent after the Chumash in the hills; the first did not find them and the second negotiated with the Chumash and convinced a majority to return to the missions by June 28.

=== Secularization ===
As the Mexican republic matured, calls for the secularization (&quot;disestablishment&quot;) of the missions increased.

José María de Echeandía, the first native Mexican elected Governor of Alta California issued a &quot;Proclamation of Emancipation&quot; (or &quot;Prevenciónes de Emancipacion&quot;) on July 25, 1826. All Indians within the military districts of San Diego, Santa Barbara, and Monterey who were found qualified were freed from missionary rule and made eligible to become Mexican citizens. Those who wished to remain under mission tutelage were exempted from most forms of corporal punishment. By 1830, even the neophyte populations themselves appeared confident in their own abilities to operate the mission ranches and farms independently; the &quot;padres&quot;, however, doubted the capabilities of their charges in this regard.

Accelerating immigration, both Mexican and foreign, increased pressure on the Alta California government to seize the mission properties and dispossess the natives in accordance with Echeandía&#x27;s directive. Despite the fact that Echeandía&#x27;s emancipation plan was met with little encouragement from the novices who populated the southern missions, he was nonetheless determined to test the scheme on a large scale at Mission San Juan Capistrano. To that end, he appointed a number of &quot;comisionados&quot; (commissioners) to oversee the emancipation of the Indians. The Mexican government passed legislation on December 20, 1827, that mandated the expulsion of all Spaniards younger than sixty years of age from Mexican territories; Governor Echeandía nevertheless intervened on behalf of some of the missionaries to prevent their deportation once the law took effect in California.

Upon arriving in Monterey, California in April 1832, Thomas O. Larkin found the economics of land and commerce were controlled by the Spanish missions, presidios, pueblos, and a few ranchos.

Governor José Figueroa (who took office in 1833) initially attempted to keep the mission system intact, but the Mexican Congress passed &quot;An Act for the Secularization of the Missions of California&quot; on August 17, 1833, when liberal Valentín Gómez Farías was in office.

The Act also provided for the colonization of both Alta and Baja California, the expenses of this latter move to be borne by the proceeds gained from the sale of the mission property to private interests.

For instance, after Mexican independence, the Mexican government confiscated Franciscan lands and decommissioned them. This, however, did not see the end of Native plight since further dislocation and abuse occurred under Mexican control. Most of the confiscated Franciscan lands were given out as grants to white settlers or well connected Mexicans, while Native Californians continued to occupy the land as a labor force.

Mission San Juan Capistrano was the very first to feel the effects of secularization when, on August 9, 1834, Governor Figueroa issued his &quot;Decree of Confiscation.&quot; Nine other settlements quickly followed, with six more in 1835; San Buenaventura and San Francisco de Asís were among the last to succumb, in June and December 1836, respectively. The Franciscans soon thereafter abandoned most of the missions, taking with them almost everything of value, after which the locals typically plundered the mission buildings for construction materials. Former mission pasture lands were divided into large land grants called &quot;ranchos&quot;, greatly increasing the number of private land holdings in Alta California.

=== Rancho period (1834–1849) ===
The Indian towns at San Juan Capistrano, San Dieguito, and Las Flores continued for some time under a provision in &quot;Gobernador&quot; Echeandía&#x27;s 1826 Proclamation that allowed for the partial conversion of missions to &quot;pueblos&quot;.

According to one estimate, the native population in and around the missions proper was approximately 80,000 at the time of the confiscation; others claim that the statewide population had dwindled to approximately 100,000 by the early 1840s, due in no small part to the natives&#x27; exposure to European diseases, and from the Franciscan practice of cloistering women in the &quot;convento&quot; and controlling sexuality during the child-bearing age. (Baja California Territory experienced a similar reduction in native population resulting from Spanish colonization efforts there).

Pío de Jesús Pico, the last Mexican Governor of Alta California, found upon taking office that there were few funds available to carry on the affairs of the province. He prevailed upon the assembly to pass a decree authorizing the renting or the sale of all mission property, reserving only the church, a curate&#x27;s house, and a building for a courthouse. The expenses of conducting the services of the church were to be provided from the proceeds, but there was no disposition made as to what should be done to secure the funds for that purpose.

After secularization, Father-Presidente Narciso Durán transferred the missions&#x27; headquarters to Santa Bárbara, thereby making Mission Santa Bárbara the repository of some 3,000 original documents that had been scattered through the California missions. The Mission archive is the oldest library in the State of California that still remains in the hands of its founders, the Franciscans (it is the only mission where they have maintained an uninterrupted presence). Beginning with the writings of Hubert Howe Bancroft, the library has served as a center for historical study of the missions for more than a century. In 1895, journalist and historian Charles Fletcher Lummis criticized the Act and its results, saying:

=== California statehood (1850 and beyond) ===

Precise figures relating to the population decline of California indigenes are not available. One writer, Gregory Orfalea, estimates that pre-contact population was reduced by 33 percent during Spanish and Mexican rule, mostly through introduction of European diseases, but much more after the United States takeover in 1848. By 1870, the loss of indigenous lives had become catastrophic. Up to 80 percent died, leaving a population of about 30,000 in 1870. Orfalea claims that nearly half of the native deaths after 1848 were murder.

In 1837–38, a major smallpox epidemic devastated native tribes north of San Francisco Bay, in the jurisdiction of Mission San Francisco Solano. General Mariano Vallejo estimated that 70,000 died from the disease. Vallejo&#x27;s ally, chief Sem-Yeto, was one of the few natives to be vaccinated, and one of the few to survive.

When the mission properties were secularized between 1834 and 1838, the approximately 15,000 resident &quot;neophytes&quot; lost whatever protection the mission system afforded them. While under the secularization laws the natives were to receive up to one-half of the mission properties, this never happened. The natives lost whatever stock and movable property they may have accumulated. When California became a U.S. state, California law stripped them of legal title to the land. In the Act of September 30, 1850, Congress appropriated funds to allow the President to appoint three Commissioners, O. M. Wozencraft, Redick McKee and George W. Barbour, to study the California situation and &quot;...negotiate treaties with the various Indian tribes of California.&quot; Treaty negotiations ensued during the period between March 19, 1851, and January 7, 1852, during which the Commission interacted with 402 Indian chiefs and headmen (representing approximately one-third to one-half of the California tribes) and entered into eighteen treaties.

California Senator William M. Gwin&#x27;s Act of March 3, 1851 created the Public Land Commission, whose purpose was to determine the validity of Spanish and Mexican land grants in California. On February 19, 1853 Archbishop Joseph Sadoc Alemany filed petitions for the return of all former mission lands in the state. Ownership of (essentially exact area of land occupied by the original mission buildings, cemeteries, and gardens) was subsequently conveyed to the Church, along with the &quot;Cañada de los Pinos&quot; (or College Rancho) in Santa Barbara County comprising , and &quot;La Laguna&quot; in San Luis Obispo County, consisting of . As the result of a U.S. government investigation in 1873, a number of Indian reservations were assigned by executive proclamation in 1875. The commissioner of Indian affairs reported in 1879 that the number of Mission Indians in the state was down to around 3,000.

=== Legacy and Native American controversy ===
Some modern anthropologists cite a cultural bias on the part of the missionaries that blinded them to the natives&#x27; plight and caused them to develop strong negative opinions of the California Indians.

The mission project was a popular teaching tool used in California to teach school children about the Spanish missions, but became controversial. Its popularity began decreasing in the mid-2010s as educators questioned whether the assignment effectively teaches students about the Spanish missions&#x27; impact on indigenous Californians.

European diseases like influenza, measles, tuberculosis, gonorrhea, and dysentery killed a significant number of natives as a result of their contact with the Europeans, as the California Native Americans had no immunity to these diseases. Miners and settlers contributed to the high death rate.

The close relationship between church and government found in the original California mission system was a foundation for later forms of government. The early missions and their sub-missions formed the nuclei of what would later become the major metropolitan areas of San Francisco and Los Angeles, as well as many other smaller municipalities.

By eliminating the native population, the Spanish, Mexican, and later American settlers could take over the land without opposition. The early Spanish mission system established the basis for the cattle and agriculture economies that flourish in the state today.

== Mission administration ==

The &quot;Father-Presidente&quot; was the head of the Catholic missions in Alta and Baja California.

=== System Father-Presidentes ===
* The Rev. Junípero Serra (1769–1784)
* The Rev. Francisco Palóu (&quot;presidente pro tempore&quot;) (1784–1785)
* The Rev. Fermín Francisco de Lasuén (1785–1803)
* The Rev. Pedro Estévan Tápis (1803–1812)
* The Rev. José Francisco de Paula Señan (1812–1815)
* The Rev. Mariano Payéras (1815–1820)
* The Rev. José Francisco de Paula Señan (1820–1823)
* The Rev. Vicente Francisco de Sarría (1823–1824)
* The Rev. Narciso Durán (1824–1827)
* The Rev. José Bernardo Sánchez (1827–1831)
* The Rev. Narciso Durán (1831–1838)
* The Rev. José Joaquin Jimeno (1838–1844)
* The Rev. Narciso Durán (1844–1846)

He was appointed by the College of San Fernando de Mexico until 1812. Then the position became known as the &quot;Commissary Prefect&quot; who was appointed by the Commissary General of the Indies, a Franciscan residing in Spain. Beginning in 1831, separate individuals were elected to oversee Upper and Lower California.

=== Mission headquarters ===

* Mission San Diego de Alcalá (1769–1771)
* Mission San Carlos Borromeo de Carmelo (1771–1815)
* Mission La Purísima Concepción*(1815–1819)
* Mission San Carlos Borromeo de Carmelo (1819–1824)
* Mission San José*(1824–1827)
* Mission San Carlos Borromeo de Carmelo (1827–1830)
* Mission San José*(1830–1833)
* Mission Santa Barbara (1833–1846)

† The Rev. Payeras and the Rev. Durán remained at their resident missions during their terms as &quot;Father-Presidente&quot;, therefore those settlements became the de facto headquarters (until 1833, when all mission records were permanently relocated to Santa Barbara).

=== Mission locations ===
There were 21 missions accompanied by military outposts in Alta California from San Diego to Sonoma, California. To facilitate travel between them on horse and foot, the mission settlements were situated approximately 30 miles (48 kilometers) apart, about one day&#x27;s journey on horseback, or three days on foot. The entire trail eventually became a 600-mile (966-kilometer) long &quot;California Mission Trail.&quot; Heavy freight movement was practical only via water. Tradition has it that the padres sprinkled mustard seeds along the trail to mark it with bright yellow flowers.

Following the old Camino Real northwards, from San Diego through to the northernmost mission in Sonoma, California, north of San Francisco Bay, the missions were:

== Presidios and military districts ==

During the Mission Period Alta California was divided into four military districts. Each was garrisoned (&quot;comandancias&quot;) by a presidio strategically placed along the California coast to protect the missions and other Spanish settlements in Upper California. Each of these functioned as a base of military operations for a specific region. They were independent of one another and were organized from south to north as follows:
* El Presidio Real de San Diego founded on July 16, 1769 – responsible for the defense of all installations located within the First Military District (the missions at San Diego, San Luis Rey, San Juan Capistrano, and San Gabriel);
* El Presidio Real de Santa Bárbara founded on April 12, 1782 – responsible for the defense of all installations located within the Second Military District (the missions at San Fernando, San Buenaventura, Santa Barbara, Santa Inés, and La Purísima, along with &quot;El Pueblo de Nuestra Señora la Reina de los Ángeles del Río de Porciúncula&quot; [Los Angeles]);
* El Presidio Real de San Carlos de Monterey (&quot;El Castillo&quot;) founded on June 3, 1770 – responsible for the defense of all installations located within the Third Military District (the missions at San Luis Obispo, San Miguel, San Antonio, Soledad, San Carlos, and San Juan Bautista, along with &quot;Villa Branciforte&quot; [Santa Cruz]); and
* El Presidio Real de San Francisco founded on December 17, 1776 – responsible for the defense of all installations located within the Fourth Military District (the missions at Santa Cruz, San José, Santa Clara, San Francisco, San Rafael, and Solano, along with &quot;El Pueblo de San José de Guadalupe&quot; [San Jose]).
* El Presidio de Sonoma, or &quot;Sonoma Barracks&quot; (a collection of guardhouses, storerooms, living quarters, and an observation tower) was established in 1836 by Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo (the &quot;Commandante-General of the Northern Frontier of Alta California&quot;) as a part of Mexico&#x27;s strategy to halt Russian incursions into the region. The Sonoma Presidio became the new headquarters of the Mexican Army in California, while the remaining &quot;presidios&quot; were essentially abandoned and, in time, fell into ruins.

An ongoing power struggle between church and state grew increasingly heated and lasted for decades. Originating as a feud between the Rev. Serra and Pedro Fages (the military governor of Alta California from 1770 to 1774, who regarded the Spanish installations in California as military institutions first and religious outposts second), the uneasy relationship persisted for more than sixty years. Dependent upon one another for their very survival, military leaders and mission &quot;padres&quot; nevertheless adopted conflicting stances regarding everything from land rights, the allocation of supplies, protection of the missions, the criminal propensities of the soldiers, and (in particular) the status of the native populations.

== Present-day California missions ==

=== Building restoration ===

California is home to the greatest number of well-preserved missions found in any U.S. state. The missions are collectively the best-known historic element of the coastal regions of California:
* Most of the missions are still owned and operated by some entity within the Catholic Church.
* Three of the missions are still run under the auspices of the Franciscan Order (Santa Barbara, San Miguel Arcángel, and San Luis Rey de Francia)
* Four of the missions (San Diego de Alcalá, San Carlos Borromeo de Carmelo, San Francisco de Asís, and San Juan Capistrano) have been designated minor basilicas by the Holy See due to their cultural, historic, architectural, and religious importance.
* Mission La Purísima Concepción, Mission San Francisco Solano, and the one remaining mission-era structure of Mission Santa Cruz are owned and operated by the California Department of Parks and Recreation as State Historic Parks;
* Seven mission sites are designated National Historic Landmarks, fourteen are listed in the National Register of Historic Places, and all are designated as California Historical Landmarks for their historic, architectural, and archaeological significance.

Because virtually all of the artwork at the missions served either a devotional or didactic purpose, there was no underlying reason for the mission residents to record their surroundings graphically; visitors, however, found them to be objects of curiosity. During the 1850s a number of artists found gainful employment as draftsmen attached to expeditions sent to map the Pacific coastline and the border between California and Mexico (as well as plot practical railroad routes); many of the drawings were reproduced as lithographs in the expedition reports.

In 1875 American illustrator Henry Chapman Ford began visiting each of the twenty-one mission sites, where he created a historically important portfolio of watercolors, oils, and etchings. His depictions of the missions were (in part) responsible for the revival of interest in the state&#x27;s Spanish heritage, and indirectly for the restoration of the missions. The 1880s saw the appearance of a number of articles on the missions in national publications and the first books on the subject; as a result, a large number of artists did one or more mission paintings, though few attempted a series.

The popularity of the missions also stemmed largely from Helen Hunt Jackson&#x27;s 1884 novel &quot;Ramona&quot; and the subsequent efforts of Charles Fletcher Lummis, William Randolph Hearst, and other members of the &quot;Landmarks Club of Southern California&quot; to restore three of the southern missions in the early 20th century (San Juan Capistrano, San Diego de Alcalá, and San Fernando; the Pala &quot;Asistencia&quot; was also restored by this effort). Lummis wrote in 1895,

In acknowledgement of the magnitude of the restoration efforts required and the urgent need to have acted quickly to prevent further or even total degradation, Lummis went on to state, It is no exaggeration to say that human power could not have restored these four missions had there been a five-year delay in the attempt.

In 1911 author John Steven McGroarty penned &quot;The Mission Play&quot;, a three-hour pageant describing the California missions from their founding in 1769 through secularization in 1834, and ending with their &quot;final ruin&quot; in 1847.

Today, the missions exist in varying degrees of architectural integrity and structural soundness. The most common extant features at the mission grounds include the church building and an ancillary &quot;convento&quot; (convent) wing. In some cases (in San Rafael, Santa Cruz, and Soledad, for example), the current buildings are replicas constructed on or near the original site. Other mission compounds remain relatively intact and true to their original, Mission Era construction.

A notable example of an intact complex is the now-threatened Mission San Miguel Arcángel: its chapel retains the original interior murals created by Salinan Indians under the direction of Esteban Munras, a Spanish artist and last Spanish diplomat to California. This structure was closed to the public from 2003 to 2009 due to severe damage from the San Simeon earthquake. Many missions have preserved (or in some cases reconstructed) historic features in addition to chapel buildings.

The missions have earned a prominent place in California&#x27;s historic consciousness, and a steady stream of tourists from all over the world visit them. In recognition of that fact, on November 30, 2004, President George W. Bush signed HR 1446, the &quot;California Mission Preservation Act&quot;, into law. The measure provided $10 million over a five-year period to the California Missions Foundation for projects related to the physical preservation of the missions, including structural rehabilitation, stabilization, and conservation of mission art and artifacts. The California Missions Foundation, a volunteer, tax-exempt organization, was founded in 1998 by Richard Ameil, an eighth generation Californian. A change to the California Constitution has also been proposed that would allow the use of State funds in restoration efforts.

== Structures gallery ==

== See also ==

On California Missions:
* List of Spanish missions in California
* San Antonio de Pala Asistencia, not a full mission, but still serving the Pala reservation

On California history:
* Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail
* History of California through 1899
* History of the west coast of North America
* Mission Vieja

On general missionary history:
* Catholic Church and the Age of Discovery
* History of Christian Missions
* List of the oldest churches in Mexico
* Missionary

On colonial Spanish American history:
* Spanish colonization of the Americas
* California mission clash of cultures
* Indian Reductions
* California genocide
* Native Americans in the United States

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
=== Books ===
* 
* 
* Crespí, Juan: &quot;A Description of Distant Roads: Original Journals of the First Expedition into California, 1796–1770&quot;, edited and translated by Alan K. Brown, San Diego State University Press, 2001, 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Articles and archives ===
* Early California Population Project (ECPP) The Huntington Library, 2006. Provides public access to all the information contained in California&#x27;s historic mission registers.
* California Missions article at the &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;
* The California Missions, 2001.
* Matrimonial Investigation records of the San Gabriel Mission Claremont Colleges Digital Library, 2008, 169 records digitized and searchable by priest name or by the names of the couple requesting marriage.
* &quot;Junipero Serra, the Vatican, &amp; Enslavement Theology&quot; Preview of Fogel, Daniel. ISM Press Books. Offers a critical perspective on the missions&#x27; impact on California&#x27;s Indians.
* MissionTour Tom Simondi, 2001–2005.
* &quot;The Old Franciscan Missions of California&quot; James, George Wharton, 1913. eText at Project Gutenberg.
* The San Diego Founders Trail 2001–2008 website.
* Trails and Roads: El Camino Real Faigin, Daniel P. California Highways, 1996–2004
* Almanac: California Missions GAzis-SAx, Joel, 1999.

== External links ==

* The California Frontier Project: Dedicated the early California, including the Spanish missions
* California Mission Studies Association
* California&#x27;s Spanish Missions
* The California Missions Trail, California Department of Parks and Recreation
* Library of Congress: American Memory Project: &quot;Early California History, The Missions&quot;
* Tricia Anne Weber: The Spanish Missions of California
* &quot;Album of Views of the Missions of California&quot;, Souvenir Publishing Company, San Francisco, Los Angeles, 1890s.
* &quot;The Missions of California&quot;, by Eugene Leslie Smyth, Chicago: Alexander Belford &amp; Co., 1899.
* California Historical Society
* California Mission Visitors Guide
* California Missions: A Journey Along the El Camino Real (exhibit at The California Museum)
* National Register of Historic Places: Early History of the California Coast: List of Sites
* California Mission Sketches by Henry Miller, 1856 and Finding Aid to the Documents relating to Missions of the Californias : typescript, 1768–1802 at The Bancroft Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="4" end="34" title="Spanish missions in California" label="Spanish missions in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q22091139" start="47" end="78" title="List of Spanish missions in California" label="series of 21 religious outposts"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="158" end="168" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="203" end="219" title="Catholic priests" label="Catholic priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="227" end="237" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="247" end="257" title="evangelism" label="evangelize"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="258" end="276" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="313" end="327" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="387" end="396" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="422" end="437" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="504" end="525" title="Spanish North America" label="Spanish North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410547" start="615" end="636" title="Pueblo de Los Ángeles" label="Pueblo de Los Ángeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="639" end="657" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q350735" start="694" end="704" title="reductions" label="reductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="1042" end="1068" title="conversion to Christianity" label="conversion to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1206" end="1214" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116312234" start="1311" end="1320" title="monjeríos" label="monjeríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123011" start="1407" end="1424" title="cultural genocide" label="cultural genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="1568" end="1607" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexico achieved independence from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109279" start="1882" end="1904" title="First Mexican Republic" label="First Mexican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010245" start="1939" end="1973" title="Mexican Secularization Act of 1833" label="Mexican Secularization Act of 1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700522" start="2461" end="2489" title="Mission Revival architecture" label="Mission Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="2535" end="2567" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="Indigenous peoples of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815577" start="2657" end="2669" title="Memorialization" label="memorialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2790" end="2801" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="2803" end="2812" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="2814" end="2822" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2828" end="2841" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="2843" end="2856" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q159232" start="2862" end="2872" title="Santa Cruz, California" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11592" start="2956" end="2962" title="Sonoma, California" label="Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="3400" end="3411" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q805831" start="3685" end="3696" title="El Camino Real (California)" label="Camino Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="3781" end="3795" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="3841" end="3847" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="3896" end="3921" title="Baja California Peninsula" label="Baja California Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444431" start="3994" end="4020" title="Fermin Lasuen" label="Fermín Francisco de Lasuén"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400834" start="4448" end="4467" title="Pedro Estévan Tápis" label="Pedro Estévan Tápis"/>
<link wikidata="Q306147" start="4514" end="4529" title="Channel Islands of California" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="4555" end="4571" title="San Pedro Harbor" label="San Pedro Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q845229" start="4593" end="4607" title="Santa Catalina Island, California" label="Santa Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398502" start="4611" end="4621" title="Santa Cruz Island" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479279" start="4656" end="4662" title="Tongva people" label="Tongva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6292607" start="4922" end="4947" title="José Joaquín de Arrillaga" label="José Joaquín de Arrillaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="5033" end="5040" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q617891" start="5383" end="5410" title="Mission San Diego de Alcalá" label="Mission San Diego de Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419983" start="5482" end="5505" title="Santa Ysabel Asistencia" label="Santa Ysabel Asistencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="5890" end="5898" title="Colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="6098" end="6102" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355821" start="6513" end="6521" title="frontier" label="frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="6796" end="6802" title="ration" label="ration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6884" end="6900" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="6945" end="6950" title="agriculture" label="crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="6960" end="6969" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="7152" end="7169" title="building material" label="building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="7299" end="7308" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209542" start="7834" end="7839" title="herds" label="herds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="7852" end="7857" title="agriculture" label="crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="7914" end="7922" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="8007" end="8013" title="thatch" label="thatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976487" start="8017" end="8022" title="Phragmites" label="reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="8243" end="8249" title="Church (building)" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q210064" start="8418" end="8430" title="illumination (lighting)" label="illumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q656720" start="8643" end="8651" title="workshop" label="workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43164" start="8654" end="8661" title="kitchen" label="kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13381944" start="8760" end="8770" title="quadrangle (architecture)" label="quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="8939" end="8948" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q350735" start="9405" end="9415" title="Indian Reductions" label="reductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="9547" end="9556" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="9626" end="9642" title="European culture" label="European culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9651" end="9659" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="9799" end="9804" title="Papal" label="Papal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10357" end="10369" title="Franciscan#Name" label="Friars Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="10530" end="10536" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706803" start="10564" end="10574" title="Luis Jayme" label="Luis Jayme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760252" start="10579" end="10594" title="Andrés Quintana" label="Andrés Quintana"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="11246" end="11253" title="gentile" label="gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="11630" end="11638" title="baptism" label="baptized"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="13124" end="13131" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q116312234" start="13344" end="13352" title="monjerío" label="monjerío"/>
<link wikidata="Q284137" start="14115" end="14133" title="population decline" label="population decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939046" start="14663" end="14682" title="Mission San Gabriel Arcángel" label="Mission San Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123011" start="14900" end="14917" title="cultural genocide" label="cultural genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="15156" end="15165" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="15167" end="15172" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="15199" end="15215" title="venereal disease" label="venereal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035945" start="15307" end="15323" title="Carey McWilliams (journalist)" label="Carey McWilliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="15409" end="15414" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="15425" end="15444" title="concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="15491" end="15509" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="15599" end="15605" title="Slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="16072" end="16076" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="16089" end="16096" title="prayers" label="prayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16161" end="16175" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312651" start="16210" end="16215" title="atole" label="atole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="16474" end="16476" title="Kilogram" label="lb"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="16968" end="16974" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485549" start="17096" end="17108" title="Manual labour" label="manual labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878624" start="17694" end="17709" title="Mission Indians" label="Mission Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="17946" end="17954" title="presidio" label="presidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="20810" end="20818" title="Industry (economics)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="20843" end="20848" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="21198" end="21210" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950796" start="21462" end="21471" title="fermentation (food)" label="fermented"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="21486" end="21495" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878490" start="21588" end="21601" title="Mission (grape)" label="Mission grape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21759" end="21767" title="Ranch#Spanish North America" label="Ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482273" start="22968" end="22976" title="San Blas, Nayarit" label="San Blas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23664" end="23679" title="Ranch#Spanish North America" label="mission ranches"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="24163" end="24192" title="Invasive species" label="invasive exotic plant species"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565554" start="24216" end="24229" title="California native plants" label="native plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956487" start="24257" end="24280" title="California chaparral and woodlands" label="chaparral and woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="24366" end="24377" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q274393" start="24656" end="24664" title="bakery" label="bakeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q863266" start="24770" end="24776" title="tallow" label="tallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751632" start="24778" end="24786" title="kitchen rendering" label="rendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="24914" end="24921" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="25459" end="25464" title="kilns" label="kilns"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883136" start="26364" end="26371" title="foundry" label="foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="26449" end="26457" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="26463" end="26473" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q964257" start="26498" end="26504" title="bloomery" label="forges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="26534" end="26539" title="smelting" label="smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="26900" end="26912" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="26948" end="26957" title="aqueduct (watercourse)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q911999" start="27123" end="27134" title="lime mortar" label="lime mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="27138" end="27145" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="27180" end="27187" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="27617" end="27637" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="27643" end="27659" title="Spain" label="Kingdom of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="27753" end="27762" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="27841" end="27867" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="27907" end="27919" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134342" start="27935" end="27942" title="Inter caetera" label="awarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27959" end="27974" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="28143" end="28172" title="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="28443" end="28449" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="28484" end="28497" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="28513" end="28519" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q182491" start="28576" end="28599" title="Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo" label="Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156217" start="28613" end="28628" title="Barra de Navidad, Jalisco" label="Navidad, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="28766" end="28779" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981671" start="28900" end="28911" title="Nova Albion" label="Nova Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="28920" end="28933" title="The Crown" label="English Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="28997" end="29006" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558706" start="29027" end="29056" title="Francis Drake&amp;#x27;s circumnavigation" label="circumnavigation of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940863" start="29179" end="29192" title="Miwok" label="Coastal Miwok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="29230" end="29241" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="29466" end="29474" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="29608" end="29622" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q127641" start="29645" end="29657" title="Vitus Bering" label="Vitus Bering"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="30228" end="30249" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous population"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30729" end="30747" title="Population of Native California#Pre-contact estimates" label="as many as 705,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="30843" end="30854" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q461023" start="30880" end="30897" title="Gaspar de Portolá" label="Gaspar de Portolá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30901" end="30915" title="Suppression of the Society of Jesus#Spanish Empire and Naples" label="forcibly expel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="30920" end="30927" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q551654" start="31013" end="31021" title="Spanish missions in Baja California" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="31029" end="31054" title="Baja California Peninsula" label="Baja California Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709724" start="31086" end="31100" title="José de Gálvez" label="José de Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="31113" end="31124" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="31156" end="31170" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875717" start="31324" end="31369" title="Misión San Fernando Rey de España de Velicatá" label="Misión San Fernando Rey de España de Velicatá"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936298" start="31441" end="31466" title="Visita de la Presentación" label="Visita de la Presentación"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="31691" end="31706" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966440" start="31907" end="31925" title="Portolá expedition" label="Portolá expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q461023" start="31980" end="31997" title="Gaspar de Portolá" label="Gaspar de Portolá"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="32047" end="32061" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712954" start="32390" end="32401" title="Juan Crespí" label="Juan Crespí"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32822" end="32836" title="San Mateo Creek (Southern California)#History" label="Los Cristianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="33044" end="33057" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173053" start="33083" end="33096" title="List of Spanish monarchs" label="Spanish Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="33196" end="33206" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="33243" end="33250" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682303" start="33315" end="33329" title="Los Angeles Pobladores" label="Los Pobladores"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="33347" end="33358" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q924774" start="33453" end="33467" title="secular clergy" label="secular clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="33693" end="33697" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="33774" end="33781" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="33931" end="33947" title="self-sufficiency" label="self-sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197163" start="34152" end="34181" title="Pious Fund of the Californias" label="Pious Fund of the Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="34250" end="34283" title="Las Californias" label="the area then known as California"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="34416" end="34432" title="Jesuits" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="34457" end="34484" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="34800" end="34807" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="34902" end="34924" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="35540" end="35552" title="Ethnology" label="ethnologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="35584" end="35620" title="Russian colonization of the Americas" label="Russian colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542166" start="35658" end="35664" title="Graton, California" label="Graton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967716" start="35666" end="35677" title="Point Arena" label="Point Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818240" start="35683" end="35694" title="Tomales Bay" label="Tomales Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11592" start="35767" end="35785" title="Sonoma, California" label="Sonoma, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278115" start="35919" end="35928" title="Fort Ross, California" label="Fort Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="35995" end="36006" title="Fur trade" label="fur trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848406" start="36301" end="36318" title="Hippolyte Bouchard" label="Hipólito Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="36372" end="36381" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="36408" end="36417" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="36576" end="36589" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878658" start="36745" end="36781" title="Mission Nuestra Señora de la Soledad" label="Mission Nuestra Señora de la Soledad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061892" start="36843" end="36861" title="Mission Santa Cruz" label="Mission Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="37130" end="37149" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560270" start="37254" end="37282" title="Mission San Francisco Solano (California)" label="Mission San Francisco Solano"/>
<link wikidata="Q212991" start="37359" end="37369" title="Santa Rosa, California" label="Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146723" start="37537" end="37579" title="College of Guadalupe de Zacatecas" label="Apostolic College of Our Lady of Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483399" start="37617" end="37648" title="Francisco García Diego y Moreno" label="Francisco García Diego y Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116140" start="37905" end="37957" title="Chumash revolt of 1824" label="Chumash people revolted against the Spanish presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="39003" end="39017" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="39025" end="39041" title="disestablishment" label="disestablishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12260691" start="39077" end="39100" title="José María de Echeandía" label="José María de Echeandía"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="39352" end="39360" title="Monterey" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="40720" end="40740" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061100" start="40756" end="40772" title="Thomas O. Larkin" label="Thomas O. Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6292209" start="40904" end="40917" title="José Figueroa" label="José Figueroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484825" start="41007" end="41023" title="Congress of Mexico" label="Mexican Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010245" start="41037" end="41096" title="Mexican secularization act of 1833" label="An Act for the Secularization of the Missions of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q358534" start="41136" end="41157" title="Valentín Gómez Farías" label="Valentín Gómez Farías"/>
<link wikidata="Q490434" start="42044" end="42060" title="Ventura, California" label="San Buenaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="42164" end="42174" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939057" start="42585" end="42604" title="Mission San Juan Capistrano" label="San Juan Capistrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885444" start="42606" end="42618" title="San Dieguito complex" label="San Dieguito"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688385" start="42624" end="42634" title="Las Flores Estancia" label="Las Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q11951646" start="43269" end="43294" title="Baja California Territory" label="Baja California Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q949282" start="43401" end="43418" title="Pío Pico" label="Pío de Jesús Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748811" start="44454" end="44474" title="Hubert Howe Bancroft" label="Hubert Howe Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959074" start="44607" end="44630" title="Charles Fletcher Lummis" label="Charles Fletcher Lummis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607092" start="44830" end="44845" title="Gregory Orfalea" label="Gregory Orfalea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291384" start="45412" end="45427" title="Mariano Vallejo" label="Mariano Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096931" start="45500" end="45508" title="Sem-Yeto" label="Sem-Yeto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="46105" end="46113" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072140" start="46188" end="46204" title="O. M. Wozencraft" label="O. M. Wozencraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q50338037" start="46206" end="46218" title="Redick McKee" label="Redick McKee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46223" end="46240" title="George W. Barbour" label="George W. Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868980" start="46656" end="46671" title="William M. Gwin" label="William M. Gwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257429" start="46712" end="46734" title="Public Land Commission" label="Public Land Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="46803" end="46813" title="land grant" label="land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="46851" end="46861" title="Archbishop" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815531" start="46862" end="46882" title="Joseph Sadoc Alemany" label="Joseph Sadoc Alemany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290902" start="47132" end="47151" title="Rancho Cañada de los Pinos" label="Cañada de los Pinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q108106" start="47181" end="47201" title="Santa Barbara County" label="Santa Barbara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752553" start="47225" end="47234" title="Rancho Laguna (Alemany)" label="La Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q49014" start="47244" end="47266" title="San Luis Obispo County" label="San Luis Obispo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="47303" end="47318" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="47354" end="47372" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878624" start="47494" end="47509" title="Mission Indians" label="Mission Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="47609" end="47624" title="anthropology" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q123998060" start="47808" end="47823" title="California mission project" label="mission project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="48167" end="48176" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="48178" end="48185" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="48187" end="48199" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="48201" end="48210" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="48216" end="48225" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48226" end="48253" title="Genocides in history#Americas" label="killed a significant number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638531" start="48321" end="48348" title="Population history of indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="California Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="48709" end="48722" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="48727" end="48738" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166062" start="48806" end="48823" title="Native American Culture" label="native population"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="49228" end="49242" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636220" start="49266" end="49281" title="Francisco Palóu" label="Francisco Palóu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727855" start="49300" end="49311" title="pro tempore" label="pro tempore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444431" start="49342" end="49368" title="Fermín Francisco de Lasuén" label="Fermín Francisco de Lasuén"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400834" start="49392" end="49411" title="Pedro Estévan Tápis" label="Pedro Estévan Tápis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6292266" start="49435" end="49464" title="José Francisco de Paula Señan" label="José Francisco de Paula Señan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766106" start="49488" end="49503" title="Mariano Payéras" label="Mariano Payéras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925149" start="49580" end="49607" title="Vicente Francisco de Sarría" label="Vicente Francisco de Sarría"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965620" start="49631" end="49644" title="Narciso Durán" label="Narciso Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291695" start="49668" end="49689" title="José Bernardo Sánchez" label="José Bernardo Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6292579" start="49750" end="49769" title="José Joaquin Jimeno" label="José Joaquin Jimeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146827" start="49844" end="49877" title="College of San Fernando de Mexico" label="College of San Fernando de Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q617891" start="50175" end="50202" title="Mission San Diego de Alcalá" label="Mission San Diego de Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="50684" end="50692" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="50876" end="50891" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="50897" end="50906" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q11592" start="50910" end="50916" title="Sonoma, California" label="Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242756" start="51077" end="51095" title="day&amp;#x27;s journey" label="day&amp;#x27;s journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30076" start="51334" end="51341" title="mustard plant" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q805831" start="51422" end="51433" title="El Camino Real (California)" label="Camino Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="51451" end="51460" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q11592" start="51500" end="51518" title="Sonoma, California" label="Sonoma, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="51529" end="51546" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q605760" start="52047" end="52076" title="Presidio of San Diego" label="El Presidio Real de San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402430" start="52279" end="52312" title="Presidio of Santa Barbara" label="El Presidio Real de Santa Bárbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="52538" end="52637" title="Los Angeles, California" label="&amp;quot;El Pueblo de Nuestra Señora la Reina de los Ángeles del Río de Porciúncula&amp;quot; [Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q734577" start="52643" end="52685" title="Presidio of Monterey, California" label="El Presidio Real de San Carlos de Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q159232" start="52944" end="52985" title="Santa Cruz, California" label="&amp;quot;Villa Branciforte&amp;quot; [Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755360" start="52995" end="53028" title="Presidio of San Francisco" label="El Presidio Real de San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="53255" end="53311" title="San Jose, California" label="&amp;quot;El Pueblo de San José de Guadalupe&amp;quot; [San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932118" start="53317" end="53338" title="Presidio of Sonoma" label="El Presidio de Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440300" start="53437" end="53454" title="observation tower" label="observation tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291384" start="53483" end="53508" title="Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo" label="Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q389243" start="54004" end="54015" title="Pedro Fages" label="Pedro Fages"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="54800" end="54808" title="historic" label="historic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="55014" end="55024" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846867" start="55243" end="55257" title="minor basilica" label="minor basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="55266" end="55274" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933976" start="55509" end="55554" title="California Department of Parks and Recreation" label="California Department of Parks and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="55617" end="55643" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="55673" end="55709" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933979" start="55737" end="55767" title="California Historical Landmark" label="California Historical Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="56359" end="56369" title="lithograph" label="lithograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q644687" start="56416" end="56427" title="illustrator" label="illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721393" start="56428" end="56446" title="Henry Ford (illustrator)" label="Henry Chapman Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q462363" start="57057" end="57075" title="Helen Hunt Jackson" label="Helen Hunt Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326609" start="57100" end="57106" title="Ramona" label="Ramona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959074" start="57143" end="57166" title="Charles Fletcher Lummis" label="Charles Fletcher Lummis"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="57168" end="57191" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701655" start="57827" end="57848" title="John Steven McGroarty" label="John Steven McGroarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="58277" end="58284" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q631915" start="58310" end="58320" title="San Rafael, California" label="San Rafael"/>
<link wikidata="Q159232" start="58322" end="58332" title="Santa Cruz, California" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q985256" start="58338" end="58345" title="Soledad, California" label="Soledad"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="58673" end="58678" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404641" start="58691" end="58698" title="Salinan" label="Salinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="58699" end="58706" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400801" start="58730" end="58744" title="Esteban Munras" label="Esteban Munras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601805" start="58892" end="58913" title="2003 San Simeon earthquake" label="San Simeon earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="59246" end="59260" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="59763" end="59786" title="California Constitution" label="California Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22091139" start="59943" end="59981" title="List of Spanish missions in California" label="List of Spanish missions in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413377" start="59984" end="60014" title="San Antonio de Pala Asistencia" label="San Antonio de Pala Asistencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6299025" start="60101" end="60146" title="Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail" label="Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152813" start="60149" end="60183" title="History of California through 1899" label="History of California through 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870950" start="60186" end="60228" title="History of the west coast of North America" label="History of the west coast of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785911" start="60231" end="60244" title="Mission Vieja" label="Mission Vieja"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053123" start="60279" end="60319" title="Catholic Church and the Age of Discovery" label="Catholic Church and the Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545973" start="60322" end="60351" title="History of Christian Missions" label="History of Christian Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906504" start="60354" end="60391" title="List of the oldest churches in Mexico" label="List of the oldest churches in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="60394" end="60404" title="Missionary" label="Missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="60446" end="60482" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021280" start="60485" end="60521" title="California mission clash of cultures" label="California mission clash of cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q350735" start="60524" end="60541" title="Indian Reductions" label="Indian Reductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22090310" start="60544" end="60563" title="California genocide" label="California genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="60566" end="60603" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400558" start="61063" end="61085" title="The Huntington Library" label="The Huntington Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="61241" end="61262" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246557" start="61365" end="61383" title="Claremont Colleges" label="Claremont Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="61844" end="61861" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720978" start="62856" end="62877" title="The California Museum" label="The California Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854158" start="63124" end="63144" title="The Bancroft Library" label="The Bancroft Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59454" wikidata="Q13377795" url="?curid=59454" title="Mystery">
<text>Mystery, The Mystery, Mysteries or The Mysteries may refer to:

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Fictional characters===
*Mystery, a cat character in &quot;Emily the Strange&quot;
*Mystery, a seahorse that SpongeBob SquarePants adopts in the episode &quot;My Pretty Seahorse&quot;

=== Films ===
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (2012 film), a 2012 Chinese drama film
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (2014 film), a 2014 Chinese suspense thriller adventure film 
* &quot;Mystery, Alaska&quot;, a 1999 comedy-drama film
* &quot;Gumnaam – The Mystery&quot;, a 2008 Indian Hindi-language thriller film
* &quot;&quot;, a 2014 Indian film

===Genres===
* Mystery fiction, a genre of detective fiction
* Mystery film, a genre in cinema

===Literature===
* &quot;Mysteries&quot; (novel) or &quot;Mysterie&quot;, an 1892 existentialist novel by Knut Hamsun
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (novel), a 1990 novel by American author Peter Straub
*&quot; The Mystery&quot; (1907), a novel by Samuel Hopkins Adams

===Newspapers===
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (newspaper), an African American newspaper by Martin Delany

===Music===
====Groups====
* Mystery (band), a Canadian progressive-rock band formed in 1986
====Albums and EPs====
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (Blk Jks EP), 2009
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (Mystery EP), 1992
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (RAH Band album), 1985
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (Faye Wong album), 1994
* &quot;Mystery&quot;, a 1984 album by Vanilla Fudge
* &quot;Mystery&quot;, a 2006 album Evonne Hsu
* &quot;Myst3ry&quot;, a 2016 EP by Ladies&#x27; Code
* &quot;The Mystery&quot; (album)

====Songs====
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Live from the 2006 album Songs from Black Mountain
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Dio from the 1984 album &quot;The Last in Line&quot;
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Hugh Laurie from the television series &quot;A Bit of Fry &amp; Laurie&quot;
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Miles Davis from the 1992 album &quot;Doo-Bop&quot;
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Raveena from the album &quot;Asha&#x27;s Awakening&quot;
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Sara Groves from the album &quot;Invisible Empires&quot;
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Rod Temperton, performed by The Manhattan Transfer and Anita Baker
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by The Olivia Tremor Control from the album &quot;Black Foliage: Animation Music Volume One&quot;
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Wipers from the 1980 album &quot;Is This Real?&quot;
*&quot;Mystery&quot;, a song by Pond from the 2012 album &quot;Beard, Wives, Denim&quot;

===Television===
====Series====
* It&#x27;s a Mystery (TV series), a children&#x27;s television show
* &quot;Mystery!&quot;, a PBS program showcasing British detective fiction

====Other uses in television====
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (&quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;), an episode of the children&#x27;s show &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;
* &quot;The Mystery&quot; (&quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&quot;), an episode of the TV show &quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&quot;
* Mystery TV, a Canadian digital television channel
* Ion Mystery, an American digital television channel formerly branded as Mystery

==People==
* Mystery (pickup artist) (born 1971), stage name of entertainer Erik Von Markovik

==Religion and ancient culture==
* Mystery play, such as the Passion play
* Sacred mysteries, beliefs which cannot be explained by normal reasoning, or esoteric teachings which are kept secret from the non-initiated
** Greco-Roman mysteries, ancient religious cults whose rituals were not revealed to outsiders; the most famous were the Eleusinian Mysteries

==Vessels==
* &quot;Mystery&quot;, a cutter built in 1863 by Peter Hedland and subsequently captained by him on journeys to Western Australia
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (log canoe), a Chesapeake Bay log canoe
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (lugger), a Mount&#x27;s Bay lugger which made a voyage from Cornwall to Australia in 1855
** &quot;Spirit of Mystery&quot;, a modern recreation of &quot;Mystery&quot;
* , the name of more than one proposed or actual United States Navy ships

==Other uses==
*The Mystery, Wavertree Playground of England
*Sunbeam 1000 HP Mystery, car that held the land-speed record

==See also==

* Anomaly (disambiguation), a deviation or departure from the normal
* Enigma (disambiguation)
* Fushigi (disambiguation), Japanese for &quot;mystery&quot; or &quot;secret&quot;
* Mystère (disambiguation)
* Mysterious (disambiguation)
* Mystery watch
* Puzzle
* Riddle
* Secret
* Unsolved problem</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13377795" start="0" end="7" title="Mystery" label="Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377795" start="9" end="20" title="Mystery" label="The Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377795" start="22" end="31" title="Mystery" label="Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377795" start="35" end="48" title="Mystery" label="The Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337664" start="161" end="178" title="Emily the Strange" label="Emily the Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q865511" start="261" end="279" title="My Pretty Seahorse" label="My Pretty Seahorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274480" start="303" end="334" title="Mystery (2012 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (2012 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18611416" start="364" end="395" title="Mystery (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956926" start="454" end="469" title="Mystery, Alaska" label="Mystery, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618215" start="510" end="531" title="Gumnaam – The Mystery" label="Gumnaam – The Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="633" end="648" title="Mystery fiction" label="Mystery fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200678" start="681" end="693" title="Mystery film" label="Mystery film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785854" start="733" end="762" title="Mysteries (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Mysteries&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387225" start="834" end="861" title="Mystery (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q185406" start="953" end="973" title="Samuel Hopkins Adams" label="Samuel Hopkins Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q113581665" start="994" end="1025" title="Mystery (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948802" start="1104" end="1118" title="Mystery (band)" label="Mystery (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452355" start="1193" end="1225" title="Mystery (Blk Jks EP)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (Blk Jks EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948798" start="1234" end="1266" title="Mystery (Mystery EP)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (Mystery EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451919" start="1275" end="1311" title="Mystery (RAH Band album)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (RAH Band album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q698144" start="1320" end="1357" title="Mystery (Faye Wong album)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (Faye Wong album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q765243" start="1403" end="1416" title="Vanilla Fudge" label="Vanilla Fudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q433247" start="1453" end="1463" title="Evonne Hsu" label="Evonne Hsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22943395" start="1472" end="1479" title="Myst3ry" label="Myst3ry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319575" start="1520" end="1551" title="The Mystery (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Mystery&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346647" start="1624" end="1649" title="Songs from Black Mountain" label="Songs from Black Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q904969" start="1712" end="1728" title="The Last in Line" label="The Last in Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q300332" start="1812" end="1837" title="A Bit of Fry &amp;amp; Laurie" label="A Bit of Fry &amp;amp; Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q607953" start="1914" end="1921" title="Doo-Bop" label="Doo-Bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q113040337" start="1989" end="2010" title="Asha&amp;#x27;s Awakening" label="Asha&amp;#x27;s Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848426" start="2082" end="2099" title="Invisible Empires" label="Invisible Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q931723" start="2138" end="2151" title="Rod Temperton" label="Rod Temperton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2284" end="2325" title="Black Foliage: Animation Music Volume One" label="Black Foliage: Animation Music Volume One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943372" start="2397" end="2410" title="Is This Real?" label="Is This Real?"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876638" start="2480" end="2499" title="Beard, Wives, Denim" label="Beard, Wives, Denim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995183" start="2541" end="2572" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mystery (TV series)" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Mystery (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869166" start="2616" end="2624" title="Mystery!" label="Mystery!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593687" start="2719" end="2777" title="Mystery (Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713376" start="2857" end="2923" title="The Mystery (The Amazing World of Gumball)" label="&amp;quot;The Mystery&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424365" start="2994" end="3004" title="Mystery TV" label="Mystery TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149700" start="3046" end="3057" title="Ion Mystery" label="Ion Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q932484" start="3140" end="3163" title="Mystery (pickup artist)" label="Mystery (pickup artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="3257" end="3269" title="Mystery play" label="Mystery play"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016426" start="3298" end="3314" title="Sacred mysteries" label="Sacred mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q505821" start="3441" end="3462" title="Greco-Roman mysteries" label="Greco-Roman mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975529" start="3642" end="3655" title="Peter Hedland" label="Peter Hedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692268" start="3725" end="3756" title="Mystery (log canoe)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (log canoe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705992" start="3787" end="3815" title="Mystery (lugger)" label="&amp;quot;Mystery&amp;quot; (lugger)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577992" start="3907" end="3924" title="Spirit of Mystery" label="Spirit of Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975513" start="4079" end="4099" title="Wavertree Playground" label="Wavertree Playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503799" start="4112" end="4135" title="Sunbeam 1000 hp" label="Sunbeam 1000 HP Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q225529" start="4190" end="4214" title="Anomaly (disambiguation)" label="Anomaly (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q672356" start="4259" end="4282" title="Enigma (disambiguation)" label="Enigma (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510016" start="4285" end="4309" title="Fushigi (disambiguation)" label="Fushigi (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219314" start="4368" end="4392" title="Mystère (disambiguation)" label="Mystère (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27788121" start="4395" end="4422" title="Mysterious (disambiguation)" label="Mysterious (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322922" start="4425" end="4438" title="Mystery watch" label="Mystery watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13698" start="4441" end="4447" title="Puzzle" label="Puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47054" start="4450" end="4456" title="Riddle" label="Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503443" start="4459" end="4465" title="Secret" label="Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151809" start="4468" end="4484" title="Unsolved problem" label="Unsolved problem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59456" wikidata="Q462174" url="?curid=59456" title="Hydrate">
<text>In chemistry, a hydrate is a substance that contains water or its constituent elements. The chemical state of the water varies widely between different classes of hydrates, some of which were so labeled before their chemical structure was understood.

==Chemical nature==

===Inorganic chemistry===

Hydrates are inorganic salts &quot;containing water molecules combined in a definite ratio as an integral part of the crystal&quot; that are either bound to a metal center or that have crystallized with the metal complex. Such hydrates are also said to contain &quot;water of crystallization&quot; or &quot;water of hydration&quot;. If the water is heavy water in which the constituent hydrogen is the isotope deuterium, then the term &quot;deuterate&quot; may be used in place of &quot;hydrate&quot;.
A colorful example is cobalt(II) chloride, which turns from blue to red upon hydration, and can therefore be used as a water indicator.

The notation &quot;&quot;hydrated compound⋅&quot;n&quot;, where &quot;n&quot; is the number of water molecules per formula unit of the salt, is commonly used to show that a salt is hydrated. The &quot;n&quot; is usually a low integer, though it is possible for fractional values to occur. For example, in a monohydrate &quot;n&quot; = 1, and in a hexahydrate &quot;n&quot; = 6. Numerical prefixes mostly of Greek origin are:
A hydrate that has lost water is referred to as an anhydride; the remaining water, if any exists, can only be removed with very strong heating. A substance that does not contain any water is referred to as anhydrous. Some anhydrous compounds are hydrated so easily that they are said to be hygroscopic and are used as drying agents or desiccants.

===Organic chemistry===
In organic chemistry, a hydrate is a compound formed by the hydration, i.e. &quot;Addition of water or of the elements of water (i.e. H and OH) to a molecular entity&quot;. For example: ethanol, , is the product of the hydration reaction of ethene, , formed by the addition of H to one C and OH to the other C, and so can be considered as the hydrate of ethene. A molecule of water may be eliminated, for example, by the action of sulfuric acid. Another example is chloral hydrate, , which can be formed by reaction of water with chloral, .

Many organic molecules, as well as inorganic molecules, form crystals that incorporate water into the crystalline structure without chemical alteration of the organic molecule (water of crystallization). The sugar trehalose, for example, exists in both an anhydrous form (melting point 203 °C) and as a dihydrate (melting point 97 °C). Protein crystals commonly have as much as 50% water content.

Molecules are also labeled as hydrates for historical reasons not covered above. Glucose, , was originally thought of as and described as a carbohydrate.

Hydrate formation is common for active ingredients. Many manufacturing processes provide an opportunity for hydrates to form and the state of hydration can be changed with environmental humidity and time. The state of hydration of an active pharmaceutical ingredient can significantly affect the solubility and dissolution rate and therefore its bioavailability.

===Clathrate hydrates===

Clathrate hydrates (also known as gas hydrates, gas clathrates, etc.) are water ice with gas molecules trapped within; they are a form of clathrate. An important example is methane hydrate (also known as gas hydrate, methane clathrate, etc.).

Nonpolar molecules such as methane can form clathrate hydrates with water, especially under high pressure. Although there is no hydrogen bonding between water and guest molecules when methane is the guest molecule of the clathrate, guest–host hydrogen bonding often forms when the guest is a larger organic molecule such as tetrahydrofuran. In such cases the guest–host hydrogen bonds result in the formation of L-type Bjerrum defects in the clathrate lattice.

==Stability==
The stability of hydrates is generally determined by the nature of the compounds, their temperature, and the relative humidity (if they are exposed to air).

== See also ==

* Efflorescence
* Hygroscopy
* Mineral hydration
* Water of crystallization
* Hemihydrate
*Hydrous oxide
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3" end="12" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="16" end="23" title="Hydrate" label="hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="53" end="58" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="418" end="425" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q504492" start="567" end="591" title="water of crystallization" label="water of crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q155890" start="649" end="660" title="heavy water" label="heavy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="702" end="709" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="710" end="719" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q407849" start="824" end="843" title="cobalt(II) chloride" label="cobalt(II) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q20396016" start="879" end="888" title="mineral hydration" label="hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437643" start="1054" end="1066" title="formula unit" label="formula unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="1165" end="1172" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366137" start="1415" end="1424" title="Inorganic anhydride" label="anhydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745207" start="1570" end="1579" title="anhydrous" label="anhydrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="1654" end="1665" title="hygroscopic" label="hygroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221746" start="1699" end="1708" title="desiccant" label="desiccant"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="1922" end="1929" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107540" start="1955" end="1973" title="hydration reaction" label="hydration reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="1977" end="1983" title="ethene" label="ethene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="2167" end="2180" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q412340" start="2201" end="2216" title="chloral hydrate" label="chloral hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422755" start="2266" end="2273" title="chloral" label="chloral"/>
<link wikidata="Q504492" start="2455" end="2479" title="water of crystallization" label="water of crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q421773" start="2492" end="2501" title="trehalose" label="trehalose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745207" start="2534" end="2543" title="anhydrous" label="anhydrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="2550" end="2563" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281033" start="2614" end="2630" title="Protein crystallization" label="Protein crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="2757" end="2764" title="Glucose" label="Glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="2816" end="2828" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="2863" end="2880" title="active ingredient" label="active ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="3177" end="3192" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailability"/>
<link wikidata="Q864080" start="3221" end="3239" title="Clathrate hydrates" label="Clathrate hydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q781204" start="3359" end="3368" title="clathrate" label="clathrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q389036" start="3394" end="3409" title="methane hydrate" label="methane hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864080" start="3509" end="3526" title="clathrate hydrate" label="clathrate hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="3593" end="3606" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q278332" start="3789" end="3804" title="tetrahydrofuran" label="tetrahydrofuran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919614" start="3884" end="3898" title="Bjerrum defect" label="Bjerrum defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="4050" end="4067" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q778128" start="4117" end="4130" title="Efflorescence" label="Efflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="4133" end="4143" title="Hygroscopy" label="Hygroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20396016" start="4146" end="4163" title="Mineral hydration" label="Mineral hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q504492" start="4166" end="4190" title="Water of crystallization" label="Water of crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144923" start="4193" end="4204" title="Hemihydrate" label="Hemihydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792522" start="4206" end="4219" title="Hydrous oxide" label="Hydrous oxide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59458" wikidata="Q1162410" url="?curid=59458" title="ElGamal encryption">
<text>In cryptography, the ElGamal encryption system is an asymmetric key encryption algorithm for public-key cryptography which is based on the Diffie–Hellman key exchange. It was described by Taher Elgamal in 1985. ElGamal encryption is used in the free GNU Privacy Guard software, recent versions of PGP, and other cryptosystems. The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) is a variant of the ElGamal signature scheme, which should not be confused with ElGamal encryption.

ElGamal encryption can be defined over any cyclic group formula_1, like multiplicative group of integers modulo &quot;n&quot; if and only if &quot;n&quot; is 1, 2, 4, &quot;p&quot;&quot;k&quot; or 2&quot;p&quot;&quot;k&quot;, where &quot;p&quot; is an odd prime and . Its security depends upon the difficulty of the Decisional Diffie Hellman Problem in formula_1.

== The algorithm ==
The algorithm can be described as first performing a Diffie–Hellman key exchange to establish a shared secret formula_3, then using this as a one-time pad for encrypting the message. ElGamal encryption is performed in three phases: the key generation, the encryption, and the decryption. The first is purely key exchange, whereas the latter two mix key exchange computations with message computations.

=== Key generation ===
The first party, Alice, generates a key pair as follows:

* Generate an efficient description of a cyclic group formula_4 of order formula_5 with generator formula_6. Let formula_7 represent the identity element of formula_1.
*: It is not necessary to come up with a group and generator for each new key. Indeed, one may expect a specific implementation of ElGamal to be hardcoded to use a specific group, or a group from a specific suite. The choice of group is mostly about how large keys you want to use.
* Choose an integer formula_9 randomly from formula_10.
* Compute formula_11.
* The public key consists of the values formula_12. Alice publishes this public key and retains formula_9 as her private key, which must be kept secret.

=== Encryption ===
A second party, Bob, encrypts a message formula_14 to Alice under her public key formula_12 as follows:

* Map the message formula_14 to an element formula_17 of formula_1 using a reversible mapping function.
* Choose an integer formula_19 randomly from formula_10.
* Compute formula_21. This is called the &quot;shared secret&quot;.
* Compute formula_22.
* Compute formula_23.
* Bob sends the ciphertext formula_24 to Alice.

Note that if one knows both the ciphertext formula_24 and the plaintext formula_17, one can easily find the shared secret formula_3, since formula_28. Therefore, a new formula_19 and hence a new formula_3 is generated for every message to improve security. For this reason, formula_19 is also called an ephemeral key.

=== Decryption ===
Alice decrypts a ciphertext formula_32 with her private key formula_9 as follows:
* Compute formula_34. Since formula_35, formula_36, and thus it is the same shared secret that was used by Bob in encryption.
* Compute formula_37, the inverse of formula_3 in the group formula_1. This can be computed in one of several ways. If formula_1 is a subgroup of a multiplicative group of integers modulo formula_41, where formula_41 is prime, the modular multiplicative inverse can be computed using the extended Euclidean algorithm. An alternative is to compute formula_37 as formula_44. This is the inverse of formula_3 because of Lagrange&#x27;s theorem, since formula_46.
* Compute formula_47. This calculation produces the original message formula_17, because formula_49; hence formula_50.
* Map formula_17 back to the plaintext message formula_14.

=== Practical use ===

Like most public key systems, the ElGamal cryptosystem is usually used as part of a hybrid cryptosystem, where the message itself is encrypted using a symmetric cryptosystem, and ElGamal is then used to encrypt only the symmetric key. This is because asymmetric cryptosystems like ElGamal are usually slower than symmetric ones for the same level of security, so it is faster to encrypt the message, which can be arbitrarily large, with a symmetric cipher, and then use ElGamal only to encrypt the symmetric key, which usually is quite small compared to the size of the message.

== Security ==

The security of the ElGamal scheme depends on the properties of the underlying group formula_1 as well as any padding scheme used on the messages. If the computational Diffie–Hellman assumption (CDH) holds in the underlying cyclic group formula_1, then the encryption function is one-way.

If the decisional Diffie–Hellman assumption (DDH) holds in formula_1, then
ElGamal achieves semantic security. Semantic security is not implied by the computational Diffie–Hellman assumption alone. See Decisional Diffie–Hellman assumption for a discussion of groups where the assumption is believed to hold.

ElGamal encryption is unconditionally malleable, and therefore is not secure under chosen ciphertext attack. For example, given an encryption formula_32 of some (possibly unknown) message formula_17, one can easily construct a valid encryption formula_58 of the message formula_59.

To achieve chosen-ciphertext security, the scheme must be further modified, or an appropriate padding scheme must be used. Depending on the modification, the DDH assumption may or may not be necessary.

Other schemes related to ElGamal which achieve security against chosen ciphertext attacks have also been proposed. The Cramer–Shoup cryptosystem is secure under chosen ciphertext attack assuming DDH holds for formula_1. Its proof does not use the random oracle model. Another proposed scheme is DHIES, whose proof requires an assumption that is stronger than the DDH assumption.

== Efficiency ==

ElGamal encryption is probabilistic, meaning that a single plaintext can be encrypted to many possible ciphertexts, with the consequence that a general ElGamal encryption produces a 1:2 expansion in size from plaintext to ciphertext.

Encryption under ElGamal requires two exponentiations; however, these exponentiations are independent of the message and can be computed ahead of time if needed. Decryption requires one exponentiation and one computation of a group inverse, which can, however, be easily combined into just one exponentiation.

== See also ==
* Taher Elgamal, designer of this and other cryptosystems
* ElGamal signature scheme
* Homomorphic encryption

== Further reading ==
* 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3" end="15" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162410" start="21" end="46" title="ElGamal encryption" label="ElGamal encryption system"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="53" end="88" title="asymmetric key encryption algorithm" label="asymmetric key encryption algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="93" end="116" title="public-key cryptography" label="public-key cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="139" end="166" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="Diffie–Hellman key exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q910915" start="188" end="201" title="Taher Elgamal" label="Taher Elgamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223204" start="250" end="267" title="GNU Privacy Guard" label="GNU Privacy Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227452" start="297" end="300" title="Pretty Good Privacy" label="PGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q976521" start="312" end="324" title="cryptosystem" label="cryptosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224829" start="331" end="358" title="Digital Signature Algorithm" label="Digital Signature Algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328731" start="385" end="409" title="ElGamal signature scheme" label="ElGamal signature scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="509" end="521" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169249" start="538" end="591" title="multiplicative group of integers modulo n" label="multiplicative group of integers modulo &amp;quot;n&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q516994" start="782" end="815" title="Decisional_Diffie–Hellman_assumption" label="Decisional Diffie Hellman Problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q150474" start="993" end="1005" title="one-time pad" label="one-time pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="1376" end="1388" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q589491" start="1402" end="1407" title="order (group theory)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q734209" start="1423" end="1432" title="generating set of a group" label="generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="1869" end="1879" title="public key" label="public key"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533181" start="2766" end="2779" title="ephemeral key" label="ephemeral key"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741788" start="3240" end="3270" title="modular multiplicative inverse" label="modular multiplicative inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362750" start="3297" end="3325" title="extended Euclidean algorithm" label="extended Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q505798" start="3426" end="3449" title="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s theorem (group theory)" label="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639918" start="3755" end="3774" title="hybrid cryptosystem" label="hybrid cryptosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826103" start="4012" end="4029" title="level of security" label="level of security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157285" start="4421" end="4460" title="computational Diffie–Hellman assumption" label="computational Diffie–Hellman assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q720931" start="4547" end="4554" title="one-way function" label="one-way"/>
<link wikidata="Q516994" start="4564" end="4600" title="decisional Diffie–Hellman assumption" label="decisional Diffie–Hellman assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333581" start="4649" end="4666" title="semantic security" label="semantic security"/>
<link wikidata="Q516994" start="4759" end="4795" title="Decisional Diffie–Hellman assumption" label="Decisional Diffie–Hellman assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668956" start="4904" end="4913" title="malleability (cryptography)" label="malleable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420767" start="4949" end="4973" title="chosen ciphertext attack" label="chosen ciphertext attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138784" start="5471" end="5496" title="Cramer–Shoup cryptosystem" label="Cramer–Shoup cryptosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q228184" start="5599" end="5618" title="random oracle model" label="random oracle model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332372" start="5647" end="5652" title="Integrated Encryption Scheme" label="DHIES"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246854" start="5772" end="5785" title="probabilistic encryption" label="probabilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162538" start="5809" end="5818" title="plaintext" label="plaintext"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="6023" end="6037" title="exponentiation" label="exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q910915" start="6313" end="6326" title="Taher Elgamal" label="Taher Elgamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328731" start="6371" end="6395" title="ElGamal signature scheme" label="ElGamal signature scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154943" start="6398" end="6420" title="Homomorphic encryption" label="Homomorphic encryption"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59459" wikidata="Q2117603" url="?curid=59459" title="Rabbinic literature">
<text>Rabbinic literature, in its broadest sense, is the entire corpus of works authored by rabbis throughout Jewish history. The term typically refers to literature from the Talmudic era (70–640 CE), as opposed to medieval and modern rabbinic writings. It aligns with the Hebrew term &quot;Sifrut Chazal&quot; (), which translates to “literature [of our] sages” and generally pertains only to the sages (&quot;Chazal&quot;) from the Talmudic period. This more specific sense of &quot;Rabbinic literature&quot;—referring to the Talmud, Midrashim (), and related writings, but hardly ever to later texts—is how the term is generally intended when used in contemporary academic writing. The terms &quot;mefareshim&quot; and &quot;parshanim&quot; (commentaries and commentators) almost always refer to later, post-Talmudic writers of rabbinic glosses on Biblical and Talmudic texts.

==Mishnaic literature==
The Midr&#x27;she halakha, Mishnah, and Tosefta (compiled from materials pre-dating the year 200 CE) are the earliest extant works of rabbinic literature, expounding and developing Judaism&#x27;s Oral Law, as well as ethical teachings. Following these came the two Talmuds:
*The Jerusalem Talmud, 
*The Babylonian Talmud, full canonization of all the previous texts .
*The minor tractates (part of the Babylonian Talmud)
The earliest extant material witness to rabbinic literature of any kind is the Tel Rehov inscription dating to the 6th–7th centuries, also the longest Jewish inscription from late antiquity. Meanwhile, the earliest extant Talmudic manuscripts are from the 8th century.

==The Midrash==

Midrash (; pl. &quot;Midrashim&quot;) is a Hebrew word referring to a method of reading details into or out of a biblical text. The term &quot;midrash&quot; also can refer to a compilation of Midrashic teachings in the form of legal, exegetical, homiletical, or narrative writing, often configured as a commentary on the Bible or Mishnah. There are a large number of &quot;classical&quot; Midrashic works spanning a period from Mishnaic to Geonic times, often showing evidence of having been worked and reworked from earlier materials and frequently coming to us in multiple variants. A compact list of these works [based on ] is given below; a more thorough annotated list can be found under Midrash. The timeline below must be approximate because many of these works were composed over a long span of time, borrowing and collating material from earlier versions; their histories are, therefore, somewhat uncertain and the subject of scholarly debate. In the table, &quot;n.e.&quot; designates that the work in question is not extant except in secondary references.

==Later works by category==

=== Aggada ===

*Alphabet of Rabbi Akiva
*Ein Yaakov
*Legends of the Jews
*Midrash HaGadol
*Midrash Hashkem
*Midrash Rabba
*Midrash Shmuel
*Midrash Tehillim
*Pesikta de-Rav Kahana
*Pesikta Rabbati
*Pirke De-Rabbi Eliezer
*Seder Olam Rabbah
*Seder Olam Zutta
*Sefer HaAggadah
*Sefer haYashar (midrash)
*Smaller midrashim
*Tanhuma
*Tanna Devei Eliyahu
*Tseno Ureno
*Yalkut Shimoni

=== Hasidic thought ===
* &quot;Keter Shem Tov&quot;
* &quot;Tzavaat HaRivash&quot;
* &quot;Toledot Yaakov Yosef&quot;
* &quot;Ben Porat Yosef&quot;, &quot;Tzafnat Paneach&quot;, and &quot;Ketonet Pasim&quot;
* &quot;Magid Devarav L&#x27;Yaakov&quot;
* &quot;Or Torah&quot;
*&quot;Menachem Zion&quot;
* &quot;Meor Einayim&quot; and &quot;Yesamach Lev&quot;
* &quot;Noam Elimelech&quot;
* &quot;Menorat Zahav&quot;
* &quot;Avodat Yisrael&quot;
* &quot;Pri Ha&#x27;Aretz&quot; and &quot;P&#x27;ri Ha&#x27;Eitz&quot;
* &quot;Kedushas Levi&quot;
* &quot;Bet Aharon&quot;
* &quot;Yosher Divrei Emes&quot;
* &quot;Tanya&quot; (&quot;Likutei Amarim&quot;) 
* &quot;Torah Or/Likutei Torah&quot;
* &quot;Likutei Moharan&quot;
* &quot;Sippurei Ma&#x27;asiyot&quot; (&quot;Rabbi Nachman&#x27;s Stories&quot;)
* &quot;Sichot HaRan&quot;
* &quot;Be&#x27;er Mayim Hayyim&quot;
* &quot;Siduro Shel Shabbos&quot;
* &quot;Avodas HaLevi&quot;
* &quot;Mei Hashiloach&quot;
* &quot;Kol Simcha&quot;
* &quot;Bnei Yissachar&quot;
* &quot;Imrei Elimelech&quot; and &quot;Divrei Elimelech&quot;
* &quot;Aish Kodesh&quot;
* &quot;Sefas Emes&quot;
* &quot;Imrei Emes&quot;
* &quot;Shem Mishmuel&quot;
* &quot;Likkutei Sichos&quot;
* &quot;Nesivos Sholom&quot;
* &quot;Darchei Noam&quot;

=== Hebrew poetry ===

*Biblical poetry
*Medieval Hebrew poetry

=== Jewish liturgy===

*Piyyut
*Siddur

=== Jewish philosophy ===
*Chovot HaLevavot
*Derech Hashem
*Emunah Ubitachon
*Emunot v&#x27;Dayyot
*Kad ha-Kemach
*Kuzari
*Moreh Nevukhim (Guide for the Perplexed)
*Milchamot Hashem (Wars of the Lord)
*Nefesh Ha-Chaim
*Or Adonai
*Perek Chelek
*Philo
*Sefer ha-Ikkarim
*Sefer ha-Chinuch

=== Kabbalah ===

*Etz Chaim
*Maggid Mesharim
*Pardes Rimonim
*Sefer haBahir
*Sefer Raziel HaMalakh
*Sefer Yetzirah
*Tikunei haZohar
*Tomer Devorah
*Zohar

=== Jewish law ===
*Arba&#x27;ah Turim
*Aruch HaShulchan
*Beit Yosef
*Ben Ish Hai
*Chayei Adam and Chochmat Adam
*Darkhei Moshe
*Halachot Gedolot
*Kaf HaChaim
*Hilchot HaRif
*Kessef Mishneh
*Kitzur Shulchan Aruch
*Levush Malchut 
*Minchat Chinuch
*Mishnah Berurah
*Mishneh Torah
*Responsa literature
*Sefer ha-Chinuch
*Sefer Hamitzvot
*Sefer Mitzvot Gadol
*Shulchan Aruch
*Shulchan Aruch HaRav
*Yalkut Yosef

=== Musar literature ===

*Mesillat Yesharim
*Orchot Tzaddikim
*Sefer Chasidim
*Shaarei Teshuva
*Sefer ha-Yir&#x27;ah
*Chovot ha-Levavot
*Ma&#x27;alot ha-Middot
*Mishnat R&#x27; Aharon
*Mikhtav me-Eliyahu
*Tomer Devorah
*Sichos Mussar 
*Pele Yoetz
*Kav ha-Yashar
*Kad HaKemah
*Madreigat Ha&#x27;Adam
*Shemonah Perakim

==Later works by historical period==

===Works of the Geonim===
The Geonim are the rabbis of Sura and Pumbeditha in Babylon (650 – 1250 CE) :
*&quot;She&#x27;iltoth of Acha&#x27;i [Gaon]&quot;
*&quot;Halachot Gedolot&quot;
*&quot;Halachot Pesukot&quot;, by Rav Yehudai Gaon
*&quot;Emunoth ve-Deoth&quot; (Saadia Gaon)
*The &quot;Siddur&quot; by Amram Gaon
*Responsa

===Works of the &quot;Rishonim&quot; (the &quot;early&quot; rabbinical commentators)===
The Rishonim are the rabbis of the early medieval period (1000 – 1550 CE)
*The commentaries on the Torah, such as those by Rashi, Abraham ibn Ezra, and Nahmanides.
*Commentaries on the Talmud, principally by Rashi, his grandson Samuel ben Meir and Nissim of Gerona.
*Commentaries on the Mishnah, such as those composed by Maimonides, Obadiah of Bertinoro, and Nathan ben Abraham
*Talmudic novellae (&quot;chiddushim&quot;) by Tosafists, Nahmanides, Nissim of Gerona, Solomon ben Aderet (RaShBA), Yomtov ben Ashbili (Ritva)
*Works of &quot;halakha&quot; (Asher ben Yechiel, Mordechai ben Hillel)
*Codices by Maimonides and Jacob ben Asher, and finally &quot;Shulkhan Arukh&quot;
*Responsa, e.g., by Solomon ben Aderet (RaShBA)
*Kabbalistic works (such as the Zohar)
*Philosophical works (Maimonides, Gersonides, Nahmanides)
*Ethical works (Bahya ibn Paquda, Jonah of Gerona)

===Works of the &quot;Acharonim&quot; (the &quot;later&quot; rabbinical commentators)===
The Acharonim are the rabbis from 1550 to the present day.
*Important Torah commentaries include &quot;Keli Yakar&quot; (Shlomo Ephraim Luntschitz), &quot;Ohr ha-Chayim&quot; by Chayim ben-Attar, the commentary of Samson Raphael Hirsch, and the commentary of Naftali Zvi Yehuda Berlin.
*Important works of Talmudic novellae include: &quot;Pnei Yehoshua&quot;, &quot;Hafla&#x27;ah&quot;, &quot;Sha&#x27;agath Aryei&quot;
*Responsa, e.g., by Moses Sofer, Moshe Feinstein
*Works of &quot;halakha&quot; and codices, e.g., &quot;Mishnah Berurah&quot; by Yisrael Meir Kagan and the &quot;Aruch ha-Shulchan&quot; by Yechiel Michel Epstein
*Ethical and philosophical works: Moshe Chaim Luzzatto, Yisrael Meir Kagan and the Mussar Movement
*Hasidic works (&quot;Kedushath Levi&quot;, &quot;Sefath Emmeth&quot;, &quot;Shem mi-Shemuel&quot;)
*Philosophical/metaphysical works (the works of the Maharal of Prague, Moshe Chaim Luzzatto and &quot;Nefesh ha-Chayim&quot; by Chaim of Volozhin)
*Mystical works
*Historical works, e.g., &quot;Shem ha-Gedolim&quot; by Chaim Joseph David Azulai.

==Mefareshim==
&quot;Mefareshim&quot; is a Hebrew word meaning &quot;commentators&quot; (or roughly meaning &quot;exegetes&quot;), &quot;Perushim&quot; means &quot;commentaries&quot;. In Judaism, these words refer to commentaries on the Torah (five books of Moses), Tanakh, Mishnah, Talmud, the responsa literature, or even the siddur (Jewish prayerbook), and more.

===Classic Torah and Talmud commentaries===
Classic Torah and/or Talmud commentaries have been written by the following individuals:
* Geonim
** Saadia Gaon, 10th century Babylon
* Rishonim
** Rashi (Shlomo Yitzchaki), 12th century France
** Abraham ibn Ezra
** Nachmanides (Moshe ben Nahman)
** Samuel ben Meir, the Rashbam, 12th century France
** Gersonides, also known as Levi ben Gershom or Ralbag) 
** David Kimhi, the Radak, 13th century France
** Joseph ben Isaac Bekhor Shor, 12th century France
** Nissim of Gerona, also known as Nissim ben Reuben Gerondi, or the RaN, 14th century Spain
** Isaac Abarbanel (1437–1508)
** Obadiah ben Jacob Sforno, 16th century Italy
* Acharonim
** The Vilna Gaon, also known as Elijah ben Solomon Zalman, 18th century Lithuania
** The Malbim, Meir Leibush ben Yehiel Michel Wisser

Classical Talmudic commentaries were written by Rashi. After Rashi, the Tosafot was written, which was an omnibus commentary on the Talmud by the disciples and descendants of Rashi; this commentary was based on discussions done in the rabbinic academies of Germany and France.

===Modern Torah commentaries===
Modern Torah commentaries which have received wide acclaim in the Jewish community include:

*&quot;Haemek Davar&quot; by Rabbi Naftali Zvi Yehuda Berlin
*The Chofetz Chaim
*&quot;Torah Temimah&quot; of Baruch ha-Levi Epstein
*&quot;Kerem HaTzvi&quot;, by Rabbi Tzvi Hirsch Ferber
*&quot;Sefat Emet&quot; (Lips of Truth), Yehudah Aryeh Leib of Ger, 19th century Europe
*The &quot;Pentateuch and Haftaras&quot; by Joseph H. Hertz
*&quot;Uebersetzung und Erklärung des Pentateuchs&quot; (&quot;Translation and Commentary of the Pentateuch&quot;) by Samson Raphael Hirsch
*Nechama Leibowitz, a noted woman scholar
*&quot;HaTorah vehaMitzva&quot; (&quot;The Torah and the Commandment&quot;) by Meïr Leibush, the &quot;Malbim&quot;
*&quot;Ha-Ketav veha-Kabbalah&quot; by Rabbi Yaakov Tzvi Mecklenburg
*The Soncino Books of the Bible
*Richard Elliot Friedman&#x27;s &quot;Commentary on the Torah&quot; (2001)

===Modern Siddur commentaries===
Modern Siddur commentaries have been written by:
*Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan HaCohen, &quot;The Chofetz Chaim&#x27;s Siddur&quot;
*Samson Raphael Hirsch, &quot;The Hirsch Siddur&quot;, Feldheim
*Abraham Isaac Kook, &quot;Olat Reyia&quot;
*The Authorised Daily Prayer Book with commentary by Joseph H. Hertz
*Elie Munk, &quot;The World of Prayer&quot;, Elie Munk
*Nosson Scherman, &quot;The Artscroll Siddur&quot;, Mesorah Publications
*Jonathan Sacks, in the &quot;Authorised Daily Prayer Book of the British Commonwealth&quot; (the new version of &quot;Singer&#x27;s Prayer Book&quot;) as well as the Koren Sacks Siddur.
*Reuven Hammer, &quot;Or Hadash&quot;, a siddur commentary built around the text of Siddur Sim Shalom, United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism
*&quot;My Peoples Prayer Book&quot;, Jewish Lights Publishing, written by a team of non-Orthodox rabbis and Talmud scholars.

==See also==

* Jewish commentaries on the Bible
* List of Jewish prayers and blessings
* List of rabbis
* Rabbinic Judaism
* Torah databases (electronic versions of traditional Jewish texts)
===Biblical figures in rabbinic literature===
* Adam in rabbinic literature
* Daniel in rabbinic literature
* Esther in rabbinic literature
* Ezra in rabbinic literature
* Haman in rabbinic literature
* Jethro in rabbinic literature
* Joab in rabbinic literature
* Job in rabbinic literature
* Moses in rabbinic literature
* Noah in rabbinic literature
* Samson in rabbinic literature
* Simeon in rabbinic literature

==References==
==Bibliography==
*&quot;Introduction to Rabbinic Literature&quot; Jacob Neusner, (Anchor Bible Reference Library/Doubleday)
*&quot;Introduction to the Talmud and Midrash&quot;, H. L. Strack and G. Stemberger, (Fortress Press)
*&quot;The Literature of the Sages: Oral Torah, Halakha, Mishnah, Tosefta, Talmud, External Tractates,&quot; Shemuel Safrai and Peter J. Tomson (Fortress, 1987)

==External links==

===General===
*A survey of rabbinic literature
*A timeline of Jewish texts
*Comprehensive listing by category - Global Jewish Database
*Judaica archival project
*Chapters On Jewish Literature
*Online Resources for the Study of Rabbinic Literature

===Links to full text resources===
*The Sefaria Library
*Mechon Mamre
*Sages of Ashkenaz Database
*Halacha Brura and Birur Halacha Institute
*The Electronic Torah Warehouse
*hebrewbooks.org
*seforimonline.org
*Primary Sources @ Ben Gurion University 
*Young Israel library 

===Glossaries===
*Judaic glossary
*Sources@JTS
*Glossary/Bibliography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="0" end="19" title="Rabbinic literature" label="Rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="86" end="92" title="Rabbi" label="rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="104" end="118" title="History of Judaism" label="Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="169" end="181" title="Talmud" label="Talmudic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642350" start="209" end="246" title="Jewish literature" label="medieval and modern rabbinic writings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915314" start="392" end="397" title="Chazal" label="sages"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="522" end="528" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="530" end="537" title="Midrash" label="Midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571907" start="825" end="841" title="Biblical gloss" label="rabbinic glosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="845" end="853" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891013" start="903" end="924" title="Midrash halakha" label="Midr&amp;#x27;she halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="926" end="933" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341410" start="939" end="946" title="Tosefta" label="Tosefta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="1095" end="1103" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="1178" end="1194" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="1202" end="1219" title="Talmud" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746539" start="1272" end="1287" title="minor tractates" label="minor tractates"/>
<link wikidata="Q12408570" start="1399" end="1420" title="Tel Rehov inscription" label="Tel Rehov inscription"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1542" end="1562" title="Talmud#Manuscripts" label="Talmudic manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1928" end="1933" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="1937" end="1944" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="2035" end="2043" title="Mishnaic" label="Mishnaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="2047" end="2053" title="Geonic" label="Geonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839539" start="2721" end="2744" title="Alphabet of Rabbi Akiva" label="Alphabet of Rabbi Akiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349597" start="2746" end="2756" title="Ein Yaakov" label="Ein Yaakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q30641627" start="2758" end="2777" title="Legends of the Jews" label="Legends of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q847953" start="2779" end="2794" title="Midrash HaGadol" label="Midrash HaGadol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842972" start="2796" end="2811" title="Midrash Hashkem" label="Midrash Hashkem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917980" start="2813" end="2826" title="Midrash Rabba" label="Midrash Rabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932039" start="2828" end="2842" title="Midrash Shmuel (aggadah)" label="Midrash Shmuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444736" start="2844" end="2860" title="Midrash Tehillim" label="Midrash Tehillim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778110" start="2862" end="2883" title="Pesikta de-Rav Kahana" label="Pesikta de-Rav Kahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171410" start="2885" end="2900" title="Pesikta Rabbati" label="Pesikta Rabbati"/>
<link wikidata="Q847943" start="2902" end="2924" title="Pirke De-Rabbi Eliezer" label="Pirke De-Rabbi Eliezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852626" start="2926" end="2943" title="Seder Olam Rabbah" label="Seder Olam Rabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129954" start="2945" end="2961" title="Seder Olam Zutta" label="Seder Olam Zutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047111" start="2963" end="2978" title="Sefer HaAggadah" label="Sefer HaAggadah"/>
<link wikidata="Q970053" start="2980" end="3004" title="Sefer haYashar (midrash)" label="Sefer haYashar (midrash)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543645" start="3006" end="3023" title="Smaller midrashim" label="Smaller midrashim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910304" start="3025" end="3032" title="Tanhuma" label="Tanhuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132142" start="3034" end="3053" title="Tanna Devei Eliyahu" label="Tanna Devei Eliyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q118694" start="3055" end="3066" title="Tseno Ureno" label="Tseno Ureno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995834" start="3068" end="3082" title="Yalkut Shimoni" label="Yalkut Shimoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206900" start="3116" end="3130" title="Keter Shem Tov" label="Keter Shem Tov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861948" start="3145" end="3161" title="Tzavaat HaRivash" label="Tzavaat HaRivash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3170" end="3202" title="Jacob Joseph of Polnoye#Works" label="&amp;quot;Toledot Yaakov Yosef&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3205" end="3232" title="Jacob Joseph of Polnoye#Works" label="&amp;quot;Ben Porat Yosef&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3234" end="3261" title="Jacob Joseph of Polnoye#Works" label="&amp;quot;Tzafnat Paneach&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3267" end="3292" title="Jacob Joseph of Polnoye#Works" label="&amp;quot;Ketonet Pasim&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3295" end="3334" title="Dov Ber of Mezeritch#Published writings" label="&amp;quot;Magid Devarav L&amp;#x27;Yaakov&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3337" end="3357" title="Dov Ber of Mezeritch#Published writings" label="&amp;quot;Or Torah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3359" end="3384" title="Menachem_Mendel_of_Rimanov#Legacy" label="&amp;quot;Menachem Zion&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3387" end="3411" title="Menachem Nachum Twersky#Me&amp;#x27;or Einayim" label="&amp;quot;Meor Einayim&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3416" end="3440" title="Menachem Nachum Twersky#Me&amp;#x27;or Einayim" label="&amp;quot;Yesamach Lev&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3443" end="3469" title="Elimelech of Lizhensk#Noam Elimelech" label="&amp;quot;Noam Elimelech&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3472" end="3497" title="Zusha_of_Hanipol#Biography" label="&amp;quot;Menorat Zahav&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3500" end="3526" title="Yisroel_Hopstein#Works" label="&amp;quot;Avodat Yisrael&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3529" end="3558" title="Menachem Mendel of Vitebsk#Works" label="&amp;quot;Pri Ha&amp;#x27;Aretz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3563" end="3597" title="Menachem Mendel of Vitebsk#Works" label="&amp;quot;P&amp;#x27;ri Ha&amp;#x27;Eitz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3600" end="3625" title="Levi Yitzchok of Berditchev#Works" label="&amp;quot;Kedushas Levi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857938" start="3628" end="3650" title="Aharon of Karlin (II)" label="&amp;quot;Bet Aharon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3653" end="3683" title="Meshullam Feivush Heller#Works" label="&amp;quot;Yosher Divrei Emes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572924" start="3686" end="3732" title="Tanya (Judaism)" label="&amp;quot;Tanya&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Likutei Amarim&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932802" start="3742" end="3764" title="Torah Or/Likutei Torah" label="Torah Or/Likutei Torah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3773" end="3800" title="Nachman of Breslov#Published works" label="&amp;quot;Likutei Moharan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3803" end="3838" title="Nachman of Breslov#Published works" label="&amp;quot;Sippurei Ma&amp;#x27;asiyot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3884" end="3908" title="Nachman of Breslov#Published works" label="&amp;quot;Sichot HaRan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062257" start="3911" end="3946" title="Hayyim Tyrer" label="&amp;quot;Be&amp;#x27;er Mayim Hayyim&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062257" start="3949" end="3980" title="Hayyim Tyrer" label="&amp;quot;Siduro Shel Shabbos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3983" end="4008" title="Strashelye (Hasidic dynasty)#Works" label="&amp;quot;Avodas HaLevi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4017" end="4031" title="Mordechai Yosef Leiner#Thought" label="Mei Hashiloach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4040" end="4062" title="Simcha Bunim of Peshischa#Works" label="&amp;quot;Kol Simcha&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4065" end="4091" title="Tzvi_Elimelech_Spira_of_Dinov#Works" label="&amp;quot;Bnei Yissachar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4094" end="4121" title="Elimelech_Szapira#Writings" label="&amp;quot;Imrei Elimelech&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4126" end="4154" title="Elimelech_Szapira#Writings" label="&amp;quot;Divrei Elimelech&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4157" end="4180" title="Kalonymus_Kalman_Shapira#Works" label="&amp;quot;Aish Kodesh&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891454" start="4189" end="4199" title="Sefas Emes" label="Sefas Emes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623065" start="4214" end="4224" title="Imrei Emes" label="Imrei Emes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494056" start="4239" end="4252" title="Shem Mishmuel" label="Shem Mishmuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907320" start="4267" end="4282" title="Likkutei Sichos" label="Likkutei Sichos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909664" start="4297" end="4311" title="Nesivos Sholom" label="Nesivos Sholom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4320" end="4344" title="Slonim (Hasidic dynasty)#Main Hasidic works of Slonim" label="&amp;quot;Darchei Noam&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903301" start="4370" end="4385" title="Biblical poetry" label="Biblical poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057314" start="4387" end="4409" title="Medieval Hebrew poetry" label="Medieval Hebrew poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q781402" start="4435" end="4441" title="Piyyut" label="Piyyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q471894" start="4443" end="4449" title="Siddur" label="Siddur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367130" start="4478" end="4494" title="Chovot HaLevavot" label="Chovot HaLevavot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023790" start="4496" end="4509" title="Derech Hashem" label="Derech Hashem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4511" end="4527" title="Avrohom_Yeshaya_Karelitz#Published_works" label="Emunah Ubitachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777400" start="4529" end="4549" title="Emunot v&amp;#x27;Dayyot" label="Emunot v&amp;#x27;Dayyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q458707" start="4551" end="4564" title="Kad ha-Kemach" label="Kad ha-Kemach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315123" start="4566" end="4572" title="Kuzari" label="Kuzari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140185" start="4574" end="4588" title="Guide for the Perplexed" label="Moreh Nevukhim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4616" end="4632" title="Gersonides#Philosophical_and_religious_works" label="Milchamot Hashem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4653" end="4668" title="Chaim of Volozhin#Works" label="Nefesh Ha-Chaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099168" start="4670" end="4679" title="Or Adonai" label="Or Adonai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4681" end="4693" title="Maimonides#Other Judaic and philosophical works" label="Perek Chelek"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="4695" end="4700" title="Philo" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16132507" start="4702" end="4718" title="Sefer ha-Ikkarim" label="Sefer ha-Ikkarim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890118" start="4720" end="4736" title="Sefer ha-Chinuch" label="Sefer ha-Chinuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533349" start="4757" end="4766" title="Etz Chaim (book)" label="Etz Chaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498026" start="4768" end="4783" title="Maggid Mesharim" label="Maggid Mesharim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136547" start="4785" end="4799" title="Pardes Rimonim" label="Pardes Rimonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q742750" start="4801" end="4814" title="Bahir" label="Sefer haBahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815036" start="4816" end="4837" title="Sefer Raziel HaMalakh" label="Sefer Raziel HaMalakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147199" start="4839" end="4853" title="Sefer Yetzirah" label="Sefer Yetzirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898441" start="4855" end="4870" title="Tikunei haZohar" label="Tikunei haZohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q367054" start="4872" end="4885" title="Tomer Devorah" label="Tomer Devorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="4887" end="4892" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533443" start="4914" end="4932" title="Arba&amp;#x27;ah Turim" label="Arba&amp;#x27;ah Turim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802022" start="4934" end="4950" title="Aruch HaShulchan" label="Aruch HaShulchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4518078" start="4952" end="4962" title="Beit Yosef (book)" label="Beit Yosef"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4964" end="4975" title="Yosef Hayyim#Works" label="Ben Ish Hai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407437" start="4977" end="4988" title="Chayei Adam" label="Chayei Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909560" start="4993" end="5006" title="Chochmat Adam" label="Chochmat Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22939129" start="5008" end="5021" title="Darkhei Moshe (book)" label="Darkhei Moshe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406659" start="5023" end="5039" title="Halachot Gedolot" label="Halachot Gedolot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468498" start="5041" end="5052" title="Kaf Hachayim (disambiguation)" label="Kaf HaChaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q523491" start="5054" end="5067" title="Hilchot HaRif" label="Hilchot HaRif"/>
<link wikidata="Q467148" start="5069" end="5083" title="Kessef Mishneh" label="Kessef Mishneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q21145445" start="5085" end="5106" title="Kitzur Shulchan Aruch (book)" label="Kitzur Shulchan Aruch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5108" end="5122" title="Mordecai Yoffe#Works" label="Levush Malchut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903622" start="5125" end="5140" title="Minchat Chinuch" label="Minchat Chinuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703131" start="5142" end="5157" title="Mishnah Berurah" label="Mishnah Berurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q201029" start="5159" end="5172" title="Mishneh Torah" label="Mishneh Torah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5174" end="5193" title="Responsa#In Judaism" label="Responsa literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890118" start="5195" end="5211" title="Sefer ha-Chinuch" label="Sefer ha-Chinuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066533" start="5213" end="5228" title="Sefer Hamitzvot" label="Sefer Hamitzvot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634209" start="5230" end="5249" title="Sefer Mitzvot Gadol" label="Sefer Mitzvot Gadol"/>
<link wikidata="Q822206" start="5251" end="5265" title="Shulchan Aruch" label="Shulchan Aruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911148" start="5267" end="5287" title="Shulchan Aruch HaRav" label="Shulchan Aruch HaRav"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906639" start="5289" end="5301" title="Yalkut Yosef" label="Yalkut Yosef"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891532" start="5330" end="5347" title="Mesillat Yesharim" label="Mesillat Yesharim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363820" start="5349" end="5365" title="Orchot Tzaddikim" label="Orchot Tzaddikim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391474" start="5367" end="5381" title="Sefer Chasidim" label="Sefer Chasidim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5383" end="5398" title="Yonah_Gerondi#Works" label="Shaarei Teshuva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5400" end="5420" title="Yonah_Gerondi#Works" label="Sefer ha-Yir&amp;#x27;ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367130" start="5422" end="5439" title="Chovot ha-Levavot" label="Chovot ha-Levavot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15650662" start="5441" end="5463" title="Ma&amp;#x27;alot ha-Middot" label="Ma&amp;#x27;alot ha-Middot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920505" start="5465" end="5487" title="Aharon Kotler" label="Mishnat R&amp;#x27; Aharon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5489" end="5507" title="Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler#Michtav me-Eliyahu" label="Mikhtav me-Eliyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q367054" start="5509" end="5522" title="Tomer Devorah" label="Tomer Devorah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5524" end="5537" title="Chaim Leib Shmuelevitz#Publications" label="Sichos Mussar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161245" start="5540" end="5550" title="Pele Yoetz" label="Pele Yoetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378990" start="5552" end="5565" title="Kav ha-Yashar" label="Kav ha-Yashar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5567" end="5578" title="Bahya_ben_Asher#Other_works" label="Kad HaKemah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055909" start="5580" end="5602" title="Yosef Yozel Horwitz" label="Madreigat Ha&amp;#x27;Adam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5604" end="5620" title="Maimonides#Other Judaic and philosophical works" label="Shemonah Perakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="5690" end="5696" title="Geonim" label="Geonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="5738" end="5745" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406659" start="5822" end="5838" title="Halachot Gedolot" label="Halachot Gedolot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125919" start="5852" end="5868" title="Halakhot Pesukot" label="Halachot Pesukot"/>
<link wikidata="Q455836" start="5883" end="5895" title="Yehudai Gaon" label="Yehudai Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777400" start="5903" end="5919" title="Emunoth ve-Deoth" label="Emunoth ve-Deoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="5927" end="5938" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q471894" start="5951" end="5957" title="Siddur" label="Siddur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890313" start="5979" end="5987" title="Responsa" label="Responsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070193" start="6081" end="6089" title="Rishonim" label="Rishonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456" start="6200" end="6205" title="Rashi" label="Rashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="6207" end="6223" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="6229" end="6239" title="Nahmanides" label="Nahmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456" start="6285" end="6290" title="Rashi" label="Rashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q722697" start="6305" end="6320" title="Samuel ben Meir" label="Samuel ben Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q723531" start="6325" end="6341" title="Nissim of Gerona" label="Nissim of Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="6364" end="6371" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="6399" end="6409" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q924800" start="6411" end="6431" title="Obadiah of Bertinoro" label="Obadiah of Bertinoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196251" start="6437" end="6455" title="Nathan ben Abraham I" label="Nathan ben Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324131" start="6482" end="6492" title="chiddushim" label="chiddushim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066514" start="6503" end="6512" title="Tosafists" label="Tosafists"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="6514" end="6524" title="Nahmanides" label="Nahmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q723531" start="6526" end="6542" title="Nissim of Gerona" label="Nissim of Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q982170" start="6544" end="6562" title="Solomon ben Aderet" label="Solomon ben Aderet"/>
<link wikidata="Q460368" start="6573" end="6591" title="Yom Tov Asevilli" label="Yomtov ben Ashbili"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="6616" end="6623" title="halakha" label="halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q722525" start="6631" end="6648" title="Asher ben Yechiel" label="Asher ben Yechiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q460673" start="6650" end="6670" title="Mordechai ben Hillel" label="Mordechai ben Hillel"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="6684" end="6694" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376849" start="6699" end="6714" title="Jacob ben Asher" label="Jacob ben Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q822206" start="6734" end="6748" title="Shulkhan Arukh" label="Shulkhan Arukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890313" start="6756" end="6764" title="Responsa" label="Responsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q982170" start="6775" end="6793" title="Solomon ben Aderet" label="Solomon ben Aderet"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="6804" end="6815" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="6835" end="6840" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="6864" end="6874" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q353633" start="6876" end="6886" title="Gersonides" label="Gersonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="6888" end="6898" title="Nahmanides" label="Nahmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q762229" start="6916" end="6932" title="Bahya ibn Paquda" label="Bahya ibn Paquda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371903" start="6934" end="6949" title="Jonah of Gerona" label="Jonah of Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q510005" start="7045" end="7054" title="Acharonim" label="Acharonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891483" start="7162" end="7187" title="Shlomo Ephraim Luntschitz" label="Shlomo Ephraim Luntschitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q982046" start="7219" end="7235" title="Chayim ben-Attar" label="Chayim ben-Attar"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="7255" end="7276" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861531" start="7300" end="7325" title="Naftali Zvi Yehuda Berlin" label="Naftali Zvi Yehuda Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162545" start="7380" end="7393" title="Pene Yehoshua (disambiguation)" label="Pnei Yehoshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q707498" start="7481" end="7492" title="Moses Sofer" label="Moses Sofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391598" start="7494" end="7509" title="Moshe Feinstein" label="Moshe Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="7526" end="7533" title="halakha" label="halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="7544" end="7551" title="codices" label="codices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703131" start="7565" end="7580" title="Mishnah Berurah" label="Mishnah Berurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q733140" start="7590" end="7608" title="Yisrael Meir Kagan" label="Yisrael Meir Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7623" end="7640" title="Yechiel Michel Epstein#Aruch ha-Shulchan" label="Aruch ha-Shulchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686102" start="7650" end="7672" title="Yechiel Michel Epstein" label="Yechiel Michel Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q982845" start="7707" end="7727" title="Moshe Chaim Luzzatto" label="Moshe Chaim Luzzatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q733140" start="7729" end="7747" title="Yisrael Meir Kagan" label="Yisrael Meir Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955480" start="7756" end="7771" title="Mussar Movement" label="Mussar Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="7773" end="7780" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q363513" start="7924" end="7941" title="Maharal of Prague" label="Maharal of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q982845" start="7943" end="7963" title="Moshe Chaim Luzzatto" label="Moshe Chaim Luzzatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059243" start="8000" end="8017" title="Chaim Volozhin" label="Chaim of Volozhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058991" start="8091" end="8116" title="Chaim Joseph David Azulai" label="Chaim Joseph David Azulai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="8162" end="8168" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="8233" end="8241" title="Exegesis" label="exegetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="8306" end="8313" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="8385" end="8391" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="8393" end="8400" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="8402" end="8408" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890313" start="8414" end="8422" title="responsa" label="responsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q471894" start="8447" end="8453" title="siddur" label="siddur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="8621" end="8627" title="Geonim" label="Geonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="8631" end="8642" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070193" start="8667" end="8675" title="Rishonim" label="Rishonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456" start="8679" end="8684" title="Rashi" label="Rashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="8728" end="8744" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="8748" end="8759" title="Nachmanides" label="Nachmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q722697" start="8803" end="8810" title="Rashbam" label="Rashbam"/>
<link wikidata="Q353633" start="8835" end="8845" title="Gersonides" label="Gersonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q733619" start="8893" end="8904" title="David Kimhi" label="David Kimhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288187" start="8940" end="8968" title="Joseph ben Isaac Bekhor Shor" label="Joseph ben Isaac Bekhor Shor"/>
<link wikidata="Q723531" start="8993" end="9009" title="Nissim of Gerona" label="Nissim of Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q319902" start="9086" end="9101" title="Isaac Abarbanel" label="Isaac Abarbanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195977" start="9117" end="9141" title="Obadiah ben Jacob Sforno" label="Obadiah ben Jacob Sforno"/>
<link wikidata="Q510005" start="9164" end="9173" title="Acharonim" label="Acharonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q279359" start="9181" end="9191" title="Vilna Gaon" label="Vilna Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391091" start="9264" end="9270" title="Malbim" label="Malbim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788294" start="9383" end="9390" title="Tosafot" label="Tosafot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861531" start="9749" end="9774" title="Naftali Zvi Yehuda Berlin" label="Naftali Zvi Yehuda Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q733140" start="9780" end="9793" title="Yisrael Meir Kagan" label="Chofetz Chaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865853" start="9824" end="9846" title="Baruch Epstein" label="Baruch ha-Levi Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862013" start="9883" end="9901" title="Tzvi Hirsch Ferber" label="Tzvi Hirsch Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509726" start="9965" end="9968" title="Ger (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Ger"/>
<link wikidata="Q549535" start="10034" end="10049" title="Joseph H. Hertz" label="Joseph H. Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10051" end="10105" title="Samson_Raphael_Hirsch#Works of activism" label="&amp;quot;Uebersetzung und Erklärung des Pentateuchs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="10168" end="10189" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q452420" start="10191" end="10208" title="Nechama Leibowitz" label="Nechama Leibowitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10233" end="10263" title="Malbim#Methodology_and_style" label="&amp;quot;HaTorah vehaMitzva&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391091" start="10335" end="10341" title="Malbim" label="Malbim"/>
<link wikidata="Q893270" start="10393" end="10416" title="Yaakov Tzvi Mecklenburg" label="Yaakov Tzvi Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560871" start="10422" end="10448" title="Soncino Books of the Bible" label="Soncino Books of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q733140" start="10614" end="10632" title="Yisrael Meir Kagan" label="Yisrael Meir Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="10687" end="10708" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q330110" start="10751" end="10769" title="Abraham Isaac Kook" label="Abraham Isaac Kook"/>
<link wikidata="Q549535" start="10847" end="10862" title="Joseph H. Hertz" label="Joseph H. Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587760" start="10864" end="10873" title="Elie Munk" label="Elie Munk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061930" start="10919" end="10934" title="Nosson Scherman" label="Nosson Scherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569738" start="10946" end="10955" title="Artscroll" label="Artscroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q336766" start="10992" end="11006" title="Jonathan Sacks" label="Jonathan Sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046670" start="11021" end="11077" title="Authorised Daily Prayer Book" label="Authorised Daily Prayer Book of the British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046670" start="11110" end="11135" title="Singer&amp;#x27;s Prayer Book" label="Singer&amp;#x27;s Prayer Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432139" start="11158" end="11176" title="Koren Sacks Siddur" label="Koren Sacks Siddur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317648" start="11179" end="11192" title="Reuven Hammer" label="Reuven Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508224" start="11262" end="11279" title="Siddur Sim Shalom" label="Siddur Sim Shalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893579" start="11281" end="11321" title="United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism" label="United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084705" start="11464" end="11496" title="Jewish commentaries on the Bible" label="Jewish commentaries on the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526755" start="11499" end="11535" title="List of Jewish prayers and blessings" label="List of Jewish prayers and blessings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183001" start="11538" end="11552" title="List of rabbis" label="List of rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="11555" end="11571" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910253" start="11574" end="11588" title="Torah database" label="Torah database"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680060" start="11688" end="11715" title="Adam in rabbinic literature" label="Adam in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219182" start="11718" end="11747" title="Daniel in rabbinic literature" label="Daniel in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401329" start="11750" end="11779" title="Esther in rabbinic literature" label="Esther in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423434" start="11782" end="11809" title="Ezra in rabbinic literature" label="Ezra in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644035" start="11812" end="11840" title="Haman in rabbinic literature" label="Haman in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189037" start="11843" end="11872" title="Jethro in rabbinic literature" label="Jethro in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204483" start="11875" end="11902" title="Joab in rabbinic literature" label="Joab in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206727" start="11905" end="11931" title="Job in rabbinic literature" label="Job in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916012" start="11934" end="11962" title="Moses in rabbinic literature" label="Moses in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045477" start="11965" end="11992" title="Noah in rabbinic literature" label="Noah in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410413" start="11995" end="12024" title="Samson in rabbinic literature" label="Samson in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517680" start="12027" end="12056" title="Simeon in rabbinic literature" label="Simeon in rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384317" start="12139" end="12152" title="Jacob Neusner" label="Jacob Neusner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59463" wikidata="Q294665" url="?curid=59463" title="DSA">
<text>DSA may refer to:

==Education==
* DeKalb School of the Arts, a grades 8–12 public school in DeKalb County, Georgia, US
* Denver School of the Arts, a grades 6–12 public school in Denver, Colorado, US
* Detroit School of Arts, Michigan, US
* , German school in Silves, Portugal
* or German School of Athens, Greece
* Direct School Admission, Singapore
* Disabled Students&#x27; Allowance, a UK government grant for students in higher education
* Durham School of the Arts, a grades 6–12 public school in Durham, North Carolina, US

==Information technology==
* Digital Signature Algorithm, a cryptographic standard for digital signatures
* Directory System Agent, an IT standard, part of X.500
* Domain-Specific Architecture, see Pixel Visual Core
* Debian Security Advisory, security advisories for the Debian Linux operating system
* Data structure alignment in computer memory 
* Data structures and algorithms
* Dynamic storage allocation, runtime reservation of address space from the free store

==Organizations==
* Dante Society of America, an academic society in the US promoting the study of Dante Alighieri
* Defence Safety Authority, UK
* Democratic Socialists of America, a political action organization in the US
* Development Studies Association, UK and Ireland
* Direct Selling Association, the name of several trade associations
* Down&#x27;s Syndrome Association, a UK charity
* Driving Standards Agency, UK
* DSA Myanmar, Defense Services Academy
* The Dozenal Society of America, advocacy group for the use of a base-12 numeral system

==Other==
* Daily Subsistence Allowance, a &quot;per diem&quot; contribution for UNDP staff members
* role-playing game
* Dental surgery assistant
* Digital Security Act, 2018 (Bangladesh)
* Digital Services Act, EU regulation concerning illegal/improper online content 
* Digital subtraction angiography, a fluoroscopy technique
* Mixed metal oxide electrode , Dimensionally Stable Anodes in electrolysis
* Distinguished Service Award (OA), Order of the Arrow, Boy Scouts of America
* Doncaster Sheffield Airport, England (IATA airport code)
* Donor-specific antibody in transplant medicine
* Dubai–Sharjah–Ajman, a conurbation of emirates in the UAE
* Duluth, South Shore and Atlantic Railway, a former railway company
* &quot;Dsa&quot;, a rare variant of the humid continental climate with hot, dry summers and cold, wet/snowy winters</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294665" start="0" end="3" title="DSA" label="DSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243951" start="35" end="60" title="DeKalb School of the Arts" label="DeKalb School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259782" start="122" end="147" title="Denver School of the Arts" label="Denver School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266008" start="203" end="225" title="Detroit School of Arts" label="Detroit School of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q884924" start="283" end="306" title="German School of Athens" label="German School of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280293" start="317" end="340" title="Direct School Admission" label="Direct School Admission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973824" start="354" end="387" title="Disabled Students&amp;#x27; Allowance" label="Disabled Students&amp;#x27; Allowance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316558" start="446" end="471" title="Durham School of the Arts" label="Durham School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224829" start="561" end="588" title="Digital Signature Algorithm" label="Digital Signature Algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280716" start="640" end="662" title="Directory System Agent" label="Directory System Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q65028930" start="730" end="747" title="Pixel Visual Core" label="Pixel Visual Core"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="804" end="833" title="Debian#Security" label="Debian Linux operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413745" start="836" end="860" title="Data structure alignment" label="Data structure alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="883" end="897" title="Data structure" label="Data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="903" end="912" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="916" end="942" title="Dynamic storage allocation" label="Dynamic storage allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883493" start="1022" end="1046" title="Dante Society of America" label="Dante Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903935" start="1119" end="1143" title="Defence Safety Authority" label="Defence Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q164182" start="1150" end="1182" title="Democratic Socialists of America" label="Democratic Socialists of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266712" start="1228" end="1259" title="Development Studies Association" label="Development Studies Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280292" start="1278" end="1304" title="Direct Selling Association" label="Direct Selling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302759" start="1347" end="1379" title="Down&amp;#x27;s Syndrome Association" label="Down&amp;#x27;s Syndrome Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q57202785" start="1396" end="1420" title="Driving Standards Agency" label="Driving Standards Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251261" start="1427" end="1438" title="DSA Myanmar" label="DSA Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212177" start="1531" end="1538" title="base-12" label="base-12"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1604" end="1612" title="Per diem#United Nations Development Programme" label="per diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="1677" end="1691" title="Dental surgery" label="Dental surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q61364344" start="1704" end="1730" title="Digital Security Act, 2018" label="Digital Security Act, 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q100691575" start="1746" end="1766" title="Digital Services Act" label="Digital Services Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224954" start="1828" end="1859" title="Digital subtraction angiography" label="Digital subtraction angiography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1887" end="1915" title="Mixed metal oxide electrode " label="Mixed metal oxide electrode "/>
<link wikidata="Q7302455" start="1963" end="1995" title="Distinguished Service Award (OA)" label="Distinguished Service Award (OA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8996" start="2041" end="2068" title="Doncaster Sheffield Airport" label="Doncaster Sheffield Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q48928650" start="2100" end="2123" title="Donor-specific antibody" label="Donor-specific antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="2149" end="2154" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q289693" start="2155" end="2162" title="Sharjah" label="Sharjah"/>
<link wikidata="Q530171" start="2163" end="2168" title="Ajman" label="Ajman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041133" start="2209" end="2249" title="Duluth, South Shore and Atlantic Railway" label="Duluth, South Shore and Atlantic Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="2317" end="2342" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59465" wikidata="Q335063" url="?curid=59465" title="Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst">
<text>Field Marshal Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst, (29 January 1717 – 3 August 1797) was a British Army officer and Commander-in-Chief of the Forces in the British Army. Amherst is credited as the architect of Britain&#x27;s successful campaign to conquer the territory of New France during the Seven Years&#x27; War. Under his command, British forces captured the cities of Louisbourg, Quebec City and Montreal, as well as several major fortresses. He was also the first British governor general in the territories that eventually became Canada. Numerous places and streets are named after him, in both Canada and the United States.

Amherst&#x27;s legacy is controversial due to his expressed desire to spread smallpox among the disaffected tribes of Indians during Pontiac&#x27;s War. This has led to a reconsideration of his legacy. In 2019, the city of Montreal removed his name from a street, renaming it Rue Atateken, from the Kanien&#x27;kéha Mohawk language.

==Early life==
Born the son of Jeffrey Amherst (d. 1750), a Kentish lawyer, and Elizabeth Amherst (née Kerrill), Jeffery Amherst was born in Sevenoaks, England, on 29 January 1717. At an early age, he became a page to the Duke of Dorset. Amherst became an ensign in the Grenadier Guards in 1735.

Amherst served in the War of the Austrian Succession becoming an aide to General John Ligonier and participating in the Battle of Dettingen in June 1743 and the Battle of Fontenoy in May 1745. Promoted to lieutenant colonel on 25 December 1745, he also saw action at the Battle of Rocoux in October 1746. He then became an aide to the Duke of Cumberland, the commander of the British forces, and saw further action at the Battle of Lauffeld in July 1747.

==Seven Years&#x27; War==
=== Germany ===

In February 1756, Amherst was appointed commissar to the Hessian forces that had been assembled to defend Hanover as part of the Army of Observation: as it appeared likely a French invasion attempt against Britain itself was imminent, Amherst was ordered in April to arrange the transportation of thousands of the Germans to southern England to bolster Britain&#x27;s defences. He was made colonel of the 15th Regiment of Foot on 12 June 1756. By 1757 as the immediate danger to Britain had passed the troops were moved back to Hanover to join a growing army under the Duke of Cumberland and Amherst fought with the Hessians under Cumberland&#x27;s command at the Battle of Hastenbeck in July 1757: the Allied defeat there forced the army into a steady retreat northwards to Stade near the North Sea coast.

Amherst was left dispirited by the retreat and by the Convention of Klosterzeven by which Hanover agreed to withdraw from the war: he began to prepare to disband the Hessian troops under his command, only to receive word that the Convention had been repudiated and the Allied force was being reformed.
=== French and Indian War ===

Amherst gained fame during the Seven Years&#x27; War, particularly in the North American campaign known in the United States as the French and Indian War when he led the British attack on Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island in June 1758.

In the wake of this action, he was appointed commander-in-chief of the British army in North America and colonel-in-chief of the 60th (Royal American) Regiment in September 1758. Amherst then led an army against French troops on Lake Champlain, where he captured Fort Ticonderoga in July 1759, while another army under William Johnson took Niagara also in July 1759 and James Wolfe besieged and eventually captured Quebec with a third army in September 1759. Amherst served as the nominal Crown Governor of Virginia from 12 September 1759.

From July 1760, Amherst led an army down the Saint Lawrence River from Fort Oswego, joined with Brigadier Murray from Quebec and Brigadier Haviland from Ile-aux-Noix in a three-way pincer, and captured Montreal, ending French rule in North America on 8 September. He infuriated the French commanders by refusing them the honours of war; the Chevalier de Lévis burned the colours rather than surrendering them, to highlight his differences with Vaudreuil for later political advantage back in France.

The British settlers were relieved and proclaimed a day of thanksgiving. Boston newspapers recount how the occasion was celebrated with a parade, a grand dinner in Faneuil Hall, music, bonfires, and firing of cannon. The Rev. Thomas Foxcroft of the First Church in Boston offered thus:

In recognition of this victory, Amherst was appointed Governor-General of British North America in September 1760 and promoted to major-general on 29 November 1760. He was appointed Knight of the Order of the Bath on 11 April 1761.

From his base at New York, Amherst oversaw the dispatch of troops under Monckton and Haviland to take part in British expeditions in the West Indies that led to the British capture of Dominica in 1761 and Martinique and Cuba in 1762.

==Pontiac&#x27;s War==
The uprising of many Native American tribes in the Ohio Valley and Great Lakes region, commonly referred to as Pontiac&#x27;s War after one of its most notable leaders, began in early 1763. From 1753, when the French first invaded the territory, to February 1763, when peace was formally declared between the English and French, the Six Nations and tenant tribes always maintained that both the French and the British must remain east of the Allegheny Mountains. After the British failed to keep their word to withdraw from the Ohio and Allegheny valleys, a loose confederation of Native American tribes including the Delawares, the Shawnees, the Senecas, the Mingoes, the Mohicans, the Miamis, the Ottawas and the Wyandots, who were opposed to British post-war occupation of the region, banded together in an effort to drive the British out of their territory.

One of the most infamous and well-documented issues during Pontiac&#x27;s War was the use of biological warfare against Native Americans and Amherst&#x27;s role in supporting it. Colonel Henry Bouquet, the commander of Fort Pitt, ordered smallpox-infested blankets to be given Native Americans when a group of them laid siege to the fortification in June 1763. During a parley in midst of the siege on 24 June 1763, Captain Simeon Ecuyer gave representatives of the besieging Delawares two blankets and a handkerchief enclosed in small metal boxes that had been exposed to smallpox, in an attempt to spread the disease to the Natives in order to end the siege. William Trent, the trader turned militia commander who had come up with the plan, sent an invoice to the British colonial authorities in North America indicating that the purpose of giving the blankets was &quot;to Convey the Smallpox to the Indians.&quot; The invoice was approved by Thomas Gage, then serving as Commander-in-Chief, North America. Reporting on parleys with Delaware chiefs on 24 June, Trent wrote: &#x27;[We] gave them two Blankets and an Handkerchief out of the Small Pox Hospital. I hope it will have the desired effect.&#x27; The military hospital records confirm that two blankets and handkerchiefs were &#x27;taken from people in the Hospital to Convey the Smallpox to the Indians.&#x27; The fort commander paid for these items, which he certified &#x27;were had for the uses above mentioned.&#x27; A reported outbreak that began the spring before left as many as one hundred Native Americans dead in Ohio Country from 1763 to 1764. It is not clear, however, whether the smallpox was a result of the Fort Pitt incident or the virus was already present among the Delaware people as outbreaks happened on their own every dozen or so years and the delegates were met again later and they seemingly had not contracted smallpox.

A month later the use of smallpox blankets was discussed by Amherst himself in letters to Bouquet. Amherst, having learned that smallpox had broken out among the garrison at Fort Pitt, and after learning of the loss of his forts at Venango, Le Boeuf and Presqu&#x27;Isle, wrote to Colonel Bouquet:

Could it not be contrived to send the small pox among the disaffected tribes of Indians? We must on this occasion use every stratagem in our power to reduce them.

Bouquet, who was already marching to relieve Fort Pitt from the siege, agreed with this suggestion in a postscript when he responded to Amherst just days later on 13 July 1763:

P.S. I will try to inocculate the Indians by means of Blankets that may fall in their hands, taking care however not to get the disease myself. As it is pity to oppose good men against them, I wish we could make use of the Spaniard&#x27;s Method, and hunt them with English Dogs. Supported by Rangers, and some Light Horse, who would I think effectively extirpate or remove that Vermine.

In response, also in a postscript, Amherst replied:

P.S. You will Do well to try to Innoculate the Indians by means of Blankets, as well as to try Every other method that can serve to Extirpate this Execrable Race. I should be very glad your Scheme for Hunting them Down by Dogs could take Effect, but England is at too great a Distance to think of that at present.

Amherst was summoned home, ostensibly so that he could be consulted on future military plans in North America, and was replaced &quot;pro tem&quot; as Commander-in-Chief, North America by Thomas Gage. Amherst expected to be praised for his conquest of Canada, however, once in London, he was instead asked to account for the recent Native American rebellion. He was forced to defend his conduct, and faced complaints made by William Johnson and George Croghan, who lobbied the Board of Trade for his removal and permanent replacement by Gage. He was also severely criticised by military subordinates on both sides of the Atlantic. Nevertheless, Amherst was promoted to lieutenant-general on 26 March 1765, and became colonel of the 3rd Regiment of Foot in November 1768.

On 22 October 1772, Amherst was appointed Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance, and he soon gained the confidence of George III, who had initially hoped the position would go to a member of the Royal Family. On 6 November 1772, he became a member of the Privy Council.

==Commander-in-Chief==
===American War of Independence===
Amherst was raised to the peerage on 14 May 1776, as Baron Amherst, &quot;of Holmesdale in the County of Kent&quot;. On 24 March 1778 he was promoted to full general and, in April 1778, he became Commander-in-Chief of the Forces, which gave him a seat in the Cabinet.

In 1778, when the British commander in North America, William Howe, requested to be relieved, Amherst was considered as a replacement by the government: however, his insistence that it would require 75,000 troops to fully defeat the rebellion was not acceptable to the government, and Henry Clinton was instead chosen to take over from Howe in America. Following the British setback at Saratoga, Amherst successfully argued for a limited war in North America, keeping footholds along the coast, defending Canada, East and West Florida, and the West Indies while putting more effort into the war at sea. On 7 November 1778 the King and Queen visited Amherst at his home, Montreal Park, in Kent and on 24 April 1779 he became colonel of the 2nd Troop of Horse Grenadier Guards.

A long-standing plan of the French had been the concept of an invasion of Great Britain which they hoped would lead to a swift end to the war if it was successful: in 1779 Spain entered the war on the side of France, and the increasingly depleted state of British home forces made an invasion more appealing and Amherst organised Britain&#x27;s land defences in anticipation of the invasion which never materialised.

===Gordon Riots===
In June 1780, Amherst oversaw the British army as they suppressed the anti-Catholic Gordon Riots in London. After the outbreak of rioting Amherst deployed the small London garrison of Horse and Foot Guards as well as he could but was hindered by the reluctance of the civil magistrates to authorise decisive action against the rioters. 

Line troops and militia were brought in from surrounding counties, swelling the forces at Amherst&#x27;s disposal to over 15,000, many of whom were quartered in tents in Hyde Park, and a form of martial law was declared, giving the troops the authority to fire on crowds if the Riot Act had first been read. Although order was eventually restored, Amherst was personally alarmed by the failure of the authorities to suppress the riots. 

In the wake of the Gordon Riots, Amherst was forced to resign as Commander-in-Chief in February 1782 and was replaced by Henry Conway. On 23 March 1782 he became captain and colonel of the 2nd Troop of Horse Guards.

== Later life ==
===French Revolutionary Wars===
On 8 July 1788, he became colonel of the 2nd Regiment of Life Guards and on 30 August 1788 he was created Baron Amherst (this time with the territorial designation &quot;of Montreal in the County of Kent&quot;) with a special provision that would allow this title to pass to his nephew (as Amherst was childless, the Holmesdale title became extinct upon his death). 

With the advent of the French Revolutionary Wars, Amherst was recalled as Commander-in-Chief of the Forces in January 1793: however is generally criticised for allowing the armed forces to slide into acute decline, a direct cause of the failure of the early campaigns in the Low Countries: Pitt the Younger said of him &quot;his age, and perhaps his natural temper, are little suited to the activity and the energy which the present moment calls for&quot;. Horace Walpole called him &quot;that log of wood whose stupidity and incapacity are past belief&quot;. &quot;He allowed innumerable abuses to grow up in the army… He kept his command, though almost in his dotage, with a tenacity that cannot be too much censured&quot;.

===Family and death===
In 1753 he married Jane Dalison (1723–1765). Following her death he married Elizabeth Cary (1740–1830), daughter of Lieutenant General George Cary (1712–1792), who later became Lady Amherst of Holmesdale, on 26 March 1767. There were no children by either marriage. He retired from that post in February 1795, to be replaced by the Duke of York, and was promoted to the rank of field marshal on 30 July 1796. He retired to his home at Montreal Park and died on 3 August 1797. He was buried in the Parish Church at Sevenoaks.

==Legacy==
Several places are named for him: Amherst Island, Ontario, Amherstburg, Ontario (location of General Amherst High School), Amherst, Massachusetts (location of the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Hampshire College and Amherst College), Amherst, New Hampshire, Amherst, Nova Scotia, Amherst, New York and Amherst County, Virginia.

Amherst&#x27;s desire to exterminate the indigenous people is now viewed as a dark stain on his legacy and various agencies, municipalities and institutions have reconsidered the use of the name &quot;Amherst&quot;. &quot;The Un-Canadians&quot;, a 2007 article in &quot;The Beaver&quot;, includes Amherst in a list of people in the history of Canada who are considered contemptible by the authors, because he &quot;supported plans of distributing smallpox-infested blankets to First Nations people&quot;.

In 2008, Mi&#x27;kmaq spiritual leader John Joe Sark called the name of Fort Amherst Park of Prince Edward Island a &quot;terrible blotch on Canada&quot;, and said: &quot;To have a place named after General Amherst would be like having a city in Jerusalem named after Adolf Hitler...it&#x27;s disgusting.&quot; Sark raised his concerns again in a 29 January 2016 letter to the Canadian government. Mi&#x27;kmaq historian Daniel N. Paul, who referred to Amherst as motivated by white supremacist beliefs, also supports a name change, saying: &quot;in the future I don&#x27;t think there should ever be anything named after people who committed what can be described as crimes against humanity.&quot; In February 2016, a spokesperson for Parks Canada said it would review the matter after a proper complaint is filed; &quot;Should there be a formal request from the public to change the name of the National Historic Site, Parks Canada would engage with the Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada for its recommendation.&quot; An online petition was launched by Sark to satisfy this formal request requirement on 20 February 2016. On 16 February 2018, the site was renamed Skmaqn–Port-la-Joye–Fort Amherst, adding a Mi&#x27;kmaq word alongside the French and English titles.

In 2009, Montreal City Councillor Nicolas Montmorency officially asked that Rue Amherst be renamed: &quot;it is totally unacceptable that a man who made comments supporting the extermination of Native Americans to be honoured in this way&quot;. On 13 September 2017, the city of Montreal decided that the street bearing his name would be renamed. On 21 June 2019, the street was officially renamed &quot;Rue Atateken&quot;, &quot;atateken&quot; being a Kanien&#x27;kehá word describing &quot;those with whom one shares values,&quot; according to Kanehsatake historian Hilda Nicholas. Similarly, Rue Amherst in Gatineau was renamed Rue Wìgwàs (Anishinaabemowin for white birch) in 2023.

In 2016, Amherst College dropped its &quot;Lord Jeffery&quot; mascot at the instigation of the students. It also renamed the Lord Jeffery Inn, a campus hotel owned by the college, to the Inn on Boltwood in early 2019.

==See also==
* List of governors general of Canada
* Turtleheart

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==

===Citations===
=== General bibliography ===
* Amherst, Jeffery (1931). &quot;The journal of Jeffery Amherst, recording the military career of General Amherst in America from 1758 to 1763&quot; (Webster, John Clarence, ed) Toronto: The Ryerson Press; Chicago: University of Chicago Press
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Middleton, Richard, &quot;Pontiac&#x27;s War: Its Causes, Course and Consequences&quot; New York and London, Routledge, 2007 
* 
* 
* Whitworth, Rex (February 1959). &quot;Field-Marshal Lord Amherst: A Military Enigma&quot; . &quot;History Today&quot; 9#2 pp. 132–137.

==External links==

* Jeffery Amherst Collection at the Amherst College Archives &amp; Special Collections
* Jeffery Amherst papers, William L. Clements Library, University of Michigan.
* Prof. Kevin Sweeney on Jeffery Amherst in America 
* Historical Biographies: Jeffrey Amherst
* Amherst and Smallpox
* Amherst in the Haldimand Papers
* Amherst and Smallpox Blankets – Excerpts from actual letters in which Lord Jeffery Amherst approves smallpox plan (dated 16 July 1763) and discusses other methods of killing Native Americans with Colonel Henry Bouquet.
* Jeffrey Amherst and Smallpox Blankets – Extensive discussion and documentation of Amherst&#x27;s involvement in warfare against Native Americans and the smallpox blanket tactics (University of Massachusetts Amherst)
* 1759 From the Warpath to the Plains of Abraham ( Virtual Exhibition)
* National Battlefields Commission (Plains of Abraham)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="0" end="13" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q335063" start="14" end="48" title="Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst" label="Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="90" end="102" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713569" start="115" end="147" title="Commander-in-Chief of the Forces" label="Commander-in-Chief of the Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="155" end="167" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q429230" start="224" end="243" title="Conquest of New France" label="successful campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="272" end="282" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="294" end="315" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263622" start="374" end="384" title="Louisbourg" label="Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="402" end="410" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197847" start="465" end="495" title="List of governors general of Canada" label="first British governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="752" end="759" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="767" end="785" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13339" start="950" end="965" title="Mohawk language" label="Mohawk language"/>
<link wikidata="Q939838" start="1109" end="1118" title="Sevenoaks" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q337505" start="1190" end="1204" title="Lionel Sackville, 1st Duke of Dorset" label="Duke of Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="1224" end="1230" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="1238" end="1254" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="1287" end="1317" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070667" start="1346" end="1359" title="John Ligonier, 1st Earl Ligonier" label="John Ligonier"/>
<link wikidata="Q402312" start="1385" end="1404" title="Battle of Dettingen" label="Battle of Dettingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q569953" start="1426" end="1444" title="Battle of Fontenoy" label="Battle of Fontenoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="1470" end="1488" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q32493" start="1536" end="1552" title="Battle of Rocoux" label="Battle of Rocoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="1600" end="1618" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q696699" start="1687" end="1705" title="Battle of Lauffeld" label="Battle of Lauffeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956065" start="1804" end="1813" title="commissariat" label="commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="1821" end="1828" title="Hesse" label="Hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="1870" end="1877" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329730" start="2169" end="2190" title="East Yorkshire Regiment" label="15th Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q677959" start="2428" end="2448" title="Battle of Hastenbeck" label="Battle of Hastenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949" start="2539" end="2544" title="Stade" label="Stade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="2554" end="2563" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q324624" start="2626" end="2652" title="Convention of Klosterzeven" label="Convention of Klosterzeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="2662" end="2669" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="2936" end="2957" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="3037" end="3058" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050672" start="3083" end="3103" title="Siege of Louisbourg (1758)" label="attack on Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="3107" end="3125" title="Cape Breton Island" label="Cape Breton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152172" start="3186" end="3241" title="Commander-in-Chief, North America" label="commander-in-chief of the British army in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997813" start="3270" end="3300" title="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps" label="60th (Royal American) Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="3370" end="3384" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q663574" start="3395" end="3420" title="Battle of Ticonderoga (1759)" label="captured Fort Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q457369" start="3460" end="3475" title="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet" label="William Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888557" start="3476" end="3488" title="Battle of Fort Niagara" label="took Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q379812" start="3511" end="3522" title="James Wolfe" label="James Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q311726" start="3547" end="3562" title="Battle of the Plains of Abraham" label="captured Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611796" start="3630" end="3656" title="List of colonial governors of Virginia" label="Crown Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="3727" end="3747" title="Saint Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q315054" start="3753" end="3764" title="Fort Oswego" label="Fort Oswego"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668150" start="3778" end="3794" title="James Murray (Quebec governor)" label="Brigadier Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210746" start="3811" end="3829" title="William Haviland" label="Brigadier Haviland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593288" start="3835" end="3847" title="Ile-aux-Noix" label="Ile-aux-Noix"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="3884" end="3892" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935054" start="4003" end="4017" title="honours of war" label="honours of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q560639" start="4023" end="4041" title="Francis de Gaston, Chevalier de Levis" label="Chevalier de Lévis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149182" start="4053" end="4060" title="Colour (flag)" label="colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356274" start="4126" end="4135" title="Pierre de Rigaud, Marquis de Vaudreuil-Cavagnial" label="Vaudreuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q49137" start="4347" end="4359" title="Faneuil Hall" label="Faneuil Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058023" start="4409" end="4424" title="Thomas Foxcroft (minister)" label="Thomas Foxcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q989111" start="4432" end="4454" title="First Church in Boston" label="First Church in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197847" start="4524" end="4565" title="List of Governors General of Canada" label="Governor-General of British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="4600" end="4613" title="major-general" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="4652" end="4683" title="Order of the Bath" label="Knight of the Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435942" start="4775" end="4783" title="Robert Monckton" label="Monckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210746" start="4788" end="4796" title="William Haviland" label="Haviland"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="4840" end="4851" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="4887" end="4895" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="4908" end="4918" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="4923" end="4927" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q314960" start="5072" end="5079" title="Pontiac (person)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141373" start="5403" end="5422" title="Allegheny Mountains" label="Allegheny Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242560" start="5917" end="5935" title="biological warfare" label="biological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q116866" start="6003" end="6024" title="Henry Bouquet" label="Colonel Henry Bouquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q209377" start="6043" end="6052" title="Fort Pitt (Pennsylvania)" label="Fort Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q977428" start="6062" end="6088" title="Smallpox blanket" label="smallpox-infested blankets"/>
<link wikidata="Q977428" start="6139" end="6170" title="Siege of Fort Pitt" label="laid siege to the fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="6300" end="6308" title="Lenape" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019514" start="6485" end="6498" title="William Trent" label="William Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q190581" start="6575" end="6582" title="invoice" label="invoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="6770" end="6781" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152172" start="6799" end="6832" title="Commander-in-Chief, North America" label="Commander-in-Chief, North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="7409" end="7421" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="7570" end="7585" title="Lenape" label="Delaware people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472223" start="7965" end="7972" title="Fort Venango" label="Venango"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077920" start="7974" end="7982" title="Fort Le Boeuf" label="Le Boeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078309" start="7987" end="8003" title="Fort Presque Isle" label="Presqu&amp;#x27;Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152172" start="9282" end="9315" title="Commander-in-Chief, North America" label="Commander-in-Chief, North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="9319" end="9330" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q457369" start="9556" end="9571" title="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet" label="William Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538228" start="9576" end="9590" title="George Croghan" label="George Croghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="9800" end="9818" title="lieutenant-general" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899477" start="9863" end="9883" title="Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment)" label="3rd Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544383" start="9945" end="9979" title="Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance" label="Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="10018" end="10028" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="10095" end="10107" title="Royal Family" label="Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="10155" end="10168" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="10255" end="10262" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="10387" end="10394" title="general" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713569" start="10425" end="10457" title="Commander-in-Chief of the Forces" label="Commander-in-Chief of the Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="10488" end="10495" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q333422" start="10552" end="10564" title="William Howe, 5th Viscount Howe" label="William Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="10783" end="10796" title="Henry Clinton (American War of Independence)" label="Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="10884" end="10892" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770351" start="11011" end="11015" title="East Florida" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425202" start="11020" end="11032" title="West Florida" label="West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="11042" end="11053" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="11120" end="11128" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="11133" end="11138" title="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906313" start="11168" end="11181" title="Montreal Park" label="Montreal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="11186" end="11190" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905433" start="11237" end="11272" title="Horse Grenadier Guards" label="2nd Troop of Horse Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538124" start="11796" end="11808" title="Gordon Riots" label="Gordon Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="12066" end="12073" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="12220" end="12229" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="12245" end="12256" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q927105" start="12328" end="12336" title="Riot Act" label="Riot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348767" start="12609" end="12621" title="Henry Seymour Conway" label="Henry Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633936" start="12677" end="12702" title="2nd Troop of Horse Guards" label="2nd Troop of Horse Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633894" start="12795" end="12822" title="2nd Regiment of Life Guards" label="2nd Regiment of Life Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703764" start="12894" end="12917" title="territorial designation" label="territorial designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="13145" end="13170" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="13412" end="13428" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="13579" end="13593" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14007" end="14018" title="George Cary (British Army officer)" label="George Cary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213573" start="14204" end="14216" title="Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="14250" end="14263" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906313" start="14307" end="14320" title="Montreal Park" label="Montreal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q939838" start="14386" end="14395" title="Sevenoaks" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q470618" start="14443" end="14466" title="Amherst Island" label="Amherst Island, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q385335" start="14468" end="14488" title="Amherstburg" label="Amherstburg, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531685" start="14502" end="14529" title="General Amherst High School" label="General Amherst High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="14532" end="14554" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="14572" end="14607" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="14609" end="14626" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="14631" end="14646" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323115" start="14649" end="14671" title="Amherst, New Hampshire" label="Amherst, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q470594" start="14673" end="14693" title="Amherst, Nova Scotia" label="Amherst, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q470592" start="14695" end="14712" title="Amherst, New York" label="Amherst, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q470626" start="14717" end="14741" title="Amherst County, Virginia" label="Amherst County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029227" start="15014" end="15024" title="The Beaver (magazine)" label="The Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q495751" start="15259" end="15271" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398320" start="15322" end="15339" title="Port-la-Joye–Fort Amherst" label="Fort Amherst Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="15343" end="15363" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218231" start="15671" end="15685" title="Daniel N. Paul" label="Daniel N. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="15727" end="15744" title="white supremacist" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q349487" start="15986" end="15998" title="Parks Canada" label="Parks Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q262843" start="16284" end="16299" title="online petition" label="online petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13339" start="16983" end="16999" title="Mohawk language" label="Kanien&amp;#x27;kehá"/>
<link wikidata="Q141844" start="17140" end="17148" title="Gatineau, Quebec" label="Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33875" start="17173" end="17189" title="Anishinaabemowin" label="Anishinaabemowin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76971" start="17194" end="17205" title="white birch" label="white birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="17226" end="17241" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197847" start="17451" end="17486" title="List of governors general of Canada" label="List of governors general of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210185" start="17489" end="17500" title="Turtleheart" label="Turtleheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226175" start="17737" end="17759" title="John Clarence Webster" label="Webster, John Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="18866" end="18901" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59467" wikidata="Q131183" url="?curid=59467" title="Cabaret">
<text>Cabaret () is a form of theatrical entertainment featuring music, song, dance, recitation, or drama. The performance venue might be a pub, a casino, a hotel, a restaurant, or a nightclub with a stage for performances. The audience, often dining or drinking, does not typically dance but usually sits at tables. Performances are usually introduced by a master of ceremonies (M.C.). The entertainment, as performed by an ensemble of actors and according to its European origins, is often (but not always) oriented towards adult audiences and of a clearly underground nature. In the United States, striptease, burlesque, drag shows, or a solo vocalist with a pianist, as well as the venues which offer this entertainment, are often advertised as cabarets.

==Etymology==
The term originally came from Picard language or Walloon language words &quot;camberete&quot; or &quot;cambret&quot; for a small room (12th century). The first printed use of the word &quot;kaberet&quot; is found in a document from 1275 in Tournai. The term was used since the 13th century in Middle Dutch to mean an inexpensive inn or restaurant (&quot;caberet&quot;, &quot;cabret&quot;).

The word &quot;cambret&quot;, itself probably derived from an earlier form of &quot;chambrette&quot;, little room, or from the Norman French &quot;chamber&quot; meaning tavern, itself derived from the Late Latin word &quot;camera&quot; meaning an arched roof.

==National history==

===France (from 15th century)===
Cabarets had appeared in Paris by at least the late 15th century. They were distinguished from taverns because they served food as well as wine, the table was covered with a cloth, and the price was charged by the plate, not the mug.
They were not particularly associated with entertainment even if musicians sometimes performed in both. Early on, cabarets were considered better than taverns; by the end of the sixteenth century, they were the preferred place to dine out. In the 17th century, a clearer distinction emerged when taverns were limited to selling wine, and later to serving roast meats.

Cabarets were frequently used as meeting places for writers, actors, friends and artists. Writers such as La Fontaine, Moliere and Jean Racine were known to frequent a cabaret called the &quot;Mouton Blanc&quot; on rue du Vieux-Colombier, and later the &quot;Croix de Lorraine&quot; on the modern rue Bourg-Tibourg. In 1773, French poets, painters, musicians and writers began to meet in a cabaret called &quot;Le Caveau&quot; on rue de Buci, where they composed and sang songs. The Caveau continued until 1816, when it was forced to close because its clients wrote songs mocking the royal government.

====Entertainment venues====

In the 18th century, the &quot;café-concert&quot; or &quot;café-chantant&quot; appeared, which offered food along with music, singers, or magicians. The most famous was the &quot;Cafe des Aveugles&quot; in the cellars of the Palais-Royal, which had a small orchestra of blind musicians. In the early 19th century, many cafés-chantants appeared around the city; the most famous were the Café des Ambassadeurs (1843) on the Champs-Élysées and the Eldorado (1858) on boulevard Strasbourg. By 1900, there were more than 150 cafés-chantants in Paris.

The first cabaret in the modern sense was in the bohemian neighborhood of Montmartre, created in 1881 by Rodolphe Salis, a theatrical agent and entrepreneur. It combined music and other entertainment with political commentary and satire. The brought together the wealthy and famous of Paris with the bohemians and artists of Montmartre and the Pigalle. Its clientele &quot;was a mixture of writers and painters, of journalists and students, of employees and high-livers, as well as models, prostitutes and true grand dames searching for exotic experiences.&quot; The host was Salis himself, calling himself a gentleman-&quot;cabaretier&quot;; he began each show with a monologue mocking the wealthy, ridiculing the deputies of the National Assembly, and making jokes about the events of the day. The cabaret was too small for the crowds trying to get in; at midnight on June 10, 1885, Salis and his customers moved down the street to a larger new club at 12 rue de Laval, which had a decor described as &quot;A sort of Beirut with Chinese influences.&quot; The composer Eric Satie, after finishing his studies at the Conservatory, earned his living playing the piano at the .
By 1896, there were 56 cabarets and cafes with music in Paris, along with a dozen music halls. The cabarets did not have a high reputation; one critic wrote in 1897 that &quot;they sell drinks which are worth fifteen centimes along with verses which, for the most part, are worth nothing.&quot; The traditional cabarets, with monologues and songs and little decor, were replaced by more specialized venues; some, like the &quot;Boite a Fursy&quot; (1899), specialized in current events, politics and satire. Some were purely theatrical, producing short scenes of plays. Some focused on the macabre or erotic. The &quot;Caberet de la fin du Monde&quot; had servers dressed as Greek and Roman gods and presented living tableaus that were between erotic and pornographic.

By the end of the century, there were only a few cabarets of the old style remaining where artists and bohemians gathered. They included the &quot;Cabaret des noctambules&quot; on Rue Champollion on the Left Bank; the Lapin Agile at Montmartre; and &quot;Le Soleil d&#x27;or&quot; at the corner of the quai Saint-Michel and boulevard Saint-Michel, where poets including Guillaume Apollinaire and André Salmon met to share their work.

The music hall, first invented in London, appeared in Paris in 1862. It offered more lavish musical and theatrical productions, with elaborate costumes, singing, and dancing. The theaters of Paris, fearing competition from the music halls, had a law passed by the National Assembly forbidding music hall performers to wear costumes, dance, wear wigs, or recite dialogue. The law was challenged by the owner of the music hall &quot;Eldorado&quot; in 1867, who put a former famous actress from the Comédie-Française on stage to recite verse from Corneille and Racine. The public took the side of the music halls, and the law was repealed.

The Moulin Rouge was opened in 1889 by the Catalan Joseph Oller. It was greatly prominent because of the large red imitation windmill on its roof, and became the birthplace of the dance known as the French Cancan. It helped make famous the singers Mistinguett and Édith Piaf and the painter Toulouse-Lautrec, who made posters for the venue. The &quot;Olympia&quot;, also run by Oller, was the first to be called a music hall; it opened in 1893, followed by the Alhambra Music Hall in 1902, and the Printania in 1903. The Printania, open only in summer, had a large &quot;music garden&quot; which seated twelve thousand spectators, and produced dinner shows which presented twenty-three different acts, including singers, acrobats, horses, mimes, jugglers, lions, bears and elephants, with two shows a day.

In the 20th century, the competition from motion pictures forced the dance halls to put on shows that were more spectacular and more complex. In 1911, the producer Jacques Charles of the Olympia Paris created the grand staircase as a setting for his shows, competing with its great rival, the Folies Bergère which had been founded in 1869. Its stars in the 1920s included the American singer and dancer Josephine Baker. The Casino de Paris, directed by Leon Volterra and then Henri Varna, presented many famous French singers, including Mistinguett, Maurice Chevalier, and Tino Rossi.

Le Lido on the Champs-Élysées opened in 1946, presenting Édith Piaf, Laurel and Hardy, Shirley MacLaine, Marlene Dietrich, Maurice Chevalier, and Noël Coward. The Crazy Horse Saloon, featuring striptease, dance, and magic, opened in 1951. The Olympia Paris went through a number of years as a movie theater before being revived as a music hall and concert stage in 1954. Performers there included Piaf, Dietrich, Miles Davis, Judy Garland, and the Grateful Dead. A handful of music halls exist today in Paris, attended mostly by visitors to the city; and a number of more traditional cabarets, with music and satire, can be found.

===Netherlands (from 1885)===

In the Netherlands, cabaret or &quot;kleinkunst&quot; (literally: &quot;small art&quot;) is a popular form of entertainment, usually performed in theatres. The birth date of Dutch cabaret is usually set at August 19, 1895. In Amsterdam, there is the Kleinkunstacademie (English: Cabaret Academy). It is often a mixture of (stand-up) comedy, theatre, and music and often includes social themes and political satire. In the mid twentieth century, &quot;the big three&quot; were Wim Sonneveld, Wim Kan, and Toon Hermans.

Nowadays, many cabaret performances by popular comedians are broadcast on national television, especially on New Year&#x27;s Eve, when the oudejaarsconference is broadcast. The oudejaarsconference is a cabaret performance in which the comedian looks back on the events of the past year.

===Germany (from 1901)===

German &quot;Kabarett&quot; developed from 1901, with the creation of the Überbrettl (&quot;Superstage&quot;) venue, and by the Weimar era in the mid-1920s, the &quot;Kabarett&quot; performances were characterized by political satire and gallows humor. It shared the characteristic atmosphere of intimacy with the French cabaret from which it was imported, but the gallows humor was a distinct German aspect.

===Polish (from 1905)===

The Polish &quot;kabaret&quot; is a popular form of live (often televised) entertainment involving a comedy troupe, and consisting mostly of comedy sketches, monologues, stand up comedy, songs and political satire (often hidden behind double entendre to fool censors).
It traces its origins to Zielony Balonik, a famous literary cabaret founded in Kraków by local poets, writers and artists during the final years of the Partitions of Poland.

In the interwar Poland there was a considerable number of Yiddish-language cabarets. This art form was called kleynkunst (lliterally &quot;small art&quot;) in Yiddish.

In post-war Poland, it is almost always associated with the troupe (often on tour), not the venue; pre-war revue shows (with female dancers) were long gone.

===United States (from 1911)===

American cabaret was imported from French cabaret by Jesse Louis Lasky in 1911. In the United States, cabaret diverged into several different styles of performance mostly due to the influence of jazz music. Chicago cabaret focused intensely on the larger band ensembles and reached its peak during Roaring Twenties, under the Prohibition Era, where it was featured in the speakeasies and steakhouses.

New York cabaret never developed to feature a great deal of social commentary. When New York cabarets featured jazz, they tended to focus on famous vocalists like Nina Simone, Bette Midler, Eartha Kitt, Peggy Lee, and Hildegarde rather than instrumental musicians. Julius Monk&#x27;s annual revues established the standard for New York cabaret during the late 1950s and &#x27;60s.

Cabaret in the United States began to decline in the 1960s, due to the rising popularity of rock concert shows, television variety shows, and general comedy theaters. However, it remained in some Las Vegas-style dinner shows, such as the Tropicana, with fewer comedy segments. The art form still survives in various musical formats, as well as in the stand-up comedy format, and in popular drag show performances.

The late 20th and early 21st century saw a revival of American cabaret, particularly in New Orleans, Chicago, Seattle, Portland, Philadelphia, Orlando, Tulsa, Asheville, North Carolina, and Kansas City, Missouri, as new generations of performers reinterpret the old forms in both music and theater. Many contemporary cabaret groups in the United States and elsewhere feature a combination of original music, burlesque and political satire. In New York City, since 1985, successful, enduring or innovative cabaret acts have been honored by the annual Bistro Awards.


===United Kingdom (from 1912)===
The Cabaret Theatre Club, later known as The Cave of the Golden Calf, was opened by Frida Strindberg (modelled on the Kaberett Fledermaus in Strindberg&#x27;s native Vienna) in a basement at 9 Heddon Street, London, in 1912. She intended her club to be an avant-garde meeting place for bohemian writers and artists, with decorations by Jacob Epstein, Eric Gill, and Wyndham Lewis, but it rapidly came to be seen as an amusing place for high society and went bankrupt in 1914. The Cave was nevertheless an influential venture, which introduced the concept of cabaret to London. It provided a model for the generation of nightclubs that came after it.

&quot;The clubs that started the present vogue for dance clubs were the Cabaret Club in Heddon Street . . . . The Cabaret Club was the first club where members were expected to appear in evening clothes. . . . The Cabaret Club began a system of vouchers which friends of members could use to obtain admission to the club. . . . the question of the legality of these vouchers led to a famous visitation of the police. That was the night a certain Duke was got out by way of the kitchen lift . . . The visitation was a well-mannered affair&#x27;

=== Iran (until 1979) ===
One of the main gathering centers of cabarets in Tehran (Iranian capital) was Laleh-Zar Street. Famous Persian cabarets were active in the city until 1979. They also introduced many domestic artists. In common language, &quot;cabaret&quot; sometimes called by Iranians &quot;home of dance&quot; (In Persian: &quot;رقاص‌خانه&quot;) or &quot;dancing place&quot;.
===Sweden (from 1970s)===

In Stockholm, an underground show called &quot;Fattighuskabarén&quot; (&quot;Poor House Cabaret&quot;) opened in 1974 and ran for 10 years. Performers of later celebrity and fame (in Sweden) such as Ted Åström, Örjan Ramberg, and Agneta Lindén began their careers there. &quot;Wild Side Story&quot; also had several runs in Stockholm, at Alexandra&#x27;s (1976 with Ulla Jones and Christer Lindarw), Camarillo (1997), Rosenlundsteatern/Teater Tre (2000), Wild Side Lounge at Bäckahästen (2003 with Helena Mattsson) and Mango Bar (2004). Alexandra&#x27;s had also hosted &quot;AlexCab&quot; in 1975, as had Compagniet in Gothenburg.

===Serbia (from 2010s)===

In 2019 the first Serbian cabaret club Lafayette opened. Although Serbia and Belgrade had a rich nightlife and theater life there was no cabaret house until 2019.

==Notable venues==
* Candlelight Cabaret, Dublin Ireland
* Cabane Choucoune in Port-au-Prince, Haiti
* Cabaret Red Light in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
* Cabaret Voltaire in Zürich
* Café Carlyle in New York City
* Café de Paris in London, England
* The Cabaret in Indianapolis, Indiana
* Cabaret rooms at various Chuck E. Cheese&#x27;s Pizza Time Theatres
* Crazy Horse in Paris, France
* Darling Cabaret in Prague
* El Mocambo in Toronto, Ontario, Canada
* in Barcelona, Spain
* Feinstein&#x27;s/54 Below in New York City
* Folies Bergere in Paris, France
* Lafayette in Belgrade, Serbia
* Lapin Agile in Paris, France
* Le Lido in Paris, France
* Le Rat Mort in Paris, France
* Metro Chicago in Chicago, Illinois
* Moulin Rouge in Paris, France
* The Tropicana in Havana, Cuba

==Notable artists==
* May Alix
* Josephine Baker
* Bernie Dieter
* Marlene Dietrich
* Fascinating Aïda
* Ute Lemper
* Meow Meow
* Mabel Mercer 
* Eartha Kitt
* Édith Piaf
* Tino Rossi
* Lady Rizo

==See also==
* Cabaret (musical)
* &quot;Cabaret Paradis&quot;
* Dark cabaret
* Dinner theater
* &quot;La Soirée&quot;
* Nightclub act
* Revue
* Vedette (cabaret)

==References==

===Bibliography===

===Notes and citations===
==External links==
* An Anatomy of Dutch Cabaret article from the magazine &quot;The Low Countries&quot; (1994)
* Dutch cabaret in 8 steps article on &#x27;The Netherlands by numbers&#x27; (2015)
* &quot;The Cabaret&quot;, 1921 painting by Alexander Deyneka</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="0" end="7" title="Cabaret" label="Cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="35" end="48" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="59" end="64" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366" start="66" end="70" title="song" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="72" end="77" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680700" start="79" end="89" title="recitation" label="recitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="94" end="99" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="134" end="137" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="141" end="147" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="151" end="156" title="hotel" label="hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="160" end="170" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="177" end="186" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="352" end="372" title="master of ceremonies" label="master of ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373485" start="553" end="564" title="underground music" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q152213" start="595" end="605" title="striptease" label="striptease"/>
<link wikidata="Q107198899" start="607" end="616" title="American burlesque" label="burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446221" start="618" end="627" title="drag show" label="drag show"/>
<link wikidata="Q270827" start="635" end="648" title="solo (music)" label="solo vocalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8719053" start="680" end="686" title="Music venue" label="venues"/>
<link wikidata="Q34024" start="798" end="813" title="Picard language" label="Picard language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34219" start="817" end="833" title="Walloon language" label="Walloon language"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="1008" end="1015" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="1061" end="1073" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49496" start="2184" end="2195" title="La Fontaine" label="La Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="2197" end="2204" title="Moliere" label="Moliere"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="2209" end="2220" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q478679" start="2770" end="2783" title="café-chantant" label="café-chantant"/>
<link wikidata="Q329948" start="2936" end="2948" title="Palais-Royal" label="Palais-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895806" start="3097" end="3118" title="Café des Ambassadeurs" label="Café des Ambassadeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="3133" end="3147" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="3332" end="3342" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q962412" start="3363" end="3377" title="Rodolphe Salis" label="Rodolphe Salis"/>
<link wikidata="Q576507" start="3602" end="3609" title="Quartier Pigalle" label="Pigalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="4328" end="4338" title="Eric Satie" label="Eric Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527760" start="5351" end="5374" title="Théâtre des Noctambules" label="Cabaret des noctambules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423353" start="5422" end="5433" title="Lapin Agile" label="Lapin Agile"/>
<link wikidata="Q133855" start="5574" end="5595" title="Guillaume Apollinaire" label="Guillaume Apollinaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q522679" start="5600" end="5612" title="André Salmon" label="André Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5643" end="5653" title="music hall#Music halls of Paris" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q151030" start="6281" end="6293" title="Moulin Rouge" label="Moulin Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q333009" start="6483" end="6489" title="Cancan" label="Cancan"/>
<link wikidata="Q235507" start="6525" end="6536" title="Mistinguett" label="Mistinguett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631" start="6541" end="6551" title="Édith Piaf" label="Édith Piaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q82445" start="6568" end="6584" title="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec" label="Toulouse-Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q915451" start="7271" end="7284" title="Olympia Paris" label="Olympia Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q330375" start="7377" end="7391" title="Folies Bergère" label="Folies Bergère"/>
<link wikidata="Q151972" start="7487" end="7502" title="Josephine Baker" label="Josephine Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187828" start="7508" end="7523" title="Casino de Paris" label="Casino de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q106001" start="7634" end="7651" title="Maurice Chevalier" label="Maurice Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q359026" start="7657" end="7667" title="Tino Rossi" label="Tino Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810868" start="7670" end="7677" title="Le Lido" label="Le Lido"/>
<link wikidata="Q33497" start="7739" end="7755" title="Laurel and Hardy" label="Laurel and Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95026" start="7757" end="7773" title="Shirley MacLaine" label="Shirley MacLaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="7775" end="7791" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q106001" start="7793" end="7810" title="Maurice Chevalier" label="Maurice Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="7816" end="7827" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139243" start="7833" end="7851" title="Crazy Horse (cabaret)" label="Crazy Horse Saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="8083" end="8094" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="8096" end="8108" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="8118" end="8131" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387785" start="8809" end="8822" title="Wim Sonneveld" label="Wim Sonneveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666043" start="8824" end="8831" title="Wim Kan" label="Wim Kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095821" start="8837" end="8849" title="Toon Hermans" label="Toon Hermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557639" start="8991" end="9010" title="oudejaarsconference" label="oudejaarsconference"/>
<link wikidata="Q331410" start="9241" end="9251" title="Überbrettl" label="Überbrettl"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="9295" end="9305" title="Weimar era" label="Weimar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225114" start="9384" end="9400" title="political satire" label="political satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="9405" end="9418" title="gallows humor" label="gallows humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="9667" end="9676" title="televised" label="televised"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="9751" end="9759" title="sketch (comedy)" label="sketches"/>
<link wikidata="Q261197" start="9761" end="9770" title="monologue" label="monologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="9773" end="9788" title="stand up comedy" label="stand up comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225114" start="9800" end="9816" title="political satire" label="political satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="9838" end="9853" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058940" start="9862" end="9869" title="Censorship in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="censors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071650" start="9897" end="9912" title="Zielony Balonik" label="Zielony Balonik"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="9951" end="9957" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="10024" end="10044" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="10054" end="10069" title="interwar Poland" label="interwar Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="10105" end="10112" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10224" end="10227" title="World War II" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393314" start="10276" end="10282" title="Dance troupe" label="troupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446710" start="10290" end="10297" title="Touring theatre" label="on tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="10308" end="10313" title="Theater (structure)" label="venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="10323" end="10328" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384661" start="10460" end="10477" title="Jesse Louis Lasky" label="Jesse Louis Lasky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="10602" end="10606" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="10614" end="10621" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="10705" end="10721" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="10733" end="10748" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q616100" start="10779" end="10790" title="speakeasies" label="speakeasies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109696" start="10795" end="10805" title="steakhouse" label="steakhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="10972" end="10983" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="10985" end="10997" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q222818" start="10999" end="11010" title="Eartha Kitt" label="Eartha Kitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q229139" start="11012" end="11021" title="Peggy Lee" label="Peggy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q543524" start="11027" end="11037" title="Hildegarde" label="Hildegarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309971" start="11074" end="11085" title="Julius Monk" label="Julius Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354800" start="11283" end="11295" title="rock concert" label="rock concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q336181" start="11314" end="11327" title="variety shows" label="variety shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="11341" end="11347" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q280339" start="11429" end="11438" title="Tropicana Resort &amp;amp; Casino" label="Tropicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="11542" end="11557" title="stand-up comedy" label="stand-up comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446221" start="11581" end="11590" title="drag show" label="drag show"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="11694" end="11705" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="11707" end="11714" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="11716" end="11723" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="11725" end="11733" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="11735" end="11747" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="11749" end="11756" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="11758" end="11763" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="11765" end="11790" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="11796" end="11817" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q107198899" start="12014" end="12023" title="American burlesque" label="burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721787" start="12247" end="12274" title="The Cave of the Golden Calf" label="The Cave of the Golden Calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q79179" start="12290" end="12306" title="Frida Uhl" label="Frida Strindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q354779" start="12542" end="12555" title="Jacob Epstein" label="Jacob Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q551426" start="12557" end="12566" title="Eric Gill" label="Eric Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="12572" end="12585" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="13477" end="13483" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q934462" start="13506" end="13522" title="Laleh-Zar Street" label="Laleh-Zar Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="13578" end="13582" title="Iranian Revolution" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="13727" end="13734" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="13819" end="13828" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373485" start="13833" end="13844" title="Underground music" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256130" start="14015" end="14025" title="Ted Åström" label="Ted Åström"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062217" start="14027" end="14040" title="Örjan Ramberg" label="Örjan Ramberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224967" start="14093" end="14108" title="Wild Side Story" label="Wild Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720613" start="14154" end="14170" title="Alexandra Charles" label="Alexandra&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957315" start="14182" end="14192" title="Ulla Jones" label="Ulla Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109196" start="14197" end="14213" title="Christer Lindarw" label="Christer Lindarw"/>
<link wikidata="Q241854" start="14314" end="14329" title="Helena Mattsson" label="Helena Mattsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="14436" end="14446" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="14553" end="14561" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q118134524" start="14573" end="14582" title="Nightlife in Belgrade" label="nightlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672705" start="14699" end="14715" title="Cabane Choucoune" label="Cabane Choucoune"/>
<link wikidata="Q34261" start="14719" end="14733" title="Port-au-Prince" label="Port-au-Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015246" start="14743" end="14760" title="Cabaret Red Light" label="Cabaret Red Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="14764" end="14790" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q661745" start="14793" end="14809" title="Cabaret Voltaire (Zürich)" label="Cabaret Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="14813" end="14819" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378613" start="14822" end="14834" title="Carlyle Hotel" label="Café Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017277" start="14854" end="14867" title="Café de Paris (London)" label="Café de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q86751128" start="14889" end="14900" title="American Cabaret Theatre" label="The Cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438391" start="14953" end="14995" title="Chuck E. Cheese" label="Chuck E. Cheese&amp;#x27;s Pizza Time Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139243" start="14998" end="15009" title="Crazy Horse (cabaret)" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q27866139" start="15029" end="15044" title="Darling Cabaret" label="Darling Cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="15048" end="15054" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351607" start="15057" end="15067" title="El Mocambo" label="El Mocambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="15071" end="15078" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291421" start="15101" end="15110" title="List of theatres and concert halls in Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706150" start="15120" end="15145" title="Feinstein&amp;#x27;s/54 Below" label="Feinstein&amp;#x27;s/54 Below"/>
<link wikidata="Q330375" start="15165" end="15179" title="Folies Bergere" label="Folies Bergere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15199" end="15208" title="Lafayette Cuisine Cabaret Club" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="15212" end="15220" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423353" start="15231" end="15242" title="Lapin Agile" label="Lapin Agile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810868" start="15262" end="15269" title="Le Lido" label="Le Lido"/>
<link wikidata="Q124284917" start="15289" end="15300" title="Le Rat Mort" label="Le Rat Mort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824526" start="15320" end="15333" title="Metro Chicago" label="Metro Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="15337" end="15354" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q151030" start="15357" end="15369" title="Moulin Rouge" label="Moulin Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783672" start="15389" end="15402" title="Tropicana Club" label="The Tropicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="15406" end="15412" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302877" start="15442" end="15450" title="May Alix" label="May Alix"/>
<link wikidata="Q151972" start="15453" end="15468" title="Josephine Baker" label="Josephine Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q98640251" start="15471" end="15484" title="Bernie Dieter" label="Bernie Dieter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="15487" end="15503" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436647" start="15506" end="15522" title="Fascinating Aïda" label="Fascinating Aïda"/>
<link wikidata="Q60659" start="15525" end="15535" title="Ute Lemper" label="Ute Lemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812777" start="15538" end="15547" title="Melissa Madden Gray" label="Meow Meow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882356" start="15550" end="15562" title="Mabel Mercer" label="Mabel Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q222818" start="15566" end="15577" title="Eartha Kitt" label="Eartha Kitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631" start="15580" end="15590" title="Édith Piaf" label="Édith Piaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q359026" start="15593" end="15603" title="Tino Rossi" label="Tino Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024739" start="15632" end="15649" title="Cabaret (musical)" label="Cabaret (musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932271" start="15658" end="15673" title="Cabaret Paradis" label="Cabaret Paradis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166158" start="15682" end="15694" title="Dark cabaret" label="Dark cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355413" start="15697" end="15711" title="Dinner theater" label="Dinner theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465300" start="15720" end="15729" title="La Soirée" label="La Soirée"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403896" start="15738" end="15751" title="Nightclub act" label="Nightclub act"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="15754" end="15759" title="Revue" label="Revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178518" start="15762" end="15779" title="Vedette (cabaret)" label="Vedette (cabaret)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59469" wikidata="Q1826463" url="?curid=59469" title="Linear cryptanalysis">
<text>In cryptography, linear cryptanalysis is a general form of cryptanalysis based on finding affine approximations to the action of a cipher. Attacks have been developed for block ciphers and stream ciphers. Linear cryptanalysis is one of the two most widely used attacks on block ciphers; the other being differential cryptanalysis.
The discovery is attributed to Mitsuru Matsui, who first applied the technique to the FEAL cipher (Matsui and Yamagishi, 1992). Subsequently, Matsui published an attack on the Data Encryption Standard (DES), eventually leading to the first experimental cryptanalysis of the cipher reported in the open community (Matsui, 1993; 1994). The attack on DES is not generally practical, requiring 247 known plaintexts.

A variety of refinements to the attack have been suggested, including using multiple linear approximations or incorporating non-linear expressions, leading to a generalized partitioning cryptanalysis. Evidence of security against linear cryptanalysis is usually expected of new cipher designs.

==Overview==
There are two parts to linear cryptanalysis. The first is to construct linear equations relating plaintext, ciphertext and key bits that have a high bias; that is, whose probabilities of holding (over the space of all possible values of their variables) are as close as possible to 0 or 1. The second is to use these linear equations in conjunction with known plaintext-ciphertext pairs to derive key bits.

===Constructing linear equations===
For the purposes of linear cryptanalysis, a linear equation expresses the equality of two expressions which consist of binary variables combined with the exclusive-or (XOR) operation. For example, the following equation, from a hypothetical cipher, states the XOR sum of the first and third plaintext bits (as in a block cipher&#x27;s block) and the first ciphertext bit is equal to the second bit of the key:

:formula_1

In an ideal cipher, any linear equation relating plaintext, ciphertext and key bits would hold with probability 1/2. Since the equations dealt with in linear cryptanalysis will vary in probability, they are more accurately referred to as linear &quot;approximations&quot;.

The procedure for constructing approximations is different for each cipher. In the most basic type of block cipher, a substitution–permutation network, analysis is concentrated primarily on the S-boxes, the only nonlinear part of the cipher (i.e. the operation of an S-box cannot be encoded in a linear equation). For small enough S-boxes, it is possible to enumerate every possible linear equation relating the S-box&#x27;s input and output bits, calculate their biases and choose the best ones. Linear approximations for S-boxes then must be combined with the cipher&#x27;s other actions, such as permutation and key mixing, to arrive at linear approximations for the entire cipher. The piling-up lemma is a useful tool for this combination step. There are also techniques for iteratively improving linear approximations (Matsui 1994).

===Deriving key bits===
Having obtained a linear approximation of the form:

:formula_2

we can then apply a straightforward algorithm (Matsui&#x27;s Algorithm 2), using known plaintext-ciphertext pairs, to guess at the values of the key bits involved in the approximation.

For each set of values of the key bits on the right-hand side (referred to as a &quot;partial key&quot;), count how many times the approximation holds true over all the known plaintext-ciphertext pairs; call this count &quot;T&quot;. The partial key whose &quot;T&quot; has the greatest absolute difference from half the number of plaintext-ciphertext pairs is designated as the most likely set of values for those key bits. This is because it is assumed that the correct partial key will cause the approximation to hold with a high bias. The magnitude of the bias is significant here, as opposed to the magnitude of the probability itself.

This procedure can be repeated with other linear approximations, obtaining guesses at values of key bits, until the number of unknown key bits is low enough that they can be attacked with brute force.

==See also==
* Piling-up lemma
* Differential cryptanalysis

==References==
== External links ==
* Linear Cryptanalysis of DES
* A Tutorial on Linear and Differential Cryptanalysis
* Linear Cryptanalysis Demo
* A tutorial on linear (and differential) cryptanalysis of block ciphers
* &quot;Improving the Time Complexity of Matsui&#x27;s Linear Cryptanalysis&quot;, improves the complexity thanks to the Fast Fourier Transform</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3" end="15" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826463" start="17" end="37" title="Linear cryptanalysis" label="linear cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="59" end="72" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="90" end="96" title="affine transformation" label="affine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="131" end="137" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="171" end="183" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q864718" start="189" end="202" title="stream cipher" label="stream cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224471" start="303" end="329" title="differential cryptanalysis" label="differential cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607335" start="362" end="376" title="Mitsuru Matsui" label="Mitsuru Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388053" start="417" end="421" title="FEAL" label="FEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q135035" start="507" end="531" title="Data Encryption Standard" label="Data Encryption Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q700583" start="725" end="741" title="known-plaintext attack" label="known plaintexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140656" start="917" end="943" title="partitioning cryptanalysis" label="partitioning cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433692" start="2311" end="2343" title="substitution–permutation network" label="substitution–permutation network"/>
<link wikidata="Q748364" start="2387" end="2392" title="S-box" label="S-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229327" start="2882" end="2897" title="piling-up lemma" label="piling-up lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773230" start="3594" end="3613" title="absolute difference" label="absolute difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q869370" start="4137" end="4148" title="brute-force attack" label="brute force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229327" start="4166" end="4181" title="Piling-up lemma" label="Piling-up lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224471" start="4184" end="4210" title="Differential cryptanalysis" label="Differential cryptanalysis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59470" wikidata="Q1224829" url="?curid=59470" title="Digital Signature Algorithm">
<text>The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) is a public-key cryptosystem and Federal Information Processing Standard for digital signatures, based on the mathematical concept of modular exponentiation and the discrete logarithm problem. In a public-key cryptosystem, a pair of private and public keys are created: data encrypted with either key can only be decrypted with the other. This means that a signing entity that declared their public key can generate an encrypted signature using their private key, and a verifier can assert the source if it is decrypted correctly using the declared public key. DSA is a variant of the Schnorr and ElGamal signature schemes. 

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) proposed DSA for use in their Digital Signature Standard (DSS) in 1991, and adopted it as FIPS 186 in 1994. Five revisions to the initial specification have been released. The newest specification is: FIPS 186-5 from February 2023. DSA is patented but NIST has made this patent available worldwide royalty-free. Specification FIPS 186-5 indicates DSA will no longer be approved for digital signature generation, but may be used to verify signatures generated prior to the implementation date of that standard.

==Overview==
The DSA works in the framework of public-key cryptosystems and is based on the algebraic properties of modular exponentiation, together with the discrete logarithm problem, which is considered to be computationally intractable. The algorithm uses a key pair consisting of a public key and a private key. The private key is used to generate a digital signature for a message, and such a signature can be verified by using the signer&#x27;s corresponding public key. The digital signature provides message authentication (the receiver can verify the origin of the message), integrity (the receiver can verify that the message has not been modified since it was signed) and non-repudiation (the sender cannot falsely claim that they have not signed the message).

==History==
In 1982, the U.S government solicited proposals for a public key signature standard. In August 1991 the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) proposed DSA for use in their Digital Signature Standard (DSS). Initially there was significant criticism, especially from software companies that had already invested effort in developing digital signature software based on the RSA cryptosystem. Nevertheless, NIST adopted DSA as a Federal standard (FIPS 186) in 1994. Five revisions to the initial specification have been released: FIPS 186–1 in 1998, FIPS 186–2 in 2000, FIPS 186–3 in 2009, FIPS 186–4 in 2013, and FIPS 186–5 in 2023. Standard FIPS 186-5 forbids signing with DSA, while allowing verification of signatures generated prior to the implementation date of the standard as a document. It is to be replaced by newer signature schemes such as EdDSA.

DSA is covered by , filed July 26, 1991 and now expired, and attributed to David W. Kravitz, a former NSA employee. This patent was given to &quot;The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of Commerce, Washington, D.C.&quot;, and NIST has made this patent available worldwide royalty-free. Claus P. Schnorr claims that his (also now expired) covered DSA; this claim is disputed.

In 1993, Dave Banisar managed to get confirmation, via a FOIA request, that the DSA algorithm hasn&#x27;t been designed by the NIST, but by the NSA.

OpenSSH announced that DSA is scheduled to be removed in 2025.

==Operation==
The DSA algorithm involves four operations: key generation (which creates the key pair), key distribution, signing and signature verification.

===1. Key generation===
Key generation has two phases. The first phase is a choice of &quot;algorithm parameters&quot; which may be shared between different users of the system, while the second phase computes a single key pair for one user.

====Parameter generation====
* Choose an approved cryptographic hash function formula_1 with output length formula_2 bits. In the original DSS, formula_1 was always SHA-1, but the stronger SHA-2 hash functions are approved for use in the current DSS. If formula_2 is greater than the modulus length formula_5, only the leftmost formula_5 bits of the hash output are used.
* Choose a key length formula_7. The original DSS constrained formula_7 to be a multiple of 64 between 512 and 1024 inclusive. NIST 800-57 recommends lengths of 2048 (or 3072) for keys with security lifetimes extending beyond 2010 (or 2030).
* Choose the modulus length formula_5 such that formula_10 and formula_11. FIPS 186-4 specifies formula_7 and formula_5 to have one of the values: (1024, 160), (2048, 224), (2048, 256), or (3072, 256).
* Choose an formula_5-bit prime formula_15.
* Choose an formula_7-bit prime formula_17 such that formula_18 is a multiple of formula_15.
* Choose an integer formula_20 randomly from formula_21.
* Compute formula_22. In the rare case that formula_23 try again with a different formula_20. Commonly formula_25 is used. This modular exponentiation can be computed efficiently even if the values are large.
The algorithm parameters are (formula_17, formula_15, formula_28). These may be shared between different users of the system.

====Per-user keys====
Given a set of parameters, the second phase computes the key pair for a single user:
* Choose an integer formula_29 randomly from formula_30.
* Compute formula_31.
formula_29 is the private key and formula_33 is the public key.

===2. Key distribution===
The signer should publish the public key formula_33. That is, they should send the key to the receiver via a reliable, but not necessarily secret, mechanism. The signer should keep the private key formula_29 secret.

===3. Signing===
A message formula_36 is signed as follows:
* Choose an integer formula_37 randomly from formula_30
* Compute formula_39. In the unlikely case that formula_40, start again with a different random formula_37.
* Compute formula_42. In the unlikely case that formula_43, start again with a different random formula_37.
The signature is formula_45

The calculation of formula_37 and formula_47 amounts to creating a new per-message key. The modular exponentiation in computing formula_47 is the most computationally expensive part of the signing operation, but it may be computed before the message is known.
Calculating the modular inverse formula_49 is the second most expensive part, and it may also be computed before the message is known. It may be computed using the extended Euclidean algorithm or using Fermat&#x27;s little theorem as formula_50.

===4. Signature Verification===
One can verify that a signature formula_45 is a valid signature for a message formula_36 as follows:
* Verify that formula_53 and formula_54.
* Compute formula_55.
* Compute formula_56.
* Compute formula_57.
* Compute formula_58.
* The signature is valid if and only if formula_59.

==Correctness of the algorithm==
The signature scheme is correct in the sense that the verifier will always accept genuine signatures. This can be shown as follows:

First, since formula_60, it follows that formula_61 by Fermat&#x27;s little theorem. Since formula_62 and formula_15 is prime, formula_28 must have order formula_15.

The signer computes

:formula_66

Thus

:formula_67

Since formula_28 has order formula_15 we have

:formula_70

Finally, the correctness of DSA follows from

:formula_71

==Sensitivity==
With DSA, the entropy, secrecy, and uniqueness of the random signature value formula_37 are critical. It is so critical that violating any one of those three requirements can reveal the entire private key to an attacker. Using the same value twice (even while keeping formula_37 secret), using a predictable value, or leaking even a few bits of formula_37 in each of several signatures, is enough to reveal the private key formula_29.

This issue affects both DSA and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) – in December 2010, the group &quot;fail0verflow&quot; announced the recovery of the ECDSA private key used by Sony to sign software for the PlayStation 3 game console. The attack was made possible because Sony failed to generate a new random formula_37 for each signature.

This issue can be prevented by deriving formula_37 deterministically from the private key and the message hash, as described by . This ensures that formula_37 is different for each formula_79 and unpredictable for attackers who do not know the private key formula_29.

In addition, malicious implementations of DSA and ECDSA can be created where formula_37 is chosen in order to subliminally leak information via signatures. For example, an offline private key could be leaked from a perfect offline device that only released innocent-looking signatures.

== Implementations ==

Below is a list of cryptographic libraries that provide support for DSA:
* Botan
* Bouncy Castle
* cryptlib
* Crypto++
* libgcrypt
* Nettle
* OpenSSL
* wolfCrypt
* GnuTLS

==See also==
* Modular arithmetic
* RSA (cryptosystem)
* ECDSA

==References==
==External links==
* FIPS PUB 186-4: Digital Signature Standard (DSS), the fourth (and current) revision of the official DSA specification.
* Recommendation for Key Management -- Part 1: general, NIST Special Publication 800-57, p. 62–63</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1224829" start="4" end="31" title="Digital Signature Algorithm" label="Digital Signature Algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224829" start="33" end="36" title="Digital Signature Algorithm" label="DSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="43" end="66" title="Public-key cryptography" label="public-key cryptosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q917824" start="71" end="110" title="Federal Information Processing Standards" label="Federal Information Processing Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="115" end="132" title="digital signature" label="digital signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228841" start="172" end="194" title="modular exponentiation" label="modular exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q864003" start="203" end="229" title="Discrete logarithm" label="discrete logarithm problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589480" start="457" end="476" title="Ciphertext" label="encrypted signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465057" start="623" end="630" title="Schnorr signature" label="Schnorr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328731" start="635" end="642" title="ElGamal signature scheme" label="ElGamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="668" end="714" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037349" start="752" end="778" title="Digital Signature Standard" label="Digital Signature Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228841" start="1349" end="1371" title="modular exponentiation" label="modular exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1391" end="1417" title="Discrete logarithm#Cryptography" label="discrete logarithm problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200279" start="1742" end="1764" title="message authentication" label="message authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q461671" start="1818" end="1827" title="Data integrity" label="integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327773" start="1917" end="1932" title="non-repudiation" label="non-repudiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="2123" end="2169" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="2300" end="2308" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="2406" end="2422" title="RSA cryptosystem" label="RSA cryptosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966748" start="2883" end="2888" title="EdDSA" label="EdDSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="2993" end="2996" title="National Security Agency" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="3089" end="3110" title="United States Secretary of Commerce" label="Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q92891" start="3200" end="3216" title="Claus P. Schnorr" label="Claus P. Schnorr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="3347" end="3351" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="FOIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q847062" start="3440" end="3447" title="OpenSSH" label="OpenSSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="3955" end="3982" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="4070" end="4075" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968605" start="4094" end="4099" title="SHA-2" label="SHA-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228841" start="5043" end="5065" title="modular exponentiation" label="modular exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362750" start="6530" end="6558" title="extended Euclidean algorithm" label="extended Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q188295" start="6568" end="6596" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q188295" start="7149" end="7177" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q915079" start="7961" end="7966" title="ECDSA" label="ECDSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q915079" start="8053" end="8058" title="ECDSA" label="ECDSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="8079" end="8083" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="8109" end="8122" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631517" start="8622" end="8634" title="subliminal channel" label="subliminally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132703" start="8684" end="8703" title="offline private key" label="offline private key"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948409" start="8897" end="8902" title="Botan (programming library)" label="Botan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090083" start="8905" end="8918" title="Bouncy Castle (cryptography)" label="Bouncy Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q309604" start="8921" end="8929" title="cryptlib" label="cryptlib"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190783" start="8932" end="8940" title="Crypto++" label="Crypto++"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237868" start="8943" end="8952" title="libgcrypt" label="libgcrypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000521" start="8955" end="8961" title="Nettle (cryptographic library)" label="Nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="8964" end="8971" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197351" start="8974" end="8983" title="wolfCrypt" label="wolfCrypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533305" start="8986" end="8992" title="GnuTLS" label="GnuTLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="9009" end="9027" title="Modular arithmetic" label="Modular arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="9030" end="9048" title="RSA (cryptosystem)" label="RSA (cryptosystem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q915079" start="9051" end="9056" title="ECDSA" label="ECDSA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59473" wikidata="Q216868" url="?curid=59473" title="Chesapeake Bay">
<text>The Chesapeake Bay ( ) is the largest estuary in the United States. The bay is located in the Mid-Atlantic region and is primarily separated from the Atlantic Ocean by the Delmarva Peninsula, including parts of the Eastern Shore of Maryland, the Eastern Shore of Virginia, and the state of Delaware. The mouth of the bay at its southern point is located between Cape Henry and Cape Charles. With its northern portion in Maryland and the southern part in Virginia, the Chesapeake Bay is a very important feature for the ecology and economy of those two states, as well as others surrounding within its watershed. More than 150 major rivers and streams flow into the bay&#x27;s drainage basin, which covers parts of six states (New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and West Virginia) and all of Washington, D.C.

The bay is approximately long from its northern headwaters in the Susquehanna River to its outlet in the Atlantic Ocean. It is wide at its narrowest (between Kent County&#x27;s Plum Point near Newtown in the east and the Harford County western shore near Romney Creek) and at its widest (just south of the mouth of the Potomac River which divides Maryland from Virginia). Total shoreline including tributaries is , circumnavigating a surface area of . Average depth is , reaching a maximum of . The bay is spanned twice, in Maryland by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge from Sandy Point (near Annapolis) to Kent Island and in Virginia by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel connecting Virginia Beach to Cape Charles.

Known for both its beauty and bounty, the bay has become &quot;emptier&quot;, with fewer crabs, oysters and watermen (fishermen) since the mid-20th century. Nutrient pollution and urban runoff have been identified as major components of impaired water quality in the bay stressing ecosystems and compounding the decline of shellfish due to overharvesting. Restoration efforts that began in the 1990s have continued into the 21st century and show potential for growth of the native oyster population. The health of the Chesapeake Bay improved in 2015, marking three years of gains over a four-year period. Slight improvements in water quality were observed in 2021, compared to indicators measured in 2020. The bay is experiencing other environmental concerns, including climate change which is causing sea level rise that erodes coastal areas and infrastructure and changes to the marine ecosystem.

==Etymology==
The word is an Algonquian word referring to a village &#x27;at a big river&#x27;. It is the seventh-oldest surviving English placename in the United States, first applied as &quot;Chesepiook&quot; by explorers heading north from the Roanoke Colony into a Chesapeake tributary in 1585 or 1586. The name may also refer to the Chesapeake people or the Chesepian, a Native American tribe who inhabited the area now known as South Hampton Roads in the U.S. state of Virginia. They occupied an area that is now the Norfolk, Portsmouth, Chesapeake, and Virginia Beach areas. In 2005, Algonquian linguist Blair Rudes &quot;helped to dispel one of the area&#x27;s most widely held beliefs: that &#x27;Chesapeake&#x27; means something like &#x27;great shellfish bay&#x27;. It does not, Rudes said. The name might have actually meant something like &#x27;great water&#x27;, or it might have just referred to a village location at the bay&#x27;s mouth.&quot;

==Physical geography==
===Geology and formation===

The Chesapeake Bay is an estuary to the North Atlantic, lying between the Delmarva Peninsula to the east and the North American mainland to the west. It is the &quot;ria&quot;, or drowned valley, of the Susquehanna River, meaning that it was the alluvial plain where the river flowed when the sea level was lower. It is not a &quot;fjord&quot;, because the Laurentide Ice Sheet never reached as far south as the northernmost point on the bay. North of Baltimore, the western shore borders the hilly Piedmont region of Maryland; south of the city the bay lies within the state&#x27;s low-lying coastal plain, with sedimentary cliffs to the west, and flat islands, winding creeks and marshes to the east. The large rivers entering the bay from the west have broad mouths and are extensions of the main ria for miles up the course of each river.

The bay&#x27;s geology, its present form, and its very location were created by a bolide impact event at the end of the Eocene (about 35.5 million years ago), forming the Chesapeake Bay impact crater and much later the Susquehanna River valley. The bay was formed starting about 10,000 years ago when rising sea levels at the end of the last ice age flooded the Susquehanna River valley. Parts of the bay, especially the Calvert County, Maryland, coastline, are lined by cliffs composed of deposits from receding waters millions of years ago. These cliffs, generally known as Calvert Cliffs, are famous for their fossils, especially fossilized shark teeth, which are commonly found washed up on the beaches next to the cliffs. Scientists&#x27; Cliffs is a beach community in Calvert County named for the desire to create a retreat for scientists when the community was founded in 1935.

===Hydrology===
Much of the bay is shallow. At the point where the Susquehanna River flows into the bay, the average depth is , although this soon diminishes to an average of southeast of the city of Havre de Grace, Maryland, to about just north of Annapolis. On average, the depth of the bay is , including tributaries; over 24 percent of the bay is less than deep.

Because the bay is an estuary, it has fresh water, salt water and brackish water. Brackish water has three salinity zones: oligohaline, mesohaline, and polyhaline. The freshwater zone runs from the mouth of the Susquehanna River to north Baltimore. The oligohaline zone has very little salt. Salinity varies from 0.5 ppt (parts per thousand) to 10 ppt, and freshwater species can survive there. The north end of the oligohaline zone is north Baltimore and the south end is the Chesapeake Bay Bridge. The mesohaline zone has a medium amount of salt and runs from the Bay Bridge to the mouth of the Rappahannock River. Salinity there ranges from 1.07% to 1.8%. The polyhaline zone is the saltiest zone, and some of the water can be as salty as sea water. It runs from the mouth of the Rappahannock River to the mouth of the bay. The salinity ranges from 1.87% to 3.6%. (3.6% is as salty as the ocean.)

The climate of the area surrounding the bay is primarily humid subtropical, with hot, very humid summers and cold to mild winters. Only the area around the mouth of the Susquehanna River is continental in nature, and the mouth of the Susquehanna River and the Susquehanna flats often freeze in winter. It is rare for the surface of the bay to freeze in winter, something that happened most recently in the winter of 1976–77.

The Chesapeake Bay is the end point of over 150 rivers and streams. The largest rivers flowing directly into the bay, in order of discharge, are:
* Susquehanna River
* Potomac River
* James River
* Rappahannock River
* York River
* Patuxent River
* Choptank River

For more information on Chesapeake Bay rivers, see the List of Chesapeake Bay rivers.

==Flora and fauna==

The Chesapeake Bay is home to numerous fauna that either migrate to the bay at some point during the year or live there year-round. There are over 300 species of fish and numerous shellfish and crab species. Some of these include the Atlantic menhaden, striped bass, American eel, eastern oyster, Atlantic horseshoe crab, and the blue crab.

Birds include ospreys, great blue herons, bald eagles, and peregrine falcons, the last two of which were threatened by DDT; their numbers plummeted but have risen in recent years. The piping plover is a near threatened species that inhabits the wetlands.

Larger fish such as Atlantic sturgeon, varieties of sharks, and stingrays visit the Chesapeake Bay. The waters of the Chesapeake Bay have been regarded as one of the most important nursery areas for sharks along the east coast. Megafaunas such as bull sharks, tiger sharks, scalloped hammerhead sharks, and basking sharks and manta rays are also known to visit. Smaller species of sharks and stingrays that are known to be regular to occasional residents in the bay include the smooth dogfish, spiny dogfish, cownose ray, and bonnethead.

Bottlenose dolphins are known to live seasonally/yearly in the bay. There have been unconfirmed sightings of humpback whales in recent years. Endangered North Atlantic right whale and fin, and minke and sei whales have also been sighted within and in the vicinity of the bay.

A male manatee visited the bay several times between 1994 and 2011, even though the area is north of the species&#x27; normal range. The manatee, recognizable due to distinct markings on its body, was nicknamed &quot;Chessie&quot; after a legendary sea monster that was allegedly sighted in the bay during the 20th century. The same manatee has been spotted as far north as Rhode Island, and was the first manatee known to travel so far north. Other manatees are occasionally seen in the bay and its tributaries, which contain sea grasses that are part of the manatee&#x27;s diet.

Loggerhead turtles are known to visit the bay.

The Chesapeake Bay is also home to a diverse flora, both land and aquatic. Common submerged aquatic vegetation includes eelgrass and widgeon grass. A report in 2011 suggested that information on underwater grasses would be released, because &quot;submerged grasses provide food and habitat for a number of species, adding oxygen to the water and improving water clarity.&quot; Other vegetation that makes its home in other parts of the bay are wild rice, various trees like the red maple, loblolly pine and bald cypress, and spartina grass and phragmites. Invasive plants have taken a significant foothold in the bay. Plants such as Phragmites, Purple loosestrife and Japanese stiltgrass have established high levels of permanency in Chesapeake wetlands. Additionally, plants such as Brazilian waterweed, native to South America, have spread to most continents with the help of aquarium owners, who often dump the contents of their aquariums into nearby lakes and streams. It is highly invasive and has the potential to flourish in the low-salinity tidal waters of the Chesapeake Bay. Dense stands of Brazilian waterweed can restrict water movement, trap sediment and affect water quality. Various local K-12 schools in the Maryland and Virginia region often have programs that cultivate native bay grasses and plant them in the bay.

==History==
===Pre-Columbian===
It is presumed that the Chesapeake Bay was once inhabited by Paleoindians 11,000 years ago. For thousands of years, Native American societies lived in villages of wooden longhouses close to water bodies where they fished and farmed the land. Agricultural products included beans, corn, tobacco, and squash. Villages often lasted between 10 and 20 years before being abandoned due to local resources such as firewood running out or soil depleting. To produce enough food, labor was divided with men hunting while the women supervised the village&#x27;s farming. All village members took part in the harvesting of fish and shellfish from the local bodies of water. As time went on, communities around the Chesapeake Bay formed confederations such as the Powhatan, the Piscataway, and the Nanticoke. Each of these confederations consisted of a collection of smaller tribes falling under the leadership of a central chief.

===European exploration and settlement===
In 1524, Italian explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano, (1485–1528), in service of the French crown, (famous for sailing through and thereafter naming the entrance to New York Bay as the &quot;Verrazzano Narrows&quot;, including now in the 20th century, a suspension bridge also named for him) sailed past the Chesapeake, but did not enter the bay. Spanish explorer Lucas Vásquez de Ayllón sent an expedition out from Hispaniola in 1525 that reached the mouths of the Chesapeake and Delaware Bays. It may have been the first European expedition to explore parts of the Chesapeake Bay, which the Spaniards called &quot;Bahía de Santa María&quot; (&quot;Bay of St. Mary&quot;) or &quot;Bahía de Madre de Dios.&quot;(&quot;Bay of the Mother of God&quot;) De Ayllón established a short-lived Spanish mission settlement, San Miguel de Gualdape, in 1526 along the Atlantic coast. Many scholars doubt the assertion that it was as far north as the Chesapeake; most place it in present-day Georgia&#x27;s Sapelo Island. In 1573, Pedro Menéndez de Márquez, the governor of Spanish Florida, conducted further exploration of the Chesapeake. In 1570, Spanish Jesuits established the short-lived Ajacan Mission on one of the Chesapeake tributaries in present-day Virginia.

The arrival of English colonists under Sir Walter Raleigh and Humphrey Gilbert in the late 16th century to found a colony, later settled at Roanoke Island (off the present-day coast of North Carolina) for the Virginia Company, marked the first time that the English approached the gates to the Chesapeake Bay between the capes of Cape Charles and Cape Henry. Three decades later, in 1607, Europeans again entered the bay. Captain John Smith of England explored and mapped the bay between 1607 and 1609, resulting in the publication in 1612 back in the British Isles of &quot;A Map of Virginia&quot;. Smith wrote in his journal: &quot;Heaven and earth have never agreed better to frame a place for man&#x27;s habitation.&quot; The Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historic Trail, the first designated &quot;all-water&quot; National Historic Trail in the US, was established in 2006 by the National Park Service. The trail follows the route of Smith&#x27;s historic 17th-century voyage. Because of economic hardships and civil strife in the &quot;Mother Land&quot;, there was a mass migration of southern English Cavaliers and their servants to the Chesapeake Bay region between 1640 and 1675, to both of the new colonies of the Province of Virginia and the Province of Maryland.

===American Revolution to the present===

The Chesapeake Bay was the site of the Battle of the Chesapeake (also known as the &quot;Battle of the Capes&quot;, Cape Charles and Cape Henry) in 1781, during which the French fleet defeated the Royal Navy in the decisive naval battle of the American Revolutionary War. The French victory enabled General George Washington and his French allies under the Comte de Rochambeau to march down from New York and bottle up a British army under Lord Cornwallis from the North and South Carolinas at the siege of Battle of Yorktown in Yorktown, Virginia. Their marching route from Newport, Rhode Island through Connecticut, New York State, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware to the &quot;Head of Elk&quot; by the Susquehanna River along the shores and also partially sailing down the bay to Virginia. It is also the subject of a designated National Historic Trail as the Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route.

The bay would again see conflict during War of 1812. During the year of 1813, from their base on Tangier Island, British naval forces under the command of Admiral George Cockburn raided several towns on the shores of the Chesapeake, treating the bay as if it were a &quot;British Lake&quot;. The Chesapeake Bay Flotilla, a fleet of shallow-draft armed barges under the command of U.S. Navy Commodore Joshua Barney, was assembled to stall British shore raids and attacks. After months of harassment by Barney, the British landed on the west side of the Patuxent at Benedict, Maryland, the Chesapeake Flotilla was scuttled, and the British trekked overland to rout the U.S. Army at Bladensburg and burn the U.S. Capitol in August 1814. A few days later in a &quot;pincer attack&quot;, they also sailed up the Potomac River to attack Fort Washington below the National Capital and raided the nearby port town of Alexandria, Virginia.

There were so-called &quot;Oyster Wars&quot; in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Until the mid-20th century, oyster harvesting rivaled the crab industry among Chesapeake watermen, a dwindling breed whose skipjacks and other workboats were supplanted by recreational craft in the latter part of the century.

In the 1960s, the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant on the historic Calvert Cliffs in Calvert County on the Western Shore of Maryland began using water from the bay to cool its reactor.

==Navigation==

The Chesapeake Bay forms a link in the Intracoastal Waterway, of the bays, sounds and inlets between the off-shore barrier islands and the coastal mainland along the Atlantic coast connecting the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal (linking the bay to the north and the Delaware River) with the Albemarle and Chesapeake Canal (linking the bay, to the south, via the Elizabeth River, by the cities of Norfolk and Portsmouth to the Albemarle Sound and Pamlico Sound in North Carolina and further to the Sea Islands of Georgia). A busy shipping channel (dredged by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers since the 1850s) runs the length of the bay, is an important transit route for large vessels entering or leaving the Port of Baltimore, and further north through the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal to the ports of Wilmington and Philadelphia on the Delaware River.

During the later half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, the bay was plied by passenger steamships and packet boat lines connecting the various cities on it, notably the Baltimore Steam Packet Company (&quot;Old Bay Line&quot;).

In the later 20th century, a series of road crossings were built. One, the Chesapeake Bay Bridge (also known as the Governor William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial Bridge) between the state capital of Annapolis, Maryland and Matapeake on the Eastern Shore, crossing Kent Island, was constructed 1949–1952. A second, parallel, span was added in 1973. The Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel, connecting Virginia&#x27;s Eastern Shore with its mainland (at the metropolitan areas of Virginia Beach, Norfolk, Portsmouth, and Chesapeake), is approximately long; it has trestle bridges as well as two stretches of tunnels that allow unimpeded shipping; the bridge is supported by four man-made islands. The Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel was opened for two lanes in 1964 and four lanes in 1999.

===Tides===
Tides in the Chesapeake Bay exhibit an interesting and unique behavior due to the nature of the topography (both horizontal and vertical shape), wind-driven circulation, and how the bay interacts with oceanic tides. Research into the peculiar behavior of tides both at the northern and southern extents of the bay began in the late 1970s. One study noted sea level fluctuations at periods of 5 days, driven by sea level changes at the bay&#x27;s mouth on the Atlantic coast and local lateral winds, and 2.5 days, caused by resonant oscillations driven by local longitudinal winds, while another study later found that the geometry of the bay permits for a resonant period of 1.46 days.

A good example of how the different Chesapeake Bay sites experience different tides can be seen in the tidal predictions published by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) (see figure at right).

At the Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel (CBBT) site, which lies at the southernmost point of the bay where it meets the Atlantic Ocean near Norfolk, Virginia, and the capes of Charles and Henry, there is a distinct semi-diurnal tide throughout the lunar month, with small amplitude modulations during spring (new/full moon) vs. neap (one/three quarter moon) tidal periods. The main forcing of the CBBT tides are typical, semi-diurnal ocean tides that the East Coast of the United States experiences.

Baltimore, in the northern portion of the bay, experiences a noticeable modulation to form its mixed tidal nature during spring vs. neap tides. Spring tides, when the sun-earth-moon system forms a line, cause the largest tidal amplitudes during lunar monthly tidal variations. In contrast, neap tides, when the sun-earth-moon system forms a right angle, are muted, and in a semi-diurnal tidal system (such as that seen at the CBBT site) this can be seen as a lowest intertidal range.

Two interesting points that arise from comparing these two sites at opposite ends of the bay are their tidal characteristics – semi-diurnal tide for CBBT and mixed tide for Baltimore (due to resonance in the bay) – and the differences in amplitude (due to dissipation in the bay).

==Economy ==
===Fishing industry===

The bay is well known for its seafood, especially blue crabs, clams, and oysters. In the middle of the 20th century, the bay supported 9,000 full-time watermen, according to one account. Today, the body of water is less productive than it used to be because of runoff from urban areas (mostly on the Western Shore) and farms (especially on the Eastern Shore and in the Susquehanna River watershed), over-harvesting, and invasion of foreign species.

The plentiful oyster harvests led to the development of the skipjack (such as the &quot;Helen Virginia&quot;), the state boat of Maryland, which is the only remaining working boat type in the United States still under sail power. Other characteristic bay-area workboats include sail-powered boats such as the log canoe, the pungy, the bugeye, and the motorized Chesapeake Bay deadrise, the state boat of Virginia.

In addition to harvesting wild oysters, oyster farming is a growing industry in the bay. Oyster aquaculture is passive in that the bay provides all the natural oyster food needed, making it an environmentally friendly practice in contrast to other kinds of fish farming. Oyster farms provide jobs as well as a natural effort for filtering excess nutrients from the water in an effort to reduce the effects of eutrophication pollution (too much algae). The Chesapeake Bay Program promotes oyster restoration projects to reduce the amount of nitrogen compounds entering the bay.

The bay is famous for its rockfish, a regional name for striped bass. Once on the verge of extinction, rockfish have made a significant comeback because of legislative action that put a moratorium on rockfishing, which allowed the species to re-populate. Rockfish can now be fished in strictly controlled and limited quantities.

Other popular recreational fisheries in the Chesapeake Bay include shad, cobia, croaker, and redfish, winter flounder, and summer flounder. Recently, non-native blue catfish have proliferated in tributaries like the James River and may be moving to other areas of the bay. A commercial fishery exists for menhaden, too oily for human consumption but instead used for bait, fish oil, and livestock feed.

===Tourism and recreation===


The Chesapeake Bay is a main feature for tourists who visit Maryland and Virginia each year. Fishing, crabbing, swimming, boating, kayaking, and sailing are extremely popular activities enjoyed on the waters of the Chesapeake Bay. As a result, tourism has a notable impact on Maryland&#x27;s economy. One report suggested that Annapolis was an appealing spot for families, water sports and boating. Commentator Terry Smith spoke about the bay&#x27;s beauty: 

One account suggested how the Chesapeake attracts people:
The Chesapeake Bay plays an extremely important role in Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania&#x27;s economies, in addition to the ecosystem. The nature-based recreation of wildlife, boating, and ecotourism are dependent on enforcement of the Clean Water Act (CWA), which regulates pollutant discharges and supports related pollution control programs. In 2006, &quot;roughly eight million wildlife watchers spent $636 million, $960 million, and $1.4 billion in Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania&quot; according to the Chesapeake Bay Foundation.

==Cuisine==
In colonial times, simple cooking techniques were used to create one pot meals like ham and potato casserole, clam chowder, or stews with common ingredients like oysters, chicken or venison. When John Smith landed in Chesapeake in 1608, he wrote: &quot;The fish were so thick, we attempted to catch them with frying pans&quot;. Common regional ingredients in the local cuisine of Chesapeake included terrapins, smoked hams, blue crab, shellfish, local fish, game meats and various species of waterfowl. Blue crab continues to be an especially popular regional specialty.

==Environmental issues==
=== Pollution ===
In the 1970s, the Chesapeake Bay was found to contain one of the planet&#x27;s first identified marine dead zones, where waters were so depleted of oxygen that they were unable to support life, resulting in massive fish kills. In 2010 the bay&#x27;s dead zones were estimated to kill 75,000 tons of bottom-dwelling clams and worms each year, weakening the base of the estuary&#x27;s food chain and robbing the blue crab in particular of a primary food source. Crabs are sometimes observed to amass on shore to escape pockets of oxygen-poor water, a behavior known as a &quot;crab jubilee&quot;. Hypoxia results in part from large algal blooms, which are nourished by the runoff of residential, farm and industrial waste throughout the watershed. A 2010 report criticized Amish farmers in Pennsylvania for raising cows with inadequate controls on the manure that they generate. Farms in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania generate large quantities of manure that washes into tributaries of the bay.

The pollution entering the bay has multiple components that contribute to algal blooms, principally the nutrients phosphorus and nitrogen. The algae prevents sunlight from reaching the bottom of the bay while alive and deoxygenates the bay&#x27;s water when it dies and rots. Soil erosion and runoff of sediment into the bay, exacerbated by devegetation, construction and the prevalence of pavement in urban and suburban areas, also block vital sunlight. The resulting loss of aquatic vegetation has depleted the habitat for much of the bay&#x27;s animal life. Beds of eelgrass, the dominant variety in the southern Chesapeake Bay, have shrunk by more than half there since the early 1970s. Overharvesting, pollution, sedimentation and disease have turned much of the bay&#x27;s bottom into a muddy wasteland.

The principal sources of nutrient pollution in the bay are surface runoff from farms, as well as runoff from urban and suburban areas. About half of the nutrient pollutant loads in the bay are generated by manure and poultry litter. Extensive use of lawn fertilizers and air pollution from motor vehicles and power plants are also significant nutrient sources.

One particularly harmful source of toxicity is &quot;Pfiesteria piscicida&quot;, which can affect both fish and humans. &quot;Pfiesteria&quot; caused a small regional panic in the late 1990s when a series of large blooms started killing large numbers of fish while giving swimmers mysterious rashes; nutrient runoff from chicken farms was blamed for the growth.

=== Depletion of oysters ===
While the bay&#x27;s salinity is ideal for oysters and the oyster fishery was at one time the bay&#x27;s most commercially viable, the population has in the last fifty years been devastated. Maryland once had roughly of oyster reefs. In 2008 there were about . It has been estimated that in pre-colonial times, oysters could filter the entirety of the bay in about 3.3 days; by 1988 this time had increased to 325 days. The harvest&#x27;s gross value decreased 88% from 1982 to 2007. One report suggested the bay had fewer oysters in 2008 than 25 years earlier.
The primary problem is overharvesting. Lax government regulations allow anyone with a license to remove oysters from state-owned beds, and although limits are set, they are not strongly enforced. The overharvesting of oysters has made it difficult for them to reproduce, which requires close proximity to one another. A second cause for the oyster depletion is that the drastic increase in human population caused a sharp increase in pollution flowing into the bay. The bay&#x27;s oyster industry has also suffered from two diseases: MSX and Dermo.

The depletion of oysters has had a particularly harmful effect on the quality of the bay. Oysters serve as natural water filters, and their decline has further reduced the water quality of the bay. Water that was once clear for meters is now so turbid that a wader may lose sight of his feet while his knees are still dry.

=== Institutional responses to pollution problems ===
Concern about the increasing discoveries of bay pollution problems, and of the institutional challenges of organizing bay restoration programs over a large geographical area, led to Congress directing the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to take a greater role in studying the scientific and technical aspects of the problems beginning in the late 1970s. The agency conducted its research over a seven-year period and published a major report in 1983. The report stated that the bay was an &quot;ecosystem in decline&quot; and cited numerous instances of declines in the populations of oysters, crabs, freshwater fish and other wildlife.

The growing concerns about pollution also prompted the legislatures of Maryland and Virginia to establish the Chesapeake Bay Commission, an advisory body, in 1980. The commission consults with the state legislatures and executive agencies, as well as Congress, about environmental, economic and social issues related to the bay.

As an initial follow-up to the EPA report, the Chesapeake Bay Commission and EPA developed the &quot;Chesapeake Bay Agreement&quot; in 1983. The agreement was signed by the governors of Maryland, Virginia and Pennsylvania; the Mayor of the District of Columbia; and the EPA Administrator. The parties agreed to:
* Creation of an &quot;Executive Council&quot; consisting of cabinet-level appointees from each state and Washington, D.C., and the EPA Regional Administrator
* The council&#x27;s creation of an implementation committee to coordinate technical issues and development management plans for bay restoration
* The establishment of the Chesapeake Bay Program as a liaison office for all of the participating organizations. The program&#x27;s office, based in Annapolis, is partially funded by EPA and staffed by experts from the member states, EPA and other federal agencies, and academic institutions.
Concurrent with the 1983 agreement EPA began providing matching grants to the bay states for research and restoration projects.

In 1987 the parties agreed to set a goal of reducing the amount of nutrients that enter the bay by 40 percent by 2000. In 1992, the bay program partners agreed to continue the 40 percent reduction goal beyond 2000 and to attack nutrients at their source: upstream, in the bay tributaries.

===Restoration efforts===

Efforts of federal, state and local governments, working in partnership through the Chesapeake Bay Program along with the Chesapeake Bay Foundation and other nonprofit environmental groups, to restore or at least maintain the current water quality, have had mixed results. One particular obstacle to cleaning up the bay is that much of the polluting substances are discharged far upstream in states far removed from the bay: New York and Pennsylvania. Despite the State of Maryland spending over $100 million to restore the bay, conditions have continued to grow worse. In the mid-20th century, the bay supported over 6,000 oystermen. As of 2008, there were fewer than 500.

In June 2000, the Chesapeake Bay Program adopted &quot;Chesapeake 2000,&quot; an agreement adopted by the member jurisdictions, intended to guide restoration activities throughout the Chesapeake Bay watershed through 2010. One component of this agreement was a series of upgrades to sewage treatment plants throughout the watershed. In 2016 EPA stated that the upgrades &quot;have resulted in steep reductions in nitrogen and phosphorus pollution... despite increases in human population and wastewater volume.&quot;

EPA published a series of scientific documents on water quality criteria for the bay between 2004 and 2010. The criteria documents, which describe specific pollutants and their effects on aquatic species, are used by the states to develop water quality standards (WQS) for individual water bodies. Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and the District of Columbia adopted WQS for various Chesapeake Bay tributaries in the mid-2000s, referencing the EPA criteria documents, as well as their own extensive data gathering and modeling efforts.

Restoration efforts that began in the 1990s have continued into the 21st century and show potential for growth of the native oyster population. Efforts to repopulate the bay using oyster hatcheries have been carried out by a group called the Oyster Recovery Partnership, with some success. In 2011 the group placed 6 million oysters on of the Trent Hall sanctuary. Scientists from the Virginia Institute of Marine Science at the College of William &amp; Mary claim that experimental reefs created in 2004 now house 180 million native oysters, &quot;Crassostrea virginica&quot;, which is far fewer than the billions that once existed.

=== Regulatory actions ===

In 2009 the Chesapeake Bay Foundation (CBF) filed suit against EPA for its failure to finalize a total maximum daily load (TMDL) ruling for the bay, pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The TMDL would restrict water pollution from farms, land development, power plants and sewage treatment plants. EPA, which had been working with the states on various components of the TMDL since the 1980s (e.g. water quality criteria, standards for individual tributaries, improvements in data gathering and modeling techniques), agreed to settle the lawsuit and issued its TMDL for nitrogen, phosphorus and sediment pollution on December 29, 2010. This was the largest, most complex TMDL document that EPA had issued to date. The TMDL was challenged in litigation by the agriculture and construction industries, but EPA&#x27;s document was upheld by the courts.

In 2020 the CBF filed another lawsuit against EPA for its failure to require the states of New York and Pennsylvania to comply with their TMDL goals and reduce pollution in the bay. CBF and EPA reached a settlement on the lawsuit in 2023. EPA agreed to increase its efforts to reduce farm and stormwater runoff pollution in Pennsylvania, including compliance and enforcement actions.

EPA&#x27;s 2010 TMDL document requires all states in the bay watershed region to develop detailed implementation plans for pollutant reduction. The states have been developing their plans for years, in many cases building upon restoration projects that they had initiated before EPA&#x27;s TMDL was finalized. These plans are long and complex, involving regular consultation with many stakeholders (i.e. governments, industry, agriculture, citizen groups). The plans include multiple milestone goals for project initiation or continued progress in water quality, through the use of pollution control upgrades (such as at sewage treatment plants) and more widespread utilization of various best management practices (BMPs). The BMPs are designed for specific sites to control pollution from nonpoint sources, principally agriculture, land development and urban runoff. For example, a farmer may install vegetated stream buffers along a stream bank to reduce runoff of sediment, nutrients and other pollutants. A land developer may install stormwater management facilities such as infiltration basins or constructed wetlands during the construction of housing or commercial buildings.

In 2011 both Maryland and Virginia enacted laws to reduce the effects of lawn fertilizer use, by restricting nitrogen and phosphorus content. The Virginia law also banned deicers containing urea, nitrogen or phosphorus.

Installation of stormwater management facilities is already a requirement for most new construction projects in the bay region, under various state and local government requirements. These facilities reduce erosion and keep sediment and other pollutants from entering tributaries and the bay. However retrofitting such facilities into existing developed areas is often expensive due to high land costs, or difficult to install among existing structures. As a result, the extent of such retrofit projects in the bay region has been limited.

=== Water quality improvements ===
In 2010 bay health improved slightly in terms of the overall health of its ecosystem, earning a rating of 31 out of 100, up from a 28 rating in 2008. An estimate in 2006 from a &quot;blue ribbon panel&quot; said cleanup costs would be $15 billion. Compounding the problem is that 100,000 new residents move to the area each year. A 2008 &quot;Washington Post&quot; report suggested that government administrators had overstated progress on cleanup efforts as a way to &quot;preserve the flow of federal and state money to the project.&quot; In January 2011, there were reports that millions of fish had died, but officials suggested it was probably the result of extremely cold weather.

The health of the Chesapeake Bay improved in 2015, marking three years of gains over a four-year period, according to a 2016 report by the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES). In 2021 scientists at the UMCES reported slight improvements in bay water quality compared to levels measured in 2020. The greatest improvements were seen in the lower bay areas, while the Patapsco River and Back River (Maryland) regions showed minimal improvement. Positive indicators included decreased nitrogen levels and increases in dissolved oxygen.

The CBF reported that as of 2022 pollution control efforts in the bay have continued to show mixed results, with no improvement in levels of toxic contaminants, nitrogen and dissolved oxygen, and a small decrease in water clarity compared to 2020 levels (measured as Secchi depth). Oyster and rockfish populations in the bay have improved, but blue crab populations have continued to decline.

In the 2023 annual report the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science rated the Chesapeake Bay&#x27;s overall health a C-plus or 55%, its highest score since 2002.

=== Climate change ===

The Chesapeake Bay is already experiencing the effects of climate change. Key among these is sea level rise: water levels in the bay have already risen one foot, with a predicted increase of 1.3 to 5.2 feet in the next 100 years. This has related environmental effects, causing changes in marine ecosystems, destruction of coastal marshes and wetlands, and intrusion of saltwater into otherwise brackish parts of the bay. Sea level rise also compounds the effects of extreme weather on the bay, making coastal flooding as part of the events more extreme and increasing runoff from upstream in the watershed.

With increases in flooding events and sea level rise, the 11,600 miles of coastline, which include significant historic buildings and modern infrastructure, will be at risk of erosion. Islands such as Holland Island have disappeared due to the rising sea levels.

Beyond sea level rise, other changes in the marine ecosystem due to climate change, such as ocean acidification and temperature increases, will put increasing pressure on marine life. Projected effects include decreasing dissolved oxygen, more acidic waters making it harder for shellfish to maintain shells and changing the seasonal cycles important for breeding and other lifecycle activities. Seasonal shifts and warmer temperatures also mean that there is a greater likelihood of pathogens to stay active in the ecosystem.

Climate change may worsen hypoxia. However, compared to the current effects of nutrient pollution and algal blooms, climate change&#x27;s effect to increase hypoxia is relatively small. Warmer waters can hold less dissolved oxygen. Therefore, as the bay warms, there may be a longer duration of hypoxia each summer season in the deep central channel of the bay. However, comparing the effects of climate change and nutrient pollution, reduced nutrient pollution would increase oxygen concentrations more dramatically than if climate change were to level out.

Climate change adaptation and mitigation programs in Maryland and Virginia often include significant programs to address the communities in the Chesapeake Bay. Key infrastructure in Virginia, such as the port of Norfolk, and major agriculture and fishing industries of the Eastern Shore of Maryland will be directly impacted by the changes in the bay.

===Eutrophication and Hypoxia===
European settlers around the Chesapeake Bay in the late 17th and early 18th centuries brought with them industrial agricultural techniques. Land clearance and deep plowing of farmland increased sediment and nutrient loading into the bay, which continued to increase as the area continued to develop (Cooper &amp; Brush 1991). 

The sediment record of the Chesapeake Bay shows a major increase in nutrient levels, suggesting limited availability of oxygen, starting between the 17th and 18th centuries (Cooper &amp; Brush 1991; Zimmerman &amp; Canuel, 2002). The overloading of nutrients into the bay only continued to increase throughout the modern era. Recently deposited sediments in the Chesapeake Bay have 2–3 times greater amounts of organic carbon, and 4–20 times greater amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus input into the bay than the pre-colonial era (Cornwell et al., 1996; Fisher et al., 2006).
The nutrient runoff from land sources causes a huge increase in available nutrients in the water. Algae present in the bay take up those nutrients and rapidly reproduce in algal blooms. As algae sink to the bottom, they are decomposed, consuming oxygen (Long et al. 2014). In the Chesapeake Bay, seasonal stratification typically occurs between Spring and early Fall (Officer et al. 1984; Cerco &amp; Noel 2007). More sunlight, higher temperatures, and less storms and winds during the summer cause strongly stratified water column, with a pycnocline typically 10 meters below the surface (Cerco &amp; Noel; Seliger et al.). As oxygen is depleted from the decomposition of organic matter in bottom waters, but is not able to exchange gas with surface water due to a strong pycnocline, dissolved oxygen levels reach near zero by mid-June and can persist until October (Officer et al.). Organisms living in bottom waters may have some tolerance to hypoxia, but when events exceed their tolerance, ecologically and commercially important crabs, oysters, and mesoplankton become unhealthy and may experience die offs (Kirby &amp; Miller; Officer; Kimmel).

===Scientific research===
Researchers work in the Chesapeake Bay to collect information about water quality, plant and animal abundances, shoreline erosion, tides, waves, and harmful algal blooms. For example, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science monitors the abundance of submerged aquatic vegetation in the shallow areas of the Chesapeake Bay each summer. Many organizations run continuous monitoring programs. Monitoring programs set out instruments at fixed stations on buoys, moorings, and docks throughout the bay to record things like temperature, salinity, chlorophyll-a concentration, dissolved oxygen, and turbidity over time.

Organizations actively collecting data in the Chesapeake Bay include, but are not limited to:
*Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve in Maryland
*Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve in Virginia
*Chesapeake Bay Program
*Hampton Roads Sanitation District
*Maryland Department of Natural Resources
*NASA GSFC Ocean Biology group
*NASA GSFC Applied Sciences group (Water Resources and Human Health areas)
*NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office
*Old Dominion University&#x27;s Earth and Ocean Sciences Department
*Smithsonian Environmental Research Center
*United States Geological Survey
*University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science
*Virginia Department of Environmental Quality
*Virginia Department of Health
*Virginia Institute of Marine Science
*Virginia Marine Resources Commission

== Underwater archaeology ==
In 1988, the Maryland Maritime Archeology Program (MMAP) was established to manage and explore various underwater archaeological. This was in response to the National Abandoned Shipwreck Act passed in 1987, which gave ownership of historically significant shipwrecks to those states with proper management programs.

=== Location and research processes ===
The Chesapeake Bay watershed has been heavily impacted by natural forces such as erosion, tides, and a history of hurricanes and other storms. Along with environmental factors, the bay has been negatively impacted by humans since being settled in the 17th century, bringing with them problems like pollution, construction, destruction of the environment, and currently poultry farms. All of these circumstances have made it increasingly difficult for the MMAP to identify potential underwater archaeological sites. As sea levels rise and historically significant areas are sunk and covered in sediment, the MMAP relies on various pieces of equipment to locate these man-made anomalies but also ensure that the material being examined is kept intact. Using marine magnetometers (detects iron/absent space), side-scan sonar (detects objects on sea floor), along with precise global positioning systems, Langley and the MMAP have been much more successful in locating submerged archaeological sites. After locating the site, Langley and her team have a strict process in order to preserve the site and its contents, allowing more accurate and thorough research to be conducted. The remains of nearly every site have been submerged in saltwater for sometimes centuries, the integrity of shipwrecks and other materials are fragile and careful precaution must be used when working with them. Taking photos and videos, creating maps, and constructing models are all a part of the process of preserving remains. Susan Langley notes herself, &quot;If you have only ten percent of a ship’s hull, you can reconstruct the ship. Construction techniques can tell us about the people who built the vessels, artifacts can tell us about the people who profited from the ship’s trade, and eco-facts—evidence of insect infestation and organic remains, such as seeds, that are preserved in anaerobic, muddy environments—can tell us about the climate and season when a ship sank.&quot; Still, the MMAP makes it a point to publish their data and information once a site is officially identified; however, the details of the location are left out to sway would-be looters, who have plagued marine archaeologists for decades.

=== Significant sites ===
Altogether there are more than 1,800 ship and boat wrecks that scatter the bottom of the Chesapeake Bay and its surrounding waterways. Dozens of precolonial era canoes and artifacts have been extracted from the bay, helping to portray a better picture of the lives of Native Americans (e.g., Powhatan, Pamunkey, Nansemond) In 1974, scallop fishermen dredged up the skull of a prehistoric mastodon, which through carbon dating was found to be 22,000 years old. Along with the skull, a carved blade was also discovered in the same area. Unable to accurately carbon date the stone tool, archaeologists looked at similar styles of blade carving in order to gauge when it was made. The technique was similar to the Solutrean tools that were crafted in Europe between 22,000 and 17,000 years ago and it was noted that the stone tool must be at least 14,000 years old. The Solutrean hypothesis challenges the previous theory regarding the first inhabitants of North America, whereas it is commonly accepted amongst anthropologists that the Clovis people were the first to settle the region somewhere around 13,000 years ago. There is some controversy surrounding these findings; many anthropologists have disputed this, claiming that the environment and setting make properly identifying the origins of these artifacts nearly impossible.

The Chesapeake Bay Flotilla, which was constructed using shallow barges and ships to provide a blockade to the British during the War of 1812. After holding strong for some months, the British eventually dispersed the flotilla and dozens of these vessels were burnt and sunk. Starting in 1978, there were numerous expeditions launched in hopes of successfully discovering what was left of the Chesapeake Bay Flotilla. Since then, hundreds of artifacts and remains have been extracted from the submerged ships such as weapons, personal items, and many other objects. Underwater archaeologists have also been successful in constructing accurate models and maps of the wreckage amongst the sea floor.

In October 1774, a British merchant ship arrived at the port of Annapolis loaded with tea disguised as linens and garments. The tea was hidden by the British to avoid conflict with the colonists as the recently imposed tea tax had created hostility and uncertainty among the colonies. Named &quot;Peggy Stewart,&quot; the British vessel arrived and attempted to tax the colonists for the purchased tea. The colonists refused to pay the tax and after a few days of public meetings, the colonists decided to burn &quot;Peggy Stewart&quot; and the contents of it. The British ship was sunk in what became known as the &#x27;Annapolis Tea Party&#x27; and has since become an important site for underwater archaeologists in the Chesapeake Bay. In 1949, after the Nazi&#x27;s defeat in World War 2, the United States seized a German U-1105 built with sonar-evading rubber sheathing for study purposes. It was sunk the same year in the Potomac River off of the Chesapeake Bay following a high explosives test hosted by the U.S. Navy and has since been a popular site for underwater archaeologists.

Maryland has controlled the majority of underwater archaeology research around the Chesapeake Bay; however, Virginia&#x27;s Department of Historic Resources has had a State Underwater Archaeologist since the 1970s. In 1982, the Virginia Department of Historic Resources along with the first State Underwater Archaeologist, John Broadwater, led an expedition to explore and research a sunken fleet of Revolution-era battleships. In September 1781, during the Revolutionary War, the British intentionally sunk more than a dozen ships in the York River, near the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay. Led by Lord Charles Cornwallis, a fleet of British ships was pushed back towards the rivers of the Chesapeake, in a desperate attempt to avoid surrendering, Cornwallis began burning and sinking his own vessels with the hopes of stalling the incoming French and American ships. Cornwallis was eventually forced to surrender on October 19 and the ships along with its contents were at the bottom of the York River. One of the British ships, called Betsy, has been explored more than any other and over 5,000 relics were removed from Betsy on their original expedition in 1982, including weapons, personal objects, and some valuable metals. Broadwater and his team were awarded a 20-page article in the magazine &quot;National Geographic&quot; for their findings. Virginia has recently been granted funding for further research of these sunken vessels and expeditions are currently underway with the goal to fully explore this destroyed fleet of British ships. Unfortunately, following the publicity of these sunken ships, many divers have taken it upon themselves to explore the wreckage for &#x27;treasure&#x27;.

==Publications==
There are several magazines and publications that cover topics directly related to the Chesapeake Bay and life and tourism within the bay region:
*The &quot;Bay Journal&quot; provides environmental news for the Chesapeake Bay watershed region.
*&quot;Bay Weekly&quot; is the Chesapeake Bay region&#x27;s independent newspaper.
*&quot;The Capital&quot;, a newspaper based in Annapolis, reports about news pertaining to the Western Shore of Maryland and the Annapolis area. 
*&quot;Chesapeake Bay Magazine&quot; and &quot;PropTalk&quot; focus on powerboating in the bay, and &quot;SpinSheet&quot; focuses on sailing.
*&quot;What&#x27;s Up&quot; Magazine is a free monthly publication with special issues focused on Annapolis and the Eastern Shore.

==Cultural depictions==

===In literature===
* &quot;Beautiful Swimmers: Watermen, Crabs and the Chesapeake Bay&quot; (1976), a Pulitzer Prize-winning non-fiction book by William W. Warner about the Chesapeake Bay, blue crabs, and watermen.
* &quot;Chesapeake&quot; (1978), a novel by author James A. Michener.
*&quot;Chesapeake Requiem: A Year with the Watermen of Vanishing Tangier Island&quot; (2018), by Earl Swift, a New York Times bestselling nonfiction book about the crabbing community of Chesapeake Bay.
* &quot;Dicey&#x27;s Song&quot; (1983) and the rest of Cynthia Voigt&#x27;s Tillerman series are set in Crisfield on the Chesapeake Bay.* John Barth wrote two novels featuring Chesapeake Bay
* &quot;Jacob Have I Loved&quot; (1980) by Katherine Paterson, winner of the 1981 Newbery Medal. This is a novel about the relationship between two sisters in a waterman family who grow up on an island in the bay.
* &quot;Patriot Games&quot; (1987), in which protagonist Jack Ryan lives on the fictional Peregrine Cliffs overlooking the Chesapeake Bay, and &quot;Without Remorse&quot; (1993), in which protagonist John Kelly (later known as John Clark when he goes to work for the CIA), lives on a boat and an island in the bay, both by Tom Clancy.
* &quot;Red Kayak&quot; (2004) by Priscilla Cummings portrays class conflict between waterman people and wealthy newcomers.
*&quot;&quot; (1982) centered on a yacht race through the bay, and &quot;The Tidewater Tales&quot; (1987) detailed a married couple telling stories to each other as they cruise the bay, both novels by John Barth.
*&quot;The Oyster Wars of Chesapeake Bay&quot; (1997) by John Wennersten, on the Oyster Wars in the decades following the Civil War.

===In film===
* &quot;The Bay&quot;, a 2012 found footage-style eco-horror movie about a pandemic due to deadly pollution from chicken factory farm run-off and mutant isopods and aquatic parasites able to infect humans.
* &quot;Expedition Chesapeake, A Journey of Discovery&quot;, a 2019 film starring Jeff Corwin created by The Whitaker Center for Science and the Arts.

===In TV===
* In &quot;Chesapeake Shores&quot;, the O&#x27;Brien family lives in a small town in the bay, not far from Baltimore.
* In &quot;MeatEater&quot; by Steven Rinella, Season 8, Episode 3–4 &quot;Ghosts of the Chesapeake&quot; features the Chesapeake Bay eastern shore.

===Other media===
* Singer and songwriter Tom Wisner recorded several albums, often about the Chesapeake Bay. &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; wrote that Wisner &quot;always tried to capture the voice of the water and the sky, of the rocks and the trees, of the fish and the birds, of the gods of nature he believed still watched over it all.&quot; He was known as the &quot;Bard of the Chesapeake Bay.&quot;
* The Chesapeake Bay is referenced in the hit musical &quot;Hamilton&quot;, in the song &quot;Yorktown (The World Turned Upside Down).&quot; It describes the famous Battle of Yorktown, the last battle in the Revolutionary War. When describing the US army&#x27;s plan for attack, Hamilton sings: &quot;When we finally drive the British away, Lafayette is there waiting in Chesapeake Bay!&quot;

==See also==

* Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System
* Chesapeake Bay Retriever
* Chesapeake Climate Action Network
* Chesepian
* Chessie (sea monster)
* Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation
* Great Ireland
* List of islands in Maryland (with the islands in the bay)
* National Estuarine Research Reserve
* Old Bay Seasoning

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

* Cleaves, E.T. et al. (2006). &quot;Quaternary geologic map of the Chesapeake Bay 4º x 6º quadrangle, United States&quot; [Miscellaneous Investigations Series; Map I-1420 (NJ-18)]. Reston, VA: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.
* Crawford, S. 2012. Terrapin Bay Fishing. Chesapeake Bay Tides and Currents
* Meyers, Debra and Perrealt, Melanie (eds.) (2014). &quot;Order and Civility in the Early Modern Chesapeake.&quot; Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
* Phillips, S.W., ed. (2007). &quot;Synthesis of U.S. Geological Survey science for the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem and implications for environmental management&quot; [U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1316]. Reston, VA: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.
* Thomas, William G., III. &quot;The Chesapeake Bay.&quot; &quot;Southern Spaces&quot;, April 16, 2004.
* William W. Warner, &quot;Beautiful Swimmers&quot;, about the history, ecology and anthropology of the Chesapeake Bay, published 1976
Cerco, C. F., Noel, M. R. (2007). Can oyster restoration reverse cultural eutrophication in Chesapeake Bay? Estuaries and Coasts, 30(2): 331–343.
Cooper, S. R., Brush, G. S. (1991). Long-term history of Chesapeake Bay anoxia. Science, 254(5034): 992–996.
Cornwell, J. C., Conley, D. J., Owens, M., Stevenson, J. C. (1996). A sediment chronology of the eutrophication of Chesapeake Bay. Estuaries, 19(2B): 486–499.
Fisher, T. R., Hagy III, J. D., Boynton, W. R., Williams, M. R. (2006). Cultural eutrophication of the Choptank and Patuxent estuaries of Chesapeake Bay. Limnology and Oceanography, 51(1, part 2): 435–447.
Kimmel, D, G., Boynton, W. R., Roman, M. R. (2012). Long-term decline in calanoid copepod Acartia tonsa in central Chesapeake Bay, USA: An indirect effect of eutrophication? Estuarine, Coastal, and Shelf Science, 101: 76–85.
Kirby, M. X., Miller, H. M. (2005). Response of a benthic suspension feeder (Crassostrea virginica Gmelin) to three centuries of anthropogenic eutrophication in Chesapeake Bay. Estuarine, Coastal, and Shelf Science, 62:679–689.
Long, W. C., Seitz, R. D., Brylawski, B. J., Lipicus, R. N. (2014). Individual, population, and ecosystem effects of hypoxia on a dominant benthic bivalve in Chesapeake Bay. Ecological Monographs, 84(2): 303–327.
Officer, C. B., Biggs, R. B., Taft, J. L., Cronin, L. E., Tyler, M. A., Boynton, W. R. (1984). Chesapeake Bay anoxia: origin, development, and significance. Science, 223(4631): 22–27.
Seliger, H. H., Boggs, J. A., Biggley, W. H. (1985). Catastrophic anoxia in the Chesapeake Bay in 1984. Science, 228(4695): 70–73.
Sturdivant, S. K., Diaz, R., Llanso, R., Dauer, D. (2014). Relationship between hypoxia and macrobenthic production in Chesapeake Bay. Estuaries and Coasts. 37(5). DOI:10.1007/s12237-013-9763-4.
Zimmerman, A. R., Canuel, E. A. (2002). Sediment geochemical records of eutrophication in the mesohaline Chesapekae Bay. Limnology and Oceanography, 47(4): 1084–1093.

==External links==
* Chesapeake Bay History &amp; Culture, U.S. National Park Service
* Chesapeake Bay Program
* University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science Research and science application activities emphasizing Chesapeake Bay and its watershed.
* Maryland Department of Natural Resources Eyes on the Bay Real-time and historical Chesapeake Bay water quality and satellite data.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="4" end="18" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="38" end="45" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="94" end="113" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid-Atlantic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="150" end="164" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="172" end="190" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="215" end="240" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32286" start="246" end="271" title="Eastern Shore of Virginia" label="Eastern Shore of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="290" end="298" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640805" start="362" end="372" title="Cape Henry" label="Cape Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q644090" start="377" end="389" title="Cape Charles (headland)" label="Cape Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="420" end="428" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="454" end="462" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="676" end="690" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="726" end="734" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="736" end="748" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="750" end="758" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="784" end="797" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="810" end="826" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="894" end="911" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q494228" start="986" end="1004" title="Kent County, Maryland" label="Kent County&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q501284" start="1049" end="1063" title="Harford County, Maryland" label="Harford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="1147" end="1160" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319988" start="1368" end="1389" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417421" start="1395" end="1406" title="Sandy Point State Park" label="Sandy Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="1413" end="1422" title="Annapolis" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391790" start="1427" end="1438" title="Kent Island, Maryland" label="Kent Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070563" start="1462" end="1490" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="1502" end="1516" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376790" start="1520" end="1532" title="Cape Charles, Virginia" label="Cape Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="1631" end="1638" title="oysters" label="oysters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974366" start="1643" end="1651" title="waterman (occupation)" label="watermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203192" start="1692" end="1710" title="Nutrient pollution" label="Nutrient pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="1715" end="1727" title="urban runoff" label="urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="1875" end="1889" title="Overexploitation" label="overharvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2305" end="2319" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="2337" end="2351" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="2464" end="2474" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q59222" start="2682" end="2696" title="Roanoke Colony" label="Roanoke Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445752" start="2773" end="2790" title="Chesapeake people" label="Chesapeake people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="2875" end="2888" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018060" start="3046" end="3057" title="Blair Rudes" label="Blair Rudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="3474" end="3481" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="3523" end="3541" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q554394" start="3615" end="3618" title="ria" label="ria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="3652" end="3669" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="3781" end="3786" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765405" start="3806" end="3826" title="Laurentide Ice Sheet" label="Laurentide Ice Sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="3901" end="3910" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="3948" end="3956" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="4042" end="4055" title="Atlantic coastal plain" label="coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="4375" end="4381" title="bolide" label="bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="4382" end="4394" title="impact event" label="impact event"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="4413" end="4419" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070547" start="4464" end="4492" title="Chesapeake Bay impact crater" label="Chesapeake Bay impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q501277" start="4714" end="4738" title="Calvert County, Maryland" label="Calvert County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024242" start="4869" end="4883" title="Calvert Cliffs State Park" label="Calvert Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="4906" end="4912" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433839" start="5020" end="5043" title="Scientists&amp;#x27; Cliffs" label="Scientists&amp;#x27; Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q754475" start="5380" end="5404" title="Havre de Grace, Maryland" label="Havre de Grace, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="5614" end="5622" title="brackish" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="5655" end="5663" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226487" start="5700" end="5710" title="polyhaline" label="polyhaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="5786" end="5795" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5865" end="5868" title="Concentration#&amp;quot;Parts-per&amp;quot; notation" label="ppt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="6145" end="6163" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="6506" end="6523" title="humid subtropical" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="6721" end="6726" title="mudflat" label="flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="7023" end="7040" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="7043" end="7056" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="7059" end="7070" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="7073" end="7091" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258289" start="7094" end="7104" title="York River (Virginia)" label="York River"/>
<link wikidata="Q432641" start="7107" end="7121" title="Patuxent River" label="Patuxent River"/>
<link wikidata="Q773991" start="7124" end="7138" title="Choptank River" label="Choptank River"/>
<link wikidata="Q108365998" start="7195" end="7224" title="List of Chesapeake Bay rivers" label="List of Chesapeake Bay rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="7428" end="7437" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q756893" start="7482" end="7499" title="Atlantic menhaden" label="Atlantic menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q842647" start="7501" end="7513" title="striped bass" label="striped bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q469632" start="7515" end="7527" title="American eel" label="American eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q468415" start="7529" end="7543" title="eastern oyster" label="eastern oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133152" start="7545" end="7568" title="Atlantic horseshoe crab" label="Atlantic horseshoe crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q844839" start="7578" end="7587" title="Callinectes sapidus" label="blue crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="7604" end="7610" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q333796" start="7613" end="7629" title="great blue heron" label="great blue heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="7632" end="7642" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="7649" end="7665" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="7709" end="7712" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351070" start="7774" end="7787" title="piping plover" label="piping plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q719675" start="7793" end="7808" title="near threatened" label="near threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031462" start="7866" end="7883" title="Atlantic sturgeon" label="Atlantic sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328202" start="7910" end="7918" title="stingray" label="stingray"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="8074" end="8083" title="Megafauna" label="Megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q190469" start="8093" end="8103" title="bull shark" label="bull shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q188212" start="8106" end="8117" title="tiger shark" label="tiger shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q873701" start="8120" end="8146" title="scalloped hammerhead shark" label="scalloped hammerhead shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q185260" start="8153" end="8166" title="basking shark" label="basking shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536199" start="8172" end="8181" title="manta ray" label="manta ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q941962" start="8324" end="8338" title="smooth dogfish" label="smooth dogfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q212694" start="8340" end="8353" title="spiny dogfish" label="spiny dogfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10360338" start="8355" end="8366" title="cownose ray" label="cownose ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q338891" start="8372" end="8382" title="bonnethead" label="bonnethead"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="8385" end="8403" title="Bottlenose dolphin" label="Bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="8494" end="8508" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193683" start="8538" end="8564" title="North Atlantic right whale" label="North Atlantic right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179020" start="8569" end="8572" title="fin whale" label="fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="8578" end="8583" title="Minke whale" label="minke"/>
<link wikidata="Q185097" start="8588" end="8591" title="sei whale" label="sei"/>
<link wikidata="Q42797" start="8669" end="8676" title="manatee" label="manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658701" start="8901" end="8922" title="Chessie (sea monster)" label="legendary sea monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="9036" end="9048" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q192095" start="9244" end="9261" title="Loggerhead turtle" label="Loggerhead turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="9374" end="9402" title="submerged aquatic vegetation" label="submerged aquatic vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q157371" start="9412" end="9420" title="Zostera" label="eelgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q164107" start="9425" end="9438" title="Ruppia maritima" label="widgeon grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q831681" start="9736" end="9745" title="wild rice" label="wild rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q161364" start="9770" end="9779" title="red maple" label="red maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q368248" start="9781" end="9794" title="Pinus taeda" label="loblolly pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q148950" start="9799" end="9811" title="bald cypress" label="bald cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q159038" start="9817" end="9825" title="spartina" label="spartina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976487" start="9836" end="9846" title="phragmites" label="phragmites"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="9848" end="9863" title="Invasive species" label="Invasive plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q163649" start="10076" end="10095" title="Egeria densa" label="Brazilian waterweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q504106" start="10829" end="10838" title="longhouse" label="longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49291" start="11411" end="11419" title="Powhatan" label="Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9060109" start="11425" end="11435" title="Piscataway people" label="Piscataway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742899" start="11445" end="11454" title="Nanticoke people" label="Nanticoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q147676" start="11647" end="11669" title="Giovanni da Verrazzano" label="Giovanni da Verrazzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="11702" end="11714" title="Kingdom of France" label="French crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190104" start="11782" end="11794" title="New York Bay" label="New York Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781097" start="11808" end="11826" title="The Narrows" label="Verrazzano Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="11871" end="11888" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125673" start="11904" end="11907" title="Verrazano-Narrows Bridge" label="him"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028779" start="11981" end="12004" title="Lucas Vásquez de Ayllón" label="Lucas Vásquez de Ayllón"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="12033" end="12043" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q738808" start="12098" end="12110" title="Delaware Bay" label="Delaware Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="12403" end="12410" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784722" start="12431" end="12453" title="San Miguel de Gualdape" label="San Miguel de Gualdape"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="12473" end="12487" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="12596" end="12603" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q515603" start="12611" end="12624" title="Sapelo Island" label="Sapelo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159775" start="12635" end="12660" title="Pedro Menéndez de Márquez" label="Pedro Menéndez de Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="12761" end="12768" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699492" start="12797" end="12811" title="Ajacan Mission" label="Ajacan Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="12914" end="12932" title="Sir Walter Raleigh" label="Sir Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q447200" start="12937" end="12953" title="Humphrey Gilbert" label="Humphrey Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636839" start="13015" end="13029" title="Roanoke Island" label="Roanoke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="13060" end="13074" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152507" start="13084" end="13100" title="Virginia Company" label="Virginia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q644090" start="13205" end="13217" title="Cape Charles (headland)" label="Cape Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640805" start="13222" end="13232" title="Cape Henry" label="Cape Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="13297" end="13315" title="Captain John Smith" label="Captain John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="13319" end="13326" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="13427" end="13440" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036695" start="13605" end="13658" title="Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historic Trail" label="Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810722" start="13703" end="13726" title="National Historic Trail" label="National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="13769" end="13790" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="13992" end="14000" title="Cavalier" label="Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="14108" end="14128" title="Province of Virginia" label="Province of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452027" start="14137" end="14157" title="Province of Maryland" label="Province of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419459" start="14241" end="14265" title="Battle of the Chesapeake" label="Battle of the Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q644090" start="14318" end="14330" title="Cape Charles (headland)" label="Cape Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640805" start="14335" end="14345" title="Cape Henry" label="Cape Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="14399" end="14409" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="14446" end="14472" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="14509" end="14526" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="14535" end="14541" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q508363" start="14559" end="14578" title="Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, Comte de Rochambeau" label="Comte de Rochambeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067131" start="14598" end="14606" title="History of New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="14642" end="14657" title="Lord Cornwallis" label="Lord Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q145913" start="14667" end="14672" title="North Carolina in the American Revolution" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566713" start="14677" end="14682" title="South Carolina in the American Revolution" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="14709" end="14727" title="Siege of Yorktown" label="Battle of Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="14731" end="14749" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="14777" end="14798" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q754338" start="14881" end="14904" title="Elkton, Maryland" label="&amp;quot;Head of Elk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="14912" end="14929" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137163" start="14990" end="14998" title="History of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972604" start="15070" end="15111" title="Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route" label="Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="15154" end="15165" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373391" start="15211" end="15225" title="Tangier Island" label="Tangier Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355040" start="15277" end="15292" title="George Cockburn" label="George Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092829" start="15410" end="15433" title="Chesapeake Bay Flotilla" label="Chesapeake Bay Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="15494" end="15503" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289640" start="15514" end="15527" title="Joshua Barney" label="Joshua Barney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886086" start="15678" end="15696" title="Benedict, Maryland" label="Benedict, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432141" start="15772" end="15805" title="Battle of Bladensburg" label="rout the U.S. Army at Bladensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="15810" end="15831" title="Burning of Washington" label="burn the U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472261" start="15945" end="15960" title="Fort Washington (Maryland)" label="Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283729" start="15992" end="15998" title="Raid on Alexandria (Virginia)" label="raided"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="16023" end="16043" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116362" start="16073" end="16084" title="Oyster Wars" label="Oyster Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535770" start="16257" end="16266" title="skipjack (boat)" label="skipjacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739367" start="16379" end="16413" title="Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant" label="Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024242" start="16430" end="16444" title="Calvert Cliffs State Park" label="Calvert Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q501277" start="16448" end="16462" title="Calvert County, Maryland" label="Calvert County"/>
<link wikidata="Q756421" start="16604" end="16625" title="Intracoastal Waterway" label="Intracoastal Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="16731" end="16745" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092885" start="16761" end="16790" title="Chesapeake and Delaware Canal" label="Chesapeake and Delaware Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="16829" end="16843" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709505" start="16854" end="16884" title="Albemarle and Chesapeake Canal" label="Albemarle and Chesapeake Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051265" start="16925" end="16940" title="Elizabeth River (Virginia)" label="Elizabeth River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="16959" end="16966" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q342803" start="16971" end="16981" title="Portsmouth, Virginia" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441345" start="16989" end="17004" title="Albemarle Sound" label="Albemarle Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033236" start="17009" end="17022" title="Pamlico Sound" label="Pamlico Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="17026" end="17040" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="17125" end="17153" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q377595" start="17271" end="17288" title="Helen Delich Bentley Port of Baltimore" label="Port of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092885" start="17320" end="17349" title="Chesapeake and Delaware Canal" label="Chesapeake and Delaware Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="17366" end="17376" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="17381" end="17393" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="17401" end="17415" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q927642" start="17613" end="17643" title="Baltimore Steam Packet Company" label="Baltimore Steam Packet Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319988" start="17748" end="17769" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="17869" end="17888" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786097" start="17893" end="17902" title="Matapeake, Maryland" label="Matapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="17910" end="17923" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391790" start="17934" end="17945" title="Kent Island, Maryland" label="Kent Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070563" start="18022" end="18050" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q32286" start="18063" end="18092" title="Eastern Shore of Virginia" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="18141" end="18155" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="18157" end="18164" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q342803" start="18166" end="18176" title="Portsmouth, Virginia" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49222" start="18182" end="18192" title="Chesapeake, Virginia" label="Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070563" start="18383" end="18384" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel" label="–"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="18461" end="18465" title="Tide" label="Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="19286" end="19339" title="National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="19507" end="19524" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q644090" start="19543" end="19550" title="Cape Charles (headland)" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640805" start="19555" end="19560" title="Cape Henry" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q844839" start="20722" end="20732" title="Callinectes sapidus" label="blue crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192868" start="20734" end="20738" title="clam" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q468415" start="20745" end="20752" title="Eastern oyster" label="oysters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="20933" end="20939" title="surface runoff" label="runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="21016" end="21029" title="Maryland Eastern Shore" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="21092" end="21119" title="invasive species" label="invasion of foreign species"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535770" start="21182" end="21190" title="Skipjack (boat)" label="skipjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619032" start="21204" end="21230" title="Helen Virginia (Skipjack boat)" label="&amp;quot;Helen Virginia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666830" start="21431" end="21440" title="log canoe" label="log canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260185" start="21446" end="21451" title="pungy" label="pungy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986163" start="21457" end="21463" title="Bugeye (boat)" label="bugeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092843" start="21483" end="21506" title="Chesapeake Bay deadrise" label="Chesapeake Bay deadrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q780811" start="21577" end="21591" title="oyster farming" label="oyster farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203192" start="21876" end="21892" title="nutrient pollution" label="excess nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="21946" end="21960" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="21961" end="21970" title="water pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092841" start="21993" end="22015" title="Chesapeake Bay Program" label="Chesapeake Bay Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q842647" start="22171" end="22183" title="striped bass" label="striped bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460220" start="22512" end="22516" title="Shad fishing" label="shad"/>
<link wikidata="Q833940" start="22518" end="22523" title="cobia" label="cobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216634" start="22525" end="22532" title="Croaker fish" label="croaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168496" start="22538" end="22545" title="red drum" label="redfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071815" start="22547" end="22562" title="winter flounder" label="winter flounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536162" start="22568" end="22583" title="summer flounder" label="summer flounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q882644" start="22606" end="22618" title="blue catfish" label="blue catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="22661" end="22672" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q756893" start="22750" end="22758" title="Atlantic menhaden" label="menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="23640" end="23655" title="Clean Water Act" label="Clean Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092833" start="23918" end="23943" title="Chesapeake Bay Foundation" label="Chesapeake Bay Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192812" start="23961" end="23969" title="Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501890" start="24057" end="24066" title="casserole" label="casserole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703292" start="24358" end="24366" title="terrapin" label="terrapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236263" start="24669" end="24685" title="marine dead zone" label="marine dead zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420425" start="24788" end="24797" title="fish kill" label="fish kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="24956" end="24966" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="25168" end="25175" title="Hypoxia (environmental)" label="Hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="25203" end="25214" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q336191" start="25287" end="25292" title="wastewater" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="25344" end="25349" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q142369" start="25459" end="25489" title="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="25682" end="25692" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="25697" end="25705" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="25871" end="25879" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="26045" end="26063" title="aquatic plant" label="aquatic vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q157371" start="26137" end="26145" title="Zostera" label="eelgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="26438" end="26452" title="surface runoff" label="surface runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="26776" end="26784" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15156646" start="26794" end="26814" title="Pfiesteria piscicida" label="Pfiesteria piscicida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="27718" end="27732" title="overharvesting" label="overharvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652087" start="28229" end="28232" title="Haplosporidium nelsoni" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169072" start="28237" end="28242" title="Perkinsus marinus" label="Dermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q898574" start="28490" end="28496" title="turbidity" label="turbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="28805" end="28813" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="28828" end="28862" title="US Environmental Protection Agency" label="US Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768318" start="29380" end="29405" title="Chesapeake Bay Commission" label="Chesapeake Bay Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092841" start="30243" end="30265" title="Chesapeake Bay Program" label="Chesapeake Bay Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="30915" end="30926" title="tributaries" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q625376" start="31190" end="31203" title="water quality" label="water quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="31914" end="31930" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32199" end="32221" title="Clean Water Act#Water quality criteria" label="water quality criteria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32388" end="32411" title="Clean Water Act#Water quality standards" label="water quality standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q30258952" start="32926" end="32953" title="Oyster Recovery Partnership" label="Oyster Recovery Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934330" start="33069" end="33105" title="Virginia Institute of Marine Science" label="Virginia Institute of Marine Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="33113" end="33142" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q468415" start="33233" end="33254" title="Crassostrea virginica" label="Crassostrea virginica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828124" start="33444" end="33468" title="total maximum daily load" label="total maximum daily load"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="33553" end="33568" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896867" start="35268" end="35293" title="Best management practice for water pollution" label="best management practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484056" start="35412" end="35428" title="land development" label="land development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335563" start="35491" end="35504" title="stream buffer" label="stream buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="35617" end="35638" title="stormwater management" label="stormwater management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137499" start="35658" end="35676" title="infiltration basin" label="infiltration basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376406" start="35681" end="35700" title="constructed wetland" label="constructed wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434081" start="35934" end="35941" title="Deicing" label="deicers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895680" start="37387" end="37442" title="University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science" label="University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748733" start="37641" end="37655" title="Patapsco River" label="Patapsco River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839144" start="37660" end="37681" title="Back River (Maryland)" label="Back River (Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q575941" start="38076" end="38088" title="Secchi depth" label="Secchi depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="38466" end="38480" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="38875" end="38890" title="extreme weather" label="extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="38910" end="38926" title="coastal flooding" label="coastal flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880990" start="39218" end="39232" title="Holland Island" label="Holland Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="39373" end="39392" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="39835" end="39842" title="Hypoxia (environmental)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203192" start="39888" end="39906" title="nutrient pollution" label="nutrient pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="39911" end="39922" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="40369" end="40394" title="Climate change adaptation" label="Climate change adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752923" start="40422" end="40430" title="Climate change in Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090475" start="40435" end="40443" title="Climate change in Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="40581" end="40588" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="40642" end="40667" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934330" start="43026" end="43062" title="Virginia Institute of Marine Science" label="Virginia Institute of Marine Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="43089" end="43117" title="submerged aquatic vegetation" label="submerged aquatic vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922685" start="43290" end="43295" title="Weather buoy" label="buoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="43371" end="43379" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="43381" end="43394" title="Chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll-a"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294669" start="43410" end="43426" title="Oxygen saturation" label="dissolved oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898574" start="43432" end="43441" title="turbidity" label="turbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092839" start="43549" end="43611" title="Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve (Maryland)" label="Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve in Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092840" start="43613" end="43675" title="Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve (Virginia)" label="Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve in Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092841" start="43677" end="43699" title="Chesapeake Bay Program" label="Chesapeake Bay Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781308" start="43736" end="43776" title="Maryland Department of Natural Resources" label="Maryland Department of Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152" start="43778" end="43787" title="Goddard Space Flight Center" label="NASA GSFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="43884" end="43888" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="NOAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="43912" end="43935" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295408" start="43980" end="44021" title="Smithsonian Environmental Research Center" label="Smithsonian Environmental Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="44023" end="44054" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895680" start="44056" end="44111" title="University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science" label="University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934241" start="44159" end="44188" title="Virginia Department of Health" label="Virginia Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934330" start="44190" end="44226" title="Virginia Institute of Marine Science" label="Virginia Institute of Marine Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934396" start="44228" end="44264" title="Virginia Marine Resources Commission" label="Virginia Marine Resources Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663374" start="44453" end="44485" title="Abandoned Shipwrecks Act" label="National Abandoned Shipwreck Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q357527" start="45458" end="45473" title="side-scan sonar" label="side-scan sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49291" start="47173" end="47181" title="Powhatan" label="Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918556" start="47183" end="47191" title="Pamunkey" label="Pamunkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502382" start="47193" end="47202" title="Nansemond" label="Nansemond"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="47269" end="47277" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121344" start="47591" end="47600" title="Solutrean" label="Solutrean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602605" start="47747" end="47767" title="Solutrean hypothesis" label="Solutrean hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="47914" end="47920" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092829" start="48217" end="48240" title="Chesapeake Bay Flotilla" label="Chesapeake Bay Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="48343" end="48354" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="48976" end="48985" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160743" start="49209" end="49222" title="Peggy Stewart (ship)" label="Peggy Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q321154" start="49732" end="49745" title="German submarine U-1105" label="German U-1105"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258289" start="50543" end="50553" title="York River (Virginia)" label="York River"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="50600" end="50623" title="Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess Cornwallis" label="Lord Charles Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="51308" end="51327" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520197" start="52057" end="52068" title="The Capital" label="The Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092836" start="52203" end="52226" title="Chesapeake Bay Magazine" label="Chesapeake Bay Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="52523" end="52581" title="Beautiful Swimmers: Watermen, Crabs and the Chesapeake Bay" label="Beautiful Swimmers: Watermen, Crabs and the Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="52598" end="52612" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019848" start="52641" end="52658" title="William W. Warner" label="William W. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962824" start="52719" end="52729" title="Chesapeake (novel)" label="Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q361653" start="52762" end="52779" title="James A. Michener" label="James A. Michener"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52878" end="52888" title="Earl Swift" label="Earl Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272399" start="52991" end="53008" title="Dicey&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Dicey&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q273209" start="53038" end="53051" title="Cynthia Voigt" label="Cynthia Voigt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49301" start="53087" end="53096" title="Crisfield" label="Crisfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q315683" start="53121" end="53131" title="John Barth" label="John Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118723" start="53182" end="53200" title="Jacob Have I Loved" label="Jacob Have I Loved"/>
<link wikidata="Q236321" start="53217" end="53235" title="Katherine Paterson" label="Katherine Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q622813" start="53256" end="53269" title="Newbery Medal" label="Newbery Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q396204" start="53396" end="53409" title="Patriot Games" label="Patriot Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533058" start="53537" end="53552" title="Without Remorse" label="Without Remorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918366" start="53615" end="53625" title="John Clark (Tom Clancy character)" label="John Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="53655" end="53658" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q105167" start="53711" end="53721" title="Tom Clancy" label="Tom Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304419" start="53731" end="53740" title="Red Kayak" label="Red Kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q99297843" start="53757" end="53775" title="Priscilla Cummings" label="Priscilla Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769224" start="53920" end="53939" title="The Tidewater Tales" label="The Tidewater Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q315683" start="54048" end="54058" title="John Barth" label="John Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116362" start="54141" end="54152" title="Oyster Wars" label="Oyster Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023608" start="54216" end="54223" title="The Bay (film)" label="The Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272147" start="54238" end="54251" title="found footage (pseudo-documentary)" label="found footage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="54283" end="54291" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206338" start="54361" end="54368" title="isopods" label="isopods"/>
<link wikidata="Q770523" start="54496" end="54507" title="Jeff Corwin" label="Jeff Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994126" start="54523" end="54563" title="Whitaker Center for Science and the Arts" label="Whitaker Center for Science and the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q24088358" start="54589" end="54606" title="Chesapeake Shores" label="Chesapeake Shores"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804231" start="54707" end="54716" title="MeatEater" label="MeatEater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615199" start="54726" end="54740" title="Steven Rinella" label="Steven Rinella"/>
<link wikidata="Q125150737" start="54887" end="54897" title="Tom Wisner" label="Tom Wisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="54961" end="54977" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19320959" start="55310" end="55318" title="Hamilton (musical)" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25616236" start="55344" end="55383" title="Yorktown (The World Turned Upside Down)" label="Yorktown (The World Turned Upside Down)"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="55415" end="55433" title="Battle of yorktown" label="Battle of Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="55458" end="55475" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092835" start="55660" end="55699" title="Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System" label="Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System"/>
<link wikidata="Q29084" start="55702" end="55726" title="Chesapeake Bay Retriever" label="Chesapeake Bay Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092853" start="55729" end="55762" title="Chesapeake Climate Action Network" label="Chesapeake Climate Action Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445752" start="55765" end="55774" title="Chesepian" label="Chesepian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658701" start="55777" end="55798" title="Chessie (sea monster)" label="Chessie (sea monster)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138339" start="55801" end="55842" title="Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation" label="Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76860" start="55845" end="55858" title="Great Ireland" label="Great Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624476" start="55861" end="55888" title="List of islands in Maryland" label="List of islands in Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158975" start="55921" end="55956" title="National Estuarine Research Reserve" label="National Estuarine Research Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083444" start="55959" end="55976" title="Old Bay Seasoning" label="Old Bay Seasoning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59474" wikidata="Q183091" url="?curid=59474" title="Monophysitism">
<text>Monophysitism ( ) or monophysism ( ; from Greek , &quot;solitary&quot; and , &quot;nature&quot;) is a Christological doctrine that states that there was only one nature—the divine—in the person of Jesus Christ, who was the incarnated Word. It is rejected as heretical by the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, Anglicanism, Lutheranism and all mainstream Protestant denominations, which hold to the dyophysitism of the 451 Council of Chalcedon—as well by Oriental Orthodoxy, which holds to miaphysitism.

== Background ==

The First Council of Nicaea (325) declared that Christ was both divine (homoousios, consubstantial, of one being or essence, with the Father) and human (was incarnate and became man). In the fifth century a heated controversy arose between the sees and theological schools of Antioch and Alexandria about how divinity and humanity existed in Christ, with the former stressing the humanity, the latter the divinity of Christ. Cyril of Alexandria succeeded in having Nestorius, a prominent exponent of the Antiochian school, condemned at the Council of Ephesus in 431, and insisted on the formula &quot;one &quot;physis&quot; of the incarnate Word&quot;, claiming that any formula that spoke of two &quot;physeis&quot; represented Nestorianism. Some taught that in Christ the human nature was completely absorbed by the divine, leaving only a divine nature. In 451, the Council of Chalcedon, on the basis of Pope Leo the Great&#x27;s 449 declaration, defined that in Christ there were two &quot;natures&quot; united in one &quot;person&quot;.

Those who insisted on the &quot;one &quot;physis&quot;&quot; formula were referred to as &quot;monophysites&quot; (), while those who accepted the &quot;two natures&quot; definition were called &quot;dyophysites&quot;, a term applied also to followers of Nestorianism.

== Groups called monophysite ==

The forms of monophysism were numerous, and included the following:
* Acephali were monophysites who in 482 broke away from Peter III of Alexandria who made an agreement with Acacius of Constantinople, sanctioned by Emperor Zeno with his Henotikon edict that condemned both Nestorius and Eutyches, as the Council of Chalcedon had done, but ignored that council&#x27;s decree on the two natures of Christ. They saw this as a betrayal of S. Cyrils use of &quot;mia physis&quot; and refused to be subject to the Chalcedonian Patriarch of Alexandria, preferring to be instead ecclesiastically &quot;without a head&quot; (the meaning of &quot;acephali&quot;). For this, they were known as Headless Ones.
* Agnoetae, Themistians or Agnosticists, founded by Themistius Calonymus around 534, held that the nature of Jesus Christ, although divine, was like other men&#x27;s in all respects, including limited knowledge. They must be distinguished from a fourth-century group called by the same name, who denied that God knew the past and the future.
* Aphthartodocetae, Phantasiasts or, after their leader Julian of Halicarnassus, Julianists believed &quot;that the body of Christ, from the very moment of his conception, was incorruptible, immortal and impassible, as it was after the resurrection, and held that the suffering and death on the cross was a miracle contrary to the normal conditions of Christ&#x27;s humanity&quot;. Emperor Justinian I wished to have this teaching adopted as orthodox, but died before he could put his plans into effect.
* Apollinarians or Apollinarists, named after Apollinaris of Laodicea (who died in 390) proposed that Jesus had a normal human body but had a divine mind instead of a regular human soul. This teaching was condemned by the First Council of Constantinople (381) and died out within a few decades. Cyril of Alexandria declared it a mad proposal.
* Docetists, not all of whom were monophysites, held that Jesus had no human nature: his humanity was only a phantasm, which, united with the impassible, immaterial divine nature, could not really suffer and die.
* Eutychians taught that Jesus had only one nature, a union of the divine and human that is not an even compound, since what is divine is infinitely larger than what is human: the humanity is absorbed by and transmuted into the divinity, as a drop of honey, mixing with the water of the sea, vanishes. The body of Christ, thus transmuted, is not consubstantial homoousios with humankind. In contrast to Severians, who are called verbal monophysites, Eutychianists are called real or ontological monophysites, and their teaching is &quot;an extreme form of the monophysite heresy that emphasizes the exclusive prevalence of the divinity in Christ&quot;.
* Tritheists, a group of sixth-century monophysites said to have been founded by a monophysite named John Ascunages of Antioch. Their principal writer was John Philoponus, who taught that the common nature of Father, Son and Holy Spirit is an abstraction of their distinct individual natures.
* The Oriental Orthodox, or Severians, accept the reality of Christ&#x27;s human nature to the extent of insisting that his body was capable of corruption, but argue that, since a single person has a single nature and Christ is one person, not two, he has only a single nature. Agreeing in substance, though not in words, with the Definition of Chalcedon, they are called &quot;verbal monophysites&quot; by some Eastern Orthodox. The Oriental Orthodox reject the label of monophysitism and consider monophysitism a heresy, preferring to label their non-Chalcedonian beliefs as miaphysitism.

==Verbal monophysitism==

Concerning verbal declarations of monophysitism, Justo L. González stated, &quot;in order not to give an erroneous idea of the theology of the so-called monophysite churches, that have subsisted until the twentieth century, one should point out that all the extreme sects of monophysism disappeared within a brief span, and that the Christology of the present so-called monophysite churches is closer to a verbal than to a real monophysism&quot;.

== Political situation of monophysitism after Chalcedon ==

Under Emperor Basiliscus, who ousted Emperor Zeno in 475, &quot;the monophysites reached the pinnacle of their power&quot;. In his &quot;Encyclion&quot;, which he issued in the same year, he revoked the Council of Chalcedon and recognized the Second Council of Ephesus of 449 except for its approval of Eutyches, whom Basiliscus condemned. He required his edict to be signed by each bishop. Among the signatures he obtained were those of three of the four Eastern Patriarchs, but the Patriarch and the populace of the capital protested so resolutely that in 476, seeing that his overthrow was imminent, he issued his &quot;Anti-Encyclion&quot; revoking his former edict. In the same year, Zeno returned victoriously.

Events had made it clear that there was a split between the population, staunchly Chalcedonian in sympathies, of Constantinople and the Balkans and the largely anti-Chalcedonian population of Egypt and Syria. In an attempt to reconcile both sides, Zeno, with the support of Acacius of Constantinople and Peter III of Alexandria, tried to enforce the compromise Henoticon (Formula of Union) decree of 482, which condemned Eutyches but ignored Chalcedon. Schisms followed on both sides. Rome excommunicated Acacius (leading to the 35-year Acacian schism), while in Egypt the Acephali broke away from Peter III. The Acacian schism continued under Zeno&#x27;s successor, the monophysite Anastasius I Dicorus and ended only with the accession of the Chalcedonian Justin I in 518.

Justin I was succeeded by the Chalcedonian Justinian I (527–565), whose wife Empress Theodora protected and assisted the monophysites. Ghassanid patronage of the monophysite Syrian Church under phylarch Al-Harith ibn Jabalah was crucial for its survival, revival, and even its spread. Justinian I was followed by Justin II, who after being a monophysite, perhaps because of Theodora&#x27;s influence, converted to the Chalcedonian faith before obtaining the imperial throne. Some time later, he adopted a policy of persecuting the monophysites. From Justinian I on, no emperor was a declared monophysite, although they continued their efforts to find compromise formulas such as monoenergism and monothelitism.

== See also ==
* Miaphysitism
* Chalcedonian Christianity (Jesus&#x27;s divinity was also viewed as one nature by a minority of Roman Christians around the time of the Council of Chalcedon)
* Non-Chalcedonian Christianity
* Barsanuphians, an Egyptian non-Chalcedonian sect of Monophysitism

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="0" end="13" title="Monophysitism" label="Monophysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="21" end="32" title="Monophysitism" label="monophysism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="42" end="47" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078867" start="83" end="89" title="Nature (philosophy)" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="102" end="116" title="Christology" label="Christological"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="197" end="209" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="223" end="233" title="incarnation (Christianity)" label="incarnated"/>
<link wikidata="Q766575" start="234" end="238" title="Logos (Christianity)" label="Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="275" end="290" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="292" end="315" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="317" end="328" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="330" end="341" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="361" end="371" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991529" start="405" end="417" title="dyophysitism" label="dyophysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="429" end="449" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="461" end="479" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764554" start="496" end="508" title="miaphysitism" label="miaphysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="533" end="556" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q988243" start="601" end="611" title="homoousios" label="homoousios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188981" start="613" end="627" title="Consubstantiality" label="consubstantial"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="659" end="669" title="God the Father" label="the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="686" end="695" title="Incarnation (Christianity)" label="incarnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="773" end="777" title="episcopal see" label="sees"/>
<link wikidata="Q865026" start="805" end="812" title="see of Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q622216" start="817" end="827" title="see of Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="954" end="973" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185073" start="994" end="1003" title="Nestorius" label="Nestorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q184332" start="1069" end="1087" title="Council of Ephesus" label="Council of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="1258" end="1270" title="Nestorianism" label="Nestorianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="1397" end="1417" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43954" start="1435" end="1453" title="Pope Leo the Great" label="Pope Leo the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q9359935" start="1461" end="1476" title="Leo&amp;#x27;s Tome" label="449 declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037472" start="1478" end="1485" title="Chalcedonian Definition" label="defined"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991529" start="1771" end="1782" title="dyophysites" label="dyophysites"/>
<link wikidata="Q417340" start="1944" end="1952" title="Acephali" label="Acephali"/>
<link wikidata="Q733961" start="1998" end="2021" title="Peter III of Alexandria" label="Peter III of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q415483" start="2049" end="2074" title="Acacius of Constantinople" label="Acacius of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q183452" start="2098" end="2102" title="Zeno (emperor)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q373987" start="2112" end="2121" title="Henotikon" label="Henotikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826957" start="2575" end="2583" title="Agnoetae" label="Agnoetae"/>
<link wikidata="Q514318" start="2917" end="2933" title="Aphthartodocetae" label="Aphthartodocetae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381031" start="2935" end="2947" title="Phantasiasts" label="Phantasiasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575123" start="2971" end="2994" title="Julian of Halicarnassus" label="Julian of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="3305" end="3316" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194234" start="3421" end="3434" title="Apollinarianism" label="Apollinarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q367946" start="3465" end="3488" title="Apollinaris of Laodicea" label="Apollinaris of Laodicea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="3600" end="3604" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="3641" end="3672" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="First Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q207674" start="3764" end="3773" title="Docetism" label="Docetists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590543" start="3977" end="3987" title="Eutychianism" label="Eutychians"/>
<link wikidata="Q988243" start="4336" end="4346" title="homoousios" label="homoousios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575559" start="4630" end="4640" title="Tritheism" label="Tritheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q317632" start="4783" end="4798" title="John Philoponus" label="John Philoponus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="4927" end="4944" title="Oriental Orthodox" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q729105" start="4949" end="4958" title="Severus of Antioch" label="Severians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="5333" end="5349" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048730" start="5470" end="5486" title="non-Chalcedonian" label="non-Chalcedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764554" start="5498" end="5510" title="miaphysitism" label="miaphysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193056" start="6061" end="6071" title="Basiliscus" label="Basiliscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183452" start="6092" end="6096" title="Zeno (emperor)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258045" start="6290" end="6315" title="Second Council of Ephesus" label="Second Council of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q415483" start="7039" end="7064" title="Acacius of Constantinople" label="Acacius of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q733961" start="7069" end="7092" title="Peter III of Alexandria" label="Peter III of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q373987" start="7126" end="7135" title="Henoticon" label="Henoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="7250" end="7254" title="Holy See" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q415434" start="7302" end="7316" title="Acacian schism" label="Acacian schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q417340" start="7338" end="7346" title="Acephali" label="Acephali"/>
<link wikidata="Q173470" start="7448" end="7468" title="Anastasius I Dicorus" label="Anastasius I Dicorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183445" start="7523" end="7531" title="Justin I" label="Justin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="7584" end="7595" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q204843" start="7618" end="7634" title="Theodora (wife of Justinian I)" label="Empress Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="7676" end="7685" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308427" start="7735" end="7743" title="phylarch" label="phylarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q643275" start="7744" end="7765" title="Al-Harith ibn Jabalah" label="Al-Harith ibn Jabalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q183813" start="7854" end="7863" title="Justin II" label="Justin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q951372" start="8220" end="8232" title="monoenergism" label="monoenergism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238459" start="8237" end="8250" title="monothelitism" label="monothelitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764554" start="8270" end="8282" title="Miaphysitism" label="Miaphysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711500" start="8285" end="8310" title="Chalcedonian Christianity" label="Chalcedonian Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="8421" end="8441" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048730" start="8445" end="8474" title="Non-Chalcedonian Christianity" label="Non-Chalcedonian Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25382355" start="8477" end="8490" title="Barsanuphians" label="Barsanuphians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59475" wikidata="Q238459" url="?curid=59475" title="Monothelitism">
<text>Monothelitism, or monotheletism was a theological doctrine in Christianity that was proposed in the 7th century, but was ultimately rejected by the sixth ecumenical council. It held Christ as having only one will and was thus contrary to dyothelitism, the Christological doctrine accepted by most Christian denominations, which holds Christ as having two wills (divine and human). Historically, &quot;monothelitism&quot; was closely related to monoenergism, a theological doctrine that holds Jesus Christ as having only one energy. Both doctrines were at the center of Christological disputes during the 7th century.

Monothelitism is from . Theological notions related to the &quot;oneness&quot; of Christ&#x27;s will emerged as a result of some earlier Christological controversies that were related to monophysitism as formulated by Eutyches (d. 456) and miaphysitism as formulated by non-Chalcedonian followers of Cyril of Alexandria (d. 444). Since the notion of Christ&#x27;s &quot;one nature&quot; implied the &quot;oneness&quot; of his will, ecclesiastical and political elites of the Eastern Roman Empire tried during the 7th century to promote monothelitism as a unifying doctrine that would reconcile divided Christian factions. In spite of strong imperial support, those attempts failed, and monothelitism was consequently rejected and denounced as heresy in 680–681 at the Third Council of Constantinople, the sixth ecumenical council.

Monothelitism is still today taught by some Christian philosophers, including William Lane Craig and J. P. Moreland, however the dyothelite view is mainstream in all major branches of Christianity. This view is today associated with Social Trinitarianism.

==Background==
During the 5th century, some regions of the Church were thrown into confusion because of the debates that erupted over the nature of Jesus Christ. Although the Church had already determined that Christ is the son of God, his exact nature remained open to debate. The Church had declared heretical the notion that Jesus is not fully divine in the 4th century (see First Council of Nicaea), during the debates over Arianism, and had declared that he is God the Son who became human. However, in arguing that he is both God and man, there then emerged a dispute over exactly how the human and divine natures of Christ actually exist within the person of Christ.

The Christological definition of Chalcedon, as accepted by the Eastern Orthodox, Catholic, Anglican, Lutheran, and Reformed churches, is that Christ remains in two distinct natures, yet these two natures come together within his one hypostasis. More simply, Christ is known as &quot;both fully human and fully Divine, one in being with the Father&quot;. This position was opposed by the Monophysites who held that Christ possesses one nature only. The term Monophysitism of which Eutychianism is one type, held that the human and divine natures of Christ were fused into one new single (&quot;mono&quot;) nature. As described by Eutyches, his human nature was &quot;dissolved like a drop of honey in the sea&quot;, and therefore his nature is really divine. This is distinct from Miaphysitism, which holds that, after the union, Christ is in one theanthropic (human-divine) nature and is generated from the union of two natures. The two are thus united without separation, without confusion, and without alteration, and with each having a particularity. Miaphysitism is the christological doctrine of the Oriental Orthodox churches.

Nevertheless, the resultant debates led the Chalcedonians to accuse the non-Chalcedonians of teaching Christ&#x27;s humanity to be of a different kind from our own. Meanwhile, the non-Chalcedonians accused the Chalcedonians of espousing a form of Nestorianism, a rejected doctrine that held that Jesus Christ was two distinct subsistences.

This internal division was dangerous for the Byzantine Empire, which was under constant threat from external enemies, especially as many of the areas most likely to be lost to the empire were the regions that were in favour of Monophysitism, and who considered the religious hierarchy at Constantinople to be heretics only interested in crushing their faith. In these provinces, the non-Chalcedonians were far more numerous than the Chalcedonians. In Egypt for instance, some 30,000 Greeks of Chalcedonian persuasion were ranged against some five million Coptic non-Chalcedonians. Meanwhile, Syria was divided between Chalcedonianism and Jacobitism, and Mesopotamia between Jacobitism and Nestorianism, while the religion of Armenia was wholly Cyrilline Non-Chalcedonian, and Palestine fully adhered to Chalcedonianism. Consequently, the &quot;Monothelite&quot; teaching emerged as a compromise position. The Byzantine emperor Heraclius tried to unite all of the various factions within the empire with this new formula that was more inclusive and more elastic.

That approach was needed to win over the non-Chalcedonians since they already believed that Christ has a single nature and so necessarily believed that he holds a single will. However, it was unclear whether the Chalcedonians should believe in Christ&#x27;s human and divine energy and/or will as well as his human and divine nature because the ecumenical councils had made no ruling on that subject. A ruling for the new doctrine would provide common ground for the non-Chalcedonians and the Chalcedonians to come together, as the non-Chalcedonians could agree that Jesus has two natures if he has only one will, and some Chalcedonians could agree that Jesus has one will if he has two natures.

==First attempt: Doctrine of one energy==

Patriarch Sergius I of Constantinople was the driving force behind this doctrine, with the full blessing of Emperor Heraclius. Coming to the imperial throne in 610, the patriarch had long since converted the emperor to the new doctrine as by 622, Heraclius had communicated with Bishop Paul of Armenia where the emperor asserted that the energy, or the active force, of Christ was single. That doctrine of &quot;monoenergism&quot; was the precursor of monotheletism.

Heraclius&#x27;s interest then focused on Armenia, and it was probably then that the emperor decided to use monoenergism as a political weapon to reconcile the Non-Chalcedonian Church of Armenia with the Imperial Church. To help bring that about, a synod was held in 622 at Theodosiopolis, called the Synod of Garin, where monoenergism was discussed. Over the next few years Heraclius was preoccupied with his prosecution of the war against the Sassanids, but by 626, he had issued a decree to Arcadius, Bishop of Cyprus, requesting him to teach the doctrine of &quot;one hegumenic energy&quot;. By all accounts, that was met with notable success, particularly as there was then a large colony of Armenians on the island, which encouraged Heraclius to attempt to seek a wider approval of his compromise. In 626, he asked Patriarch Sergius to approach Cyrus, Bishop of Phasis, to secure his cooperation.

With the successful conclusion to the Persian War, Heraclius could devote more time to promoting his compromise, which was now more urgent because of the administration of the recovered monophysite (also referred to as &quot;non-Chalcedonian&quot; for rejecting of that particular council) provinces of Syria and Egypt. In 629, a meeting took place between the emperor and Athanasius the Jacobite at Hierapolis. An agreement was struck in which the Jacobites were to return to the Imperial Church on the basis of the single energy doctrine, and Athanasius was to be made Patriarch of Antioch. In 630, Bishop Cyrus was made Patriarch of Alexandria, who soon won over another non-Chalcedonian group. Very soon, three of the five patriarchates (Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria) were teaching Christ&#x27;s &quot;one theandric energy&quot;.

Not everyone was convinced, particularly a monk of Palestine named Sophronius, who believed that there was something unsound in the doctrine and so became the champion of dyothelitism, the doctrine of the two wills of Christ. He was concerned that for the sake of ecclesiastical unity, doctrinal expressions were being compromised. For the first few years, Patriarch Sergius of Constantinople managed to keep him silent, but when Sophronius was appointed as Patriarch of Jerusalem in 634, he used his newfound position of authority to challenge the validity of the doctrine of monoenergism.

Determined to prevent that formidable challenge to his Christological compromise, Sergius wrote to Pope Honorius I (625–638) at Rome to ask him to endorse a position that Church unity should not be endangered by having any discussions or disputes over whether Christ had one energy or two. Sergius added that the doctrine of two energies could lead to the erroneous belief that Jesus has two conflicting wills. Honorius&#x27;s reply in 635 endorsed that view that all discussions should cease and agreed that Jesus has only one will, not two conflicting wills, since Jesus assumed not the vitiated human nature, tainted by Adam&#x27;s fall, but human nature as it existed prior to Adam&#x27;s fall. In the meantime the &quot;epistola synodica&quot; of Sophronius appeared, the outcome of the Synod of Cyprus. It attempted to show that the new doctrine was inconsistent with orthodoxy. Sophronius declared that it was nothing more than a bastardised form of monophysitism, which went against the hard-fought achievements at Chalcedon. Suddenly, support for the doctrine began to subside, and soon, former supporters were busy finding flaws and inconsistencies in the proposal. Soon, Sergius and Heraclius abandoned it as a doctrine.

==Second attempt: Doctrine of one will==

However, Sergius and the emperor refused to give up. Three years later, the patriarch came up with a slightly-modified formula, which Heraclius released as the &quot;Ecthesis&quot; in 638. The edict was considered to be the official response to Sophronius&#x27;s letter. It forbade all mention of Christ possessing one or two energies; instead, it now proclaimed that Christ has two natures but a single . This did not deny Christ human volition, but insisted that this volition could never be in opposition to the divine will; but the opponents of one will misinterpreted the doctrine as denying Christ any human volition whatever. Sophronius had died before the release of the new doctrine, and his replacement, Bishop Sergius of Jaffa, as Patriarch Abraham I of Jerusalem, approved the modified formula. Sergius died by the end of 638, and his replacement, Pyrrhus, was also a devoted monothelite and a close friend of Heraclius. The two remaining patriarchs in the East also gave their approval to the doctrine now referred to as monothelitism and so it looked as if Heraclius would finally heal the divisions in the imperial church.

Unfortunately, he had not counted on the popes at Rome. During the same year, 638, Pope Honorius I had died as well. His successor Pope Severinus (640) condemned the &quot;Ecthesis&quot; outright and so was forbidden his seat until 640. His successor, Pope John IV (640–42), also rejected the doctrine completely, leading to a major schism between the eastern and western halves of the Chalcedonian Church. When news reached Heraclius of the Pope&#x27;s condemnation, he was already old and ill, and the news only hastened his death. He declared with his dying breath that the controversy was all due to Sergius and that the patriarch had pressured him to give his unwilling approval to the &quot;Ecthesis&quot;.

==Conflict with Rome==
This state of schism remained for the next few years. The death of Heraclius in 641 had thrown the political situation in Constantinople into chaos, and his young grandson Constans II (641–668) succeeded him. Meanwhile, in Africa, a monk, Maximus the Confessor, carried on a furious campaign against monothelitism, and in 646, he convinced the African councils to draw up a manifesto against the doctrine, which they forwarded to the new pope, Theodore I (642–649), who, in turn, wrote to Patriarch Paul II of Constantinople to outline the heretical nature of monothelitism. Paul, another devoted monothelite, replied in a letter directing the pope to adhere to the doctrine of one will. Theodore, in turn, excommunicated the patriarch in 649 and declared Paul a heretic.

Constans II was only 17 and was indifferent to the religious debates convulsing the Church. However, he was concerned about the effect that the debate had on the Roman Empire and so he issued an imperial edict, the Type of Constans. The edict made it illegal to discuss in any manner Christ possessing either one or two wills or one or two energies. He declared that the whole controversy was to be forgotten: &quot;the scheme which existed before the strife arose shall be maintained, as it would have been if no such disputation had arisen&quot;. However, he would soon discover that the controversy would not die down.

In Rome and the West, opposition to monothelitism was reaching fever pitch, and the &quot;Type&quot; of Constans did nothing to defuse the situation but indeed made it worse by implying that either doctrine was as good as the other. Theodore planned the Lateran Council of 649 to condemn the &quot;Ecthesis&quot; but died before he could convene it, which his successor, Pope Martin I (649–653), did. The council condemned the &quot;Ecthesis&quot; but also the &quot;Type&quot;. After the synod, Pope Martin wrote to Constans to inform him of its conclusions and to require him to condemn both the monothelite doctrine and his own &quot;Type&quot;. However, Constans was not the sort of emperor to take such a rebuke of imperial authority lightly.

Even while the Lateran Synod was sitting, Olympius arrived as the new exarch of Ravenna, with instructions to ensure that the &quot;Type&quot; was followed in Italy and to use whatever means necessary to ensure that the Pope adhered to it. He was unable to complete his mission and soon died, but his successor, Theodore I Calliopas, seized Pope Martin and abducted him to Constantinople, where he was imprisoned and tortured before he was condemned for breaking the imperial commands and banished before he died from his treatment at the hands of the emperor.

The emperor continued to persecute any who spoke out against monothelitism, including Maximus the Confessor and a number of his disciples. Maximus lost his tongue and his right hand in an effort to have him recant. Nevertheless, his brutality had an effect, with the patriarchs, including the popes, remaining silent throughout the remainder of his reign.

==Condemnation==
After Constans&#x27;s death in 668, the throne passed to his son Constantine IV. Pope Vitalian (657–672), who had hosted the visit of Constans II to Rome in 663, almost immediately declared himself for the doctrine of the two wills of Christ. In response, Patriarch Theodore I of Constantinople and Macarius, Patriarch of Antioch, both pressed Constantine to take some measures against the pope. Constantine, however, decided to let the monothelite question be decided entirely by a church council.

He asked if the pope (now Pope Agatho, 678–681) would be willing to send delegates to an ecumenical council to be held at Constantinople so that the question could be firmly ended. Pope Agatho agreed but first held a preliminary synod at Rome 680 to obtain the opinion of the western theologians. Other synods were also held at Milan and at the Council of Hatfield in 680, convoked by Archbishop Theodore of Canterbury. All of the western synods condemned monothelitism, and a report of the Roman synod&#x27;s acts was sent to Constantinople, along with the western delegates to the council.

The council met from 680 to 681. Apart from the Roman representatives, it also hosted representatives from the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Jerusalem, and the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch were present in person. With the exception of two individuals, it condemned the monothelite doctrine as one that diminished the fullness of Christ&#x27;s humanity and asserted dyothelitism to be the true doctrine, with Christ possessing &quot;two natural wills and two natural energies, without division, alteration, separation or confusion&quot;. It also anathematised the chief representatives of the discredited doctrine, including Pope Honorius. The churches condemned at Constantinople included the Oriental Orthodox Churches and the Maronite Church, but the Oriental Orthodox have denied that they ever held the monothelite view and describe their own Christology as Miaphysite, and the Maronites accept the Chalcedonian formula since they are in communion with the Roman Catholic Church. That brought to an end the controversy over monothelitism.

==Controversy over Honorius I==
A side issue over the statements of Pope Honorius I and his condemnation by the council arose in discussions concerning papal infallibility. In the view of historians such as John Bagnell Bury, Honorius, with a traditional Latin dislike for dialectics, did not fully comprehend the issues. The question of Monoenergism, as presented by Patriarch Sergius, seemed to Honorius to be a matter of grammar, rather than theology. Though he used the expression &quot;one will&quot;, he was no Monothelite, for he placed &quot;one energy&quot; and &quot;two energies&quot; on exactly the same footing. Further, his second letter to Sergius was by and large orthodox. Maximus the Confessor, in his &quot;Disputation with Pyrrhus&quot;, interprets the statement &quot;one will&quot; as referring to the integrity of Christ&#x27;s human will, in contrast to the fallen human will, which seeks diverse and contradictory goods.

The Third Council of Constantinople posthumously anathematised Honorius as a heretic: &quot;And with these we define that there shall be expelled from the holy Church of God and anathematized Honorius who was some time Pope of Old Rome, because of what we found written by him to Sergius, that in all respects he followed his view and confirmed his impious doctrines&quot; (13th session) and &quot;To Honorius, the heretic, anathema!&quot; (16th session).

However, Pope Leo II&#x27;s letter of confirmation of the Council interprets the council as intending to criticise Honorius not for error of belief but for &quot;imprudent economy of silence&quot;. Leo&#x27;s letter stated: &quot;We anathematize the inventors of the new error, that is, Theodore, Sergius... and also Honorius, who did not attempt to sanctify this Apostolic Church with the teaching of Apostolic tradition, but by profane treachery permitted its purity to be polluted.&quot;

== Contemporary Monothelitism ==
Some contemporary theologians such as Alvin Plantinga have controversially argued that the council of Chalcedon allowed for two positions on Christology, an abstractist view where Jesus only assumed the property of being a human, while in the concretist view he assumed concrete human nature, with a human soul, mind and will. He argued that the abstractist position implies monothelitism within the incarnation, while the concretist position dyothelitism. This monothelite view has been also held by J. P. Moreland and William Lane Craig. Craig has offered his own of Christology, where he argues that Jesus did not assume a human soul in the incarnation, but the soul of Jesus was instead the Logos, thus teaching that the will and rationality of Christ was divine. This is similar to the teaching of Apollinarius, whose Christology was condemned as a heresy by the first council of Constantinople. However, they sought to revise the doctrines of Apollinarus by arguing that Christ in eternity already possessed those properties necessary for human personality in archetypal form. However, these new Monothelite proposals are highly controversial, and all major branches of Christendom affirm dyothelitism as in the statements of the third council of Constantinople.

William Lane Craig&#x27;s social trinitarian model in which all three persons are to be distinguished by having their own centers of consciousness and will leads one to views will as an attribute of hypostasis instead of nature, thus implying monothelitism.

==See also==
* Apollinarism
* Chalcedonian Christianity
* Impeccability
* Monergism
* Monoenergism
* Papal profession of faith (late 7th century)

== Citations ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* &quot;&quot; (&quot;The Primacy and Infallibility of the Sovereign Pontiffs, 1873&quot;) at the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q238459" start="0" end="13" title="Monothelitism" label="Monothelitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238459" start="18" end="31" title="Monothelitism" label="monotheletism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="38" end="49" title="Christian theology" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="62" end="74" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="182" end="188" title="Jesus Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q364340" start="208" end="212" title="will (philosophy)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117162" start="238" end="250" title="dyothelitism" label="dyothelitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="256" end="270" title="Christology" label="Christological"/>
<link wikidata="Q951372" start="444" end="456" title="monoenergism" label="monoenergism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068193" start="524" end="530" title="Energeia" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="805" end="818" title="monophysitism" label="monophysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q372763" start="836" end="844" title="Eutyches" label="Eutyches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764554" start="858" end="870" title="miaphysitism" label="miaphysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048730" start="888" end="904" title="non-Chalcedonian" label="non-Chalcedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="918" end="937" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1093" end="1113" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="1361" end="1367" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208037" start="1386" end="1417" title="Council of Constantinople (680-681)" label="Third Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233528" start="1528" end="1546" title="William Lane Craig" label="William Lane Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106703" start="1551" end="1565" title="J. P. Moreland" label="J. P. Moreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550896" start="1683" end="1704" title="Social trinitarianism" label="Social Trinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="2085" end="2108" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="2135" end="2143" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141210" start="2173" end="2184" title="God the Son" label="God the Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037472" start="2386" end="2424" title="Chalcedonian Creed" label="Christological definition of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="2445" end="2461" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2463" end="2471" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="2473" end="2481" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="2483" end="2491" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="2497" end="2514" title="Reformed faith" label="Reformed churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q651118" start="2615" end="2625" title="Hypostasis (philosophy)" label="hypostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="2769" end="2781" title="Monophysites" label="Monophysites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590543" start="2862" end="2874" title="Eutychianism" label="Eutychianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q372763" start="3011" end="3019" title="Eutyches" label="Eutyches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764554" start="3162" end="3174" title="Miaphysitism" label="Miaphysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="3487" end="3504" title="Oriental Orthodox" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="3763" end="3775" title="Nestorianism" label="Nestorianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3902" end="3918" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="4145" end="4159" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4308" end="4313" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="4412" end="4418" title="Copts" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="4511" end="4522" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="4766" end="4783" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="4784" end="4793" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="5265" end="5284" title="ecumenical councils" label="ecumenical councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="5660" end="5669" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q142983" start="5670" end="5697" title="Sergius I of Constantinople" label="Sergius I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5946" end="5961" title="Paul of Armenia" label="Paul of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q951372" start="6072" end="6084" title="monoenergism" label="monoenergism"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="6377" end="6382" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q122803" start="6402" end="6416" title="Theodosiopolis (Armenia)" label="Theodosiopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="6573" end="6582" title="Sassanids" label="Sassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="6642" end="6648" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q378091" start="6996" end="7002" title="Phasis (town)" label="Phasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428276" start="7432" end="7442" title="Hierapolis" label="Hierapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q865026" start="7603" end="7623" title="Patriarch of Antioch" label="Patriarch of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528423" start="7640" end="7645" title="Cyrus of Alexandria" label="Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622216" start="7655" end="7678" title="Patriarch of Alexandria" label="Patriarch of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="7928" end="7937" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q317773" start="7944" end="7954" title="Sophronius of Jerusalem" label="Sophronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q877458" start="8335" end="8357" title="Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Patriarch of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q170502" start="8568" end="8583" title="Pope Honorius I" label="Pope Honorius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="9343" end="9352" title="orthodoxy" label="orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286697" start="10604" end="10611" title="Patriarch Pyrrhus I of Constantinople" label="Pyrrhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="10924" end="10929" title="popes" label="popes"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="10933" end="10937" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q199486" start="11014" end="11028" title="Pope Severinus" label="Pope Severinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199491" start="11135" end="11147" title="Pope John IV" label="Pope John IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="11216" end="11222" title="schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41613" start="11792" end="11803" title="Constans II (Byzantine Empire)" label="Constans II"/>
<link wikidata="Q206842" start="11859" end="11880" title="Maximus the Confessor" label="Maximus the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q104244" start="12064" end="12074" title="Pope Theodore I" label="Theodore I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273458" start="12109" end="12144" title="Patriarch Paul II of Constantinople" label="Patriarch Paul II of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="12327" end="12341" title="excommunicated" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="12555" end="12567" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284645" start="12597" end="12602" title="edict" label="edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4457982" start="12608" end="12624" title="Type of Constans" label="Type of Constans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642234" start="13270" end="13292" title="Lateran Council of 649" label="Lateran Council of 649"/>
<link wikidata="Q172390" start="13387" end="13400" title="Pope Martin I" label="Pope Martin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q887349" start="13807" end="13815" title="Olympius (exarch)" label="Olympius"/>
<link wikidata="Q694740" start="13835" end="13852" title="exarchate of Ravenna" label="exarch of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="13924" end="13929" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111163" start="14077" end="14097" title="Theodore I Calliopas" label="Theodore I Calliopas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41605" start="14766" end="14780" title="Constantine IV" label="Constantine IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q199612" start="14782" end="14795" title="Pope Vitalian" label="Pope Vitalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290940" start="14967" end="14995" title="Theodore I of Constantinople" label="Theodore I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q104467" start="15227" end="15238" title="Pope Agatho" label="Pope Agatho"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="15529" end="15534" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176417" start="15546" end="15565" title="Council of Hatfield" label="Council of Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q504529" start="15597" end="15619" title="Theodore of Tarsus" label="Theodore of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117162" start="16170" end="16182" title="dyothelitism" label="dyothelitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="16533" end="16541" title="Maronite" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764554" start="16667" end="16677" title="Miaphysite" label="Miaphysite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16766" end="16787" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="17001" end="17020" title="papal infallibility" label="papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q502912" start="17056" end="17073" title="John Bagnell Bury" label="John Bagnell Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="17122" end="17132" title="dialectics" label="dialectics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208037" start="17800" end="17831" title="Third Council of Constantinople" label="Third Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q355201" start="18816" end="18831" title="Alvin Plantinga" label="Alvin Plantinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106703" start="19279" end="19293" title="J. P. Moreland" label="J. P. Moreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233528" start="19298" end="19316" title="William Lane Craig" label="William Lane Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q367946" start="19581" end="19593" title="Apollinaris of Laodicea" label="Apollinarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="19646" end="19677" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="first council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117162" start="19973" end="19985" title="dyothelitism" label="dyothelitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550896" start="20074" end="20092" title="Social trinitarianism" label="social trinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194234" start="20322" end="20334" title="Apollinarism" label="Apollinarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711500" start="20337" end="20362" title="Chalcedonian Christianity" label="Chalcedonian Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006204" start="20365" end="20378" title="Impeccability" label="Impeccability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734125" start="20381" end="20390" title="Monergism" label="Monergism"/>
<link wikidata="Q951372" start="20393" end="20405" title="Monoenergism" label="Monoenergism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132451" start="20408" end="20452" title="Papal profession of faith (late 7th century)" label="Papal profession of faith (late 7th century)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59477" wikidata="Q2711500" url="?curid=59477" title="Chalcedonian Christianity">
<text>Chalcedonian Christianity is a term referring to the branches of Christianity that accept and uphold theological resolutions of the Council of Chalcedon, the fourth ecumenical council, held in AD 451. Chalcedonian Christianity accepts the Christological Definition of Chalcedon, a Christian doctrine concerning the union of two natures (divine and human) in one hypostasis of Jesus Christ, who is thus acknowledged as a single person (prosopon). Chalcedonian Christianity also accepts the Chalcedonian confirmation of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, thus acknowledging the commitment of Chalcedonism to Nicene Christianity.

Chalcedonian Christology is upheld by Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and some branches of Protestantism, and thus comprises the majority of Christianity.

==Chalcedonian Christology==

Those present at the Council of Chalcedon accepted Trinitarianism and the concept of hypostatic union, and rejected Arianism, Modalism, and Ebionism as heresies (which had also been rejected at the First Council of Nicaea in AD 325). Those present at the council also rejected the Christological doctrines of the Nestorians, Eutychians, and Monophysites.

The Chalcedonian doctrine of the Hypostatic Union states that Jesus Christ has two natures, divine and human, possessing a complete human nature while remaining one divine hypostasis. It asserts that the natures are unmixed and unconfused, with the human nature of Christ being assumed at the incarnation without any change to the divine nature. It also states that while Jesus Christ has assumed a true human nature, body and soul, which shall remain hypostatically united to his divine nature for all of eternity, he is nevertheless not a human person, as human personhood would imply a second created hypostasis existing within Jesus Christ and violating the unity of the God-man.

The Hypostatic Union was also viewed as one nature in Roman Christianity by a minority around this time. Single-nature ideas such as Apollinarism and Eutychianism were taught to explain some of the seeming contradictions in Chalcedonian Christianity.

==References==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==See also==
*Non-Chalcedonian Christianity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2711500" start="0" end="25" title="Chalcedonian Christianity" label="Chalcedonian Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="65" end="77" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="101" end="112" title="Christian theology" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="132" end="152" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="165" end="183" title="ecumenical council" label="ecumenical council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037472" start="239" end="277" title="Christological Definition of Chalcedon" label="Christological Definition of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="281" end="299" title="Christian doctrine" label="Christian doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452745" start="315" end="320" title="Hypostatic union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991529" start="324" end="335" title="dyophysitism" label="two natures"/>
<link wikidata="Q651118" start="362" end="372" title="Hypostasis (Christianity)" label="hypostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="376" end="388" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250703" start="435" end="443" title="Prosopon (Christology)" label="prosopon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="522" end="553" title="Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed" label="Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965829" start="608" end="627" title="Nicene Christianity" label="Nicene Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="668" end="679" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="681" end="698" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="721" end="734" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="867" end="881" title="Trinitarianism" label="Trinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452745" start="901" end="917" title="hypostatic union" label="hypostatic union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="932" end="940" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856561" start="942" end="950" title="Modalism" label="Modalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208171" start="956" end="964" title="Ebionism" label="Ebionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="968" end="976" title="heresies" label="heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="1014" end="1037" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="1129" end="1139" title="Nestorianism" label="Nestorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q372763" start="1141" end="1151" title="Eutyches" label="Eutychians"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="1157" end="1169" title="Monophysitism" label="Monophysites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452745" start="1205" end="1221" title="Hypostatic union" label="Hypostatic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452745" start="1344" end="1354" title="Hypostasis of Christ" label="hypostasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1897" end="1907" title="Hypostatic union#Through history" label="one nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1911" end="1929" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194234" start="1990" end="2002" title="Apollinarism" label="Apollinarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590543" start="2007" end="2019" title="Eutychianism" label="Eutychianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048730" start="2175" end="2204" title="Non-Chalcedonian Christianity" label="Non-Chalcedonian Christianity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59480" wikidata="Q1755360" url="?curid=59480" title="Presidio of San Francisco">
<text>The Presidio of San Francisco (originally, El Presidio Real de San Francisco or The Royal Fortress of Saint Francis) is a park and former U.S. Army post on the northern tip of the San Francisco Peninsula in San Francisco, California, and is part of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area.

It had been a fortified location since September 17, 1776, when New Spain established the presidio to gain a foothold in Alta California and the San Francisco Bay. It passed to Mexico in 1820, which in turn passed to the United States in 1848. As part of a military reduction program under the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) process from 1988, Congress voted to end the Presidio&#x27;s status as an active military installation of the U.S. Army. On October 1, 1994, it was transferred to the National Park Service, ending 219 years of military use and beginning its next phase of mixed commercial and public use.

In 1996, the United States Congress created the Presidio Trust to oversee and manage the interior 80% of the park&#x27;s lands, with the National Park Service managing the coastal 20%. In a first-of-its-kind structure, Congress mandated that the Presidio Trust make the Presidio financially self-sufficient by 2013. The Presidio achieved the goal in 2005, eight years ahead of the deadline.

The Presidio is at the southern end of the Golden Gate Bridge, and is crossed by the bridge approach road.
The park has many wooded areas, hills, and scenic vistas overlooking the Golden Gate itself, the Bridge, San Francisco Bay, and the Pacific Ocean. It was recognized as a California Historical Landmark in 1933 and as a National Historic Landmark in 1962.

== History ==

===Military use===

The Presidio was originally a Spanish fort sited by Juan Bautista de Anza on March 28, 1776, built by a party led by José Joaquín Moraga later that year. The limestone used to build the presidio was mined by Ohlones at the Rockaway Quarry. In 1783, the Presidio&#x27;s garrison numbered only 33 men. Upon Mexican independence from Spain in 1821, it was briefly operated as a Mexican fortification. The Presidio was seized by the U.S. military at the start of the Mexican–American War in 1846. It was officially reopened by the Americans in 1848 and became home to several army headquarters and units, the last being the United States 6th Army. Several famous U.S. generals, such as William Tecumseh Sherman, George Henry Thomas, and John J. Pershing, made their homes here.

During its long history, the Presidio was involved in most of America&#x27;s military engagements in the Pacific Rim. Importantly, it was the assembly point for army forces that invaded the Philippines during the Spanish–American War, America&#x27;s first significant military engagement in the region.

Beginning in the 1890s, the Presidio was home to the Letterman Army Medical Center (LAMC), named in 1911 for Jonathan Letterman, the medical director of the Civil War–era Army of the Potomac. LAMC provided thousands of war-wounded with high-quality medical care during every US foreign conflict of the 20th century.

One of the last two remaining cemeteries within the city&#x27;s limits is the San Francisco National Cemetery. Among the military personnel interred there are General Frederick Funston, hero of the Spanish–American War, Philippine–American War, and commanding officer of the Presidio at the time of the 1906 earthquake; and General Irvin McDowell, a Union Army commander who lost the First Battle of Bull Run.

The Marine Hospital operated a cemetery for merchant seamen approximately from the hospital property. Based on city municipal records, historians estimate that the cemetery was used from 1885 to 1912. As part of the &quot;Trails Forever&quot; initiative, the Parks Conservancy, the National Park Service, and the Presidio Trust partnered to build a walking trail along the south side of the site featuring interpretive signage about its history.
The Presidio was the home of the Western Defense Command headquarters during World War II. It was here that Lieutenant General John L. DeWitt signed 108 Civilian Exclusion Orders and directives for the internment of Japanese Americans under the authority of Executive Order 9066 signed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt on February 19, 1942.

The Presidio sent its few remaining units to war for the last time in 1991 for Desert Storm, the First Gulf War. The role of the Sixth Army was the management of training and coordinating deployment of Army National Guard and U.S. Army Reserve units in the Western U.S. for Operation Desert Storm.

===Preservation===
After a hard-fought battle, the Presidio averted being sold at auction and came under the management of the Presidio Trust, a U.S. government corporation established by an act of Congress in 1996.

The Presidio Trust now manages most of the park in partnership with the National Park Service. The trust has jurisdiction over the interior of 80 percent of the Presidio, including nearly all its historic structures. The National Park Service manages coastal areas. Primary law enforcement throughout the Presidio is the jurisdiction of the United States Park Police.

One of the main objectives of the Presidio Trust&#x27;s program was achieving financial self-sufficiency by fiscal year 2013, which was reached in 2006. Immediately after its inception, the trust began preparing rehabilitation plans for the park. Many areas had to be decontaminated before being prepared for public use.

The Presidio Trust Act calls for the &quot;preservation of the cultural and historic integrity of the Presidio for public use.&quot; The Act also requires that the Presidio Trust be financially self-sufficient by 2013. These imperatives have resulted in numerous conflicts between the need to maximize income by leasing historic buildings and permitting public use despite most structures being rented privately. Further differences have arisen from the divergent needs to preserve the integrity of the National Historic Landmark District in the face of new construction, competing pressures for natural habitat restoration, and requirements for commercial purposes that impede public access.

Crissy Field, a former airfield, has undergone extensive restoration and is now a popular recreational area. It borders on the San Francisco Marina in the east and on the Golden Gate Bridge in the west.

The park has a large inventory of approximately 800 buildings, many of them historical. By 2004, about 50% of the buildings on park grounds had been restored and partially remodeled. The Presidio Trust has contracted commercial real estate management companies to help attract and retain residential and commercial tenants. The total capacity is estimated at 5,000 residents when all buildings have been rehabilitated. Among the Presidio&#x27;s residents is The Bay School of San Francisco, a private, coeducational college preparatory school located in the central Main Post area. Others include The Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, Tides Foundation, the Arion Press, Sports Basement Presidio, and The Walt Disney Family Museum, a museum in the memory of Walt Disney. Many various commercial enterprises also lease buildings on the Presidio.

The Thoreau Center for Sustainability preserved sections of the Letterman Army Hospital .

The Presidio of San Francisco is the only site in a national recreation area with an extensive residential leasing program.

The Presidio has four creeks that park stewards and volunteers are restoring to expand their riparian habitats&#x27; former extents. The creeks are Lobos and Dragonfly creeks, El Polin Spring, and Coyote Gulch.

===1999 – present===

The Trust entered a significant agreement with Lucasfilm to build a new facility called the Letterman Digital Arts Center (LDAC), which is now Lucasfilm&#x27;s corporate headquarters. The site replaced portions of what was the Letterman Hospital. George Lucas won the development rights for of the Presidio, in June 1999, after beating out several rival plans, including a leading proposal by the Shorenstein Company. LDAC replaced the former Lucasfilm headquarters in San Rafael. The $300 million development includes nearly of office space and a underground parking garage with a capacity of 2,500 employees. Lucasfilm&#x27;s Industrial Light &amp; Magic, Lucas Licensing, and Lucas Online divisions reside at the site. George Lucas&#x27;s proposal included plans for a high-tech Presidio museum and a &quot;Great Lawn&quot; that is now open to the public.

In 2007, Donald Fisher, founder of the Gap clothing stores and former board member of the Presidio Trust, announced a plan to build a museum tentatively named the Contemporary Art Museum of the Presidio, to house his art collection. Due to opposition, Fisher withdrew his plans to build the museum in the Presidio and instead donated the art to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art before he died in 2009.
As the Doyle Drive viaduct was deemed seismically unsafe and obsolete, construction started on the demolition of Doyle Drive in 2008 to replace the structure with a flat, broad-lane highway with a tunnel through the bluffs above Crissy Field, called the Presidio Parkway. The project cost $1 billion and was scheduled to be completed by 2016.

The Trust plans to create a promenade that will link the Lombard Gate and the new Lucasfilm campus to the Main Post and, ultimately, to the Golden Gate Bridge. The promenade is part of a trail expansion plan that will add of new pathways and eight scenic overlooks throughout the park.

In October 2008, artist Andy Goldsworthy constructed the first of a series of sculptures in the Presidio, the &quot;Spire&quot;. It is tall and located near the Arguello Gate. It represents the tree replanting effort that has been underway at the Presidio. &quot;Spire&quot; was followed by &quot;Wood Line&quot; in 2011, &quot;Tree Fall&quot; in 2013, and &quot;Earth Wall&quot; in 2014.

In 2010, a trampoline park called House of Air was built using an old aircraft hangar.

As of 2023, it is estimated that there may be at least four coyote families living in the park.

== Presidio visitor centers ==
The visitor centers are operated by the National Park Service:
* Presidio Visitor Center: offers changing exhibits about the Presidio, information about sights and activities in the park, and a bookstore. The Presidio Transit Center is located adjacent to this visitor center and is served by the Presidio Go Shuttle and Muni bus routes.
* Battery Chamberlin: seacoast defense museum and artillery display at Baker Beach built in 1904.
* Fort Point: 1861 brick and granite fortification under the Golden Gate Bridge. The visitor center, open on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, offers video orientations, guided tours, self-guiding materials, exhibits, and a bookstore.
* Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary Visitor Center: This center offers hands-on marine-life exhibits and is located in a historic Coast Guard Station at the west end of Crissy Field. The building was used by the Coast Guard from 1890 to 1990.
* Golden Gate Bridge Pavilion: opened May 2012 for the 75th anniversary of the Golden Gate Bridge; the Pavilion is the first visitor center in the history of the Golden Gate Bridge. It is located just east of the southern end of the bridge.
*Hidden Presidio Outdoor Track: begins at Julius Kahn Playground and encircles the valley just below it, of dirt trails, cutbacks, wooden stairs, and various altitudes.

==Crissy Field Center==
Crissy Field Center (former Air Service/Air Corps/Army Air Forces airfield) is an urban environmental education center with programs for schools, public workshops, after-school programs, summer camps, and more. The center is operated by the Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy and overlooks a restored tidal marsh. The facilities include interactive environmental exhibits, a media lab, a resource library, an art workshop, a science lab, a gathering room, a teaching kitchen, a café, and a bookstore. The landscape of Crissy Field was designed by George Hargreaves. The project restored a naturally functioning and sustaining tidal wetland as a habitat for flora and fauna, previously not in the site&#x27;s evidence. It also restored a historic grass airfield that became a culturally significant military airfield between 1919 and 1936. The park at Crissy Field expanded and widened the recreational opportunities of the existing San Francisco shore to a broader number of Presidio residents and visitors.

== Presidio Tunnel Tops ==

A major component of the Presidio&#x27;s park attractions is the Presidio Tunnel Tops, which has created a on top of the tunneled portions of Doyle Drive. The park contains several meadows and walking trails, along with viewpoints for major landmarks such as the Golden Gate Bridge. Negotiations between Caltrans, the San Francisco County Transportation Authority, and the Presidio Trust to finalize the land transfer for the park lasted from 2015 to 2018. The budget for the park is $100 million, funded with public funds from the Presidio Trust and private contributions. The park opened for public use on July 17, 2022.

== Timeline ==

* Pre-1776: The area was Ohlone land.
* 1776: Spanish Captain Juan Bautista de Anza led 193 soldiers, women, and children on a trek from present-day Tubac, Arizona, to San Francisco Bay.
* September 17, 1776: The Presidio began as a Spanish garrison to defend Spain&#x27;s claim to San Francisco Bay and to support Mission Dolores; it was the northernmost outpost of New Spain in the declining Spanish Empire.
* 1794: Castillo de San Joaquin, an artillery emplacement was built above present-day Fort Point, San Francisco, complete with iron or bronze cannon. Six cannons may be seen in the Presidio today.
* 1776–1821: The Presidio was a simple fort made of adobe, brush, and wood. It often was damaged by earthquakes or heavy rains. In 1783, its company was only 33 men. Presidio soldiers&#x27; duties were to support Mission Dolores by controlling Indian workers in the Mission and farming, ranching, and hunting to supply themselves and their families. Support from Spanish authorities in Mexico was minimal.
* 1821: Mexico became independent of Spain. The Presidio received even less support from Mexico. Residents of Alta California, which included the Presidio, debated separating from Mexico.
* January 1827: Minor earthquake in San Francisco; some buildings were damaged extensively.
* 1835: The Presidio garrison, led by Mariano Vallejo, relocated to Sonoma. A small detachment remained at the Presidio, which was in decline.
* 1846: American settlers and adventurers in Sonoma staged the Bear Flag Revolt against Mexican rule. Mariano Vallejo was imprisoned for a brief time. Lieutenant John C. Fremont, a U.S. Army officer, with a small detachment of soldiers and frontiersmen, crossed the Golden Gate in a boat to &quot;capture&quot; the Presidio unresisted. A cannon that Fremont spiked remains on the Presidio today.

* 1846–1848: The U.S. Army occupied the Presidio. The Presidio began a long era directing operations to control and protect Native Americans as headquarters for scattered Army units on the West Coast.
* 1853: Work was begun on Fort Point, which became a fine example of coastal defenses of its time. Fort Point, located at the foot of the Golden Gate in the Presidio, was the keystone of an elaborate network of fortifications to defend San Francisco Bay. These fortifications now reflect 150 years of military concern for the defense of the West Coast.
* 1861–1865: The American Civil War involved the Presidio. Colonel Albert Sydney Johnston protected Union weapons from being taken by Southern sympathizers in San Francisco. Later, he resigned from the Union Army and became a general in the Confederate Army. He was killed at the Battle of Shiloh. The Presidio organized regiments of volunteers for the Civil War and to control Indians in California and Oregon during the absence of federal troops.
* 1869–1870: Major General George Henry Thomas, an American Civil War hero, led the Division of the Pacific. General Thomas died in 1870 and was buried in Troy, New York.
* 1872–1873: Modoc Indian Campaign involved some Presidio troops and command in this significant battle, the last large-scale U.S. Army operation against Native Americans in the Far West.
* 1890–1914: Presidio soldiers became the nation&#x27;s first &quot;park rangers&quot; by patrolling the new Yosemite and Sequoia National Parks.
* 1898–1906: The Presidio became the nation&#x27;s center for assembling, training, and shipping out forces to the Spanish–American War in the Philippine Islands and the subsequent Philippine–American War (Philippine Insurrection). Letterman Army Hospital was modernized and expanded to care for the many wounded and seriously ill soldiers from these campaigns. The Philippine campaign was an early major U.S. military intervention in the Asia/Pacific region. Camp Merriam, located just north of the presidio, was established to train and house volunteers for service during the Spanish-American War.
* 1903: President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Presidio. His honor guard was from the African American &quot;Buffalo Soldier&quot; 9th Cavalry Regiment, then at the Presidio. This regiment took a role in Roosevelt&#x27;s famous charge of San Juan Hill in Cuba.

* 1906: The San Francisco earthquake of April 1906 led to an immediate Army response directed by General Frederick Funston, who had earned the Medal of Honor for his bravery in the Philippines. Army units provided security and fought fires at the direction of the city government. After the fire that resulted from the earthquake, Presidio soldiers gave aid, food, and shelter to refugees. Temporary camps for refugees were set up in the Presidio.
* 1912: Fort Winfield Scott was established in the western part of the Presidio as a coast artillery post and the headquarters of the Artillery District of San Francisco.
* 1914–1916: The Presidio Commander, General John J. Pershing, commanded the Mexican Punitive Expedition to eliminate the threat of Pancho Villa, a Mexican rebel and bandit, who conducted raids across the U.S. border. General Pershing&#x27;s family died in a tragic fire while he was away. As a result of the 1915 fire in General Pershing&#x27;s quarters, the Presidio Fire Department was established as the first fire station staffed 24 hours per day on a military post.
* 1915: Part of the Panama–Pacific International Exposition was located on the Presidio waterfront, which was expanded by a landfill for the purpose. Soldiers supported the Exposition with parades, honor guards, and artillery demonstrations. The Exposition was to celebrate the opening of the Panama Canal.
* 1917–1918: The Presidio rapidly expanded with new cantonments and training areas for World War I. Recruiting, training, and deploying units again become the Presidio&#x27;s role. An officer training camp was located here. Quickly assembled buildings covered the waterfront area, and the railroad track into the Presidio was busy with wartime traffic. During the war, the 30th Infantry Regiment, &quot;San Francisco&#x27;s Own&quot;, whose motto, &quot;OUR COUNTRY NOT OURSELVES&quot;, fought with distinction in World War I as a key fighting element of the 3rd Infantry Division who earned the title &quot;Rock of the Marne&quot;. The 30th Infantry Regiment was frequently based at the Presidio.
* 1918–1920: The Presidio was the center for forming and training the American Expeditionary Force Siberia. This little-remembered force moved into Siberia during the Russian Civil War. The mission of this force changed often. It encountered hostility from another part of the Expeditionary Force, Japan, while fighting bandits and protecting Allied civilians.
* 1920–1932: The Presidio became home to Crissy Field, the major pioneering military aviation field located on the West Coast. Trailbreaking transpacific and transcontinental flights occurred here. At Crissy, future General &quot;Hap&quot; Arnold developed techniques for the new military aviation. Arnold later commanded the Army Air Corps and Army Air Forces in World War II.
* 1941–1946: World War II saw intense activity at the Presidio. It continued as a coordinating headquarters, deployment center, and training site, as it was for most of its existence. The Western Defense Command was responsible for the defense of the West Coast. This included supervising combat in the Aleutian Islands for a time. The Presidio again was crowded with temporary barracks and training facilities. Letterman Army Hospital was filled with casualties. At one point, entire trains filled with war-wounded arrived at the Presidio from the battles of Okinawa and Iwo Jima. A Japanese Language School was set up to train Japanese Americans to be interpreters in the war against Japan. Ironically, some of these soldiers&#x27; families were interned in camps for the rest of the war while they performed bravely in the Pacific.
* 1941–1945: The Commanding General of the Western Defense Command, General John L. DeWitt, responded to public hysteria directed against all Japanese on the West Coast. He recommended removing all Japanese, including citizens, from the Western Seaboard. The Federal Bureau of Investigation and some Western politicians also expressed alarm, although no incidents of sabotage occurred. President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066 on February 19, 1942, to direct removal of ethnic Japanese residents to internment camps.
* 1946: After World War II, the Presidio command was redesignated the Sixth Army under the leadership of General Joseph Stilwell. Again, it was responsible for all U.S. Army forces in the Western U.S., including training, supplies, and deployment. It also was the federal agency to coordinate disaster relief by the military. During this year, President Harry Truman had offered the Presidio as the site for the future United Nations Headquarters. A United Nations Committee visited the Presidio to examine its suitability for the site, but the UN General Assembly ultimately voted in favor of its current New York City location instead.
* 1950–1953: The Korean War tasked the Presidio&#x27;s headquarters and support functions. Letterman Army Hospital was mobilized to care for casualties from the war.
* 1951: The Presidio hosted ceremonies for signing the ANZUS Treaty, a security pact of Australia, New Zealand, and the U.S. The Japan-US security treaty was signed at the Presidio, while the Japanese Peace Treaty was signed in downtown San Francisco.
* 1961–1973: The Presidio filled a supporting role during the Vietnam War. Antiwar demonstrations took place at the Presidio&#x27;s gates.
* 1968: Richard Bunch shot, initiating the Presidio mutiny at the Presidio stockade prison. The XV Corps Deactivated.
* 1969–1974: Letterman Army Hospital (LAMC) was modernized, and Letterman Army Institute of Research (LAIR) was built.
* 1991: The Presidio sent its few remaining units to war for the last time in Desert Storm, the First Gulf War. The role of the Sixth Army was the management of training and coordinating deployment of Army National Guard and U.S. Army Reserve units in the Western U.S. for Operation Desert Storm.
* 1994: Sixth Army was inactivated, and the Presidio closed as an active U.S. Army installation per BRAC. The Presidio was transferred to the National Park Service.
* 1996: Presidio Trust was created to manage the park as part of the Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996 by the 104th United States Congress. 
* 1996–2009: The Internet Archive&#x27;s headquarters were located in Building 116 from its founding until 2009.
* 2001: Letterman Army Hospital was demolished. Later, the Letterman Digital Arts Center was constructed on the site.
* 2005: The Bay School of San Francisco opens in Building 35.
* 2009–2015: Doyle Drive Replacement Project – Demolition of the Doyle Drive viaduct, to be replaced by an eight-lane boulevard, including two pairs of tunnels between Crissy Field and the Main Post and a pair of elevated viaducts, at a total project cost of approximately $1 billion. The original Doyle Drive was demolished on April 27–30, 2012.
* 2017: The William Penn Mott Jr. Presidio Visitor Center was opened to the public and is meant to be a focal point for visitors to explore the of the Presidio grounds. The center is operated by the National Park Service, the Presidio Trust, and the Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy.

==See also==

* 49-Mile Scenic Drive
* Military Districts in Spanish California

* Rancho San Ramon (Amador)
*List of beaches in California
*List of California state parks
* Bibliography of California history

==References==

* National Register of Historic Places Nomination Form and accompanying photos
** 

==External links==

*The National Park Service&#x27;s official site of the Presidio
*The Presidio Trust
*The National Park Service&#x27;s official site of the Golden Gate Recreation Area
*Moraga&#x27;s Account of the Founding of San Francisco
*&quot;Discover Our Shared Heritage&quot; &quot;Early History of the California Coast&quot; National Park Service
*&quot;Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail&quot; National Park Service
*The California State Military Museum, on the Letterman Army Hospital
*El Presidio Digital Media Archive (creative commons-licensed photos, laser scans, panoramas), mainly The Officer&#x27;s Club and Fort Scott, using data from a UC Berkeley/CyArk research partnership
*Fort Point and Presidio Historical Association
*
*Records of the Presidio Trust in the National Archives (Record Group 556)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1755360" start="4" end="29" title="Presidio of San Francisco" label="Presidio of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755360" start="43" end="76" title="Presidio of San Francisco" label="El Presidio Real de San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755360" start="80" end="115" title="Presidio of San Francisco" label="The Royal Fortress of Saint Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="138" end="147" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827082" start="180" end="203" title="San Francisco Peninsula" label="San Francisco Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="207" end="220" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="222" end="232" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456206" start="253" end="289" title="Golden Gate National Recreation Area" label="Golden Gate National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="356" end="365" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="382" end="390" title="presidio" label="presidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="413" end="428" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="437" end="454" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="586" end="614" title="Base Realignment and Closure" label="Base Realignment and Closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="616" end="620" title="Base Realignment and Closure Commission" label="BRAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="732" end="741" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="789" end="810" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="924" end="946" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="1346" end="1364" title="Golden Gate Bridge" label="Golden Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220032" start="1483" end="1494" title="Golden Gate" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="1542" end="1555" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933979" start="1580" end="1610" title="California Historical Landmark" label="California Historical Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="1628" end="1654" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="1704" end="1712" title="Presidio" label="Presidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q727612" start="1752" end="1773" title="Juan Bautista de Anza" label="Juan Bautista de Anza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356932" start="1817" end="1836" title="José Joaquín Moraga" label="José Joaquín Moraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1858" end="1867" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q598406" start="1908" end="1914" title="Ohlone" label="Ohlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q121142006" start="1923" end="1938" title="Rockaway Quarry" label="Rockaway Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="2005" end="2025" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="2031" end="2036" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2129" end="2142" title="United States Army" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="2163" end="2183" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q246612" start="2320" end="2342" title="US Sixth Army" label="United States 6th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="2382" end="2406" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q740330" start="2408" end="2427" title="George Henry Thomas" label="George Henry Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="2433" end="2449" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301187" start="2580" end="2591" title="Pacific Rim" label="Pacific Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2665" end="2676" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="2688" end="2708" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533682" start="2832" end="2861" title="Letterman Army Hospital" label="Letterman Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632831" start="2888" end="2906" title="Jonathan Letterman" label="Jonathan Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2936" end="2945" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q653089" start="2950" end="2969" title="Army of the Potomac" label="Army of the Potomac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414075" start="3174" end="3205" title="San Francisco National Cemetery" label="San Francisco National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497814" start="3263" end="3280" title="Frederick Funston, Sr." label="Frederick Funston"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="3316" end="3339" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="3399" end="3414" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q707558" start="3428" end="3442" title="Irvin McDowell" label="Irvin McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="3480" end="3504" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987773" start="3986" end="4009" title="Western Defense Command" label="Western Defense Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4030" end="4042" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700829" start="4080" end="4094" title="John L. DeWitt" label="John L. DeWitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="4155" end="4187" title="internment of Japanese Americans" label="internment of Japanese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159918" start="4211" end="4231" title="Executive Order 9066" label="Executive Order 9066"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4252" end="4273" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="4376" end="4388" title="Desert Storm" label="Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q689764" start="4499" end="4518" title="Army National Guard" label="Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="4523" end="4540" title="U.S. Army Reserve" label="U.S. Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="4746" end="4768" title="State-owned enterprise" label="government corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005254" start="5154" end="5179" title="United States Park Police" label="United States Park Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q933336" start="6339" end="6345" title="Marina District, San Francisco" label="Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="6369" end="6387" title="Golden Gate Bridge" label="Golden Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070474" start="7003" end="7036" title="Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation" label="Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800861" start="7038" end="7054" title="Tides Foundation" label="Tides Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790763" start="7060" end="7071" title="Arion Press" label="Arion Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415048" start="7103" end="7132" title="The Walt Disney Family Museum" label="The Walt Disney Family Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132998" start="7391" end="7415" title="national recreation area" label="national recreation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663813" start="7612" end="7617" title="Lobos Creek" label="Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305376" start="7622" end="7631" title="Dragonfly Creek" label="Dragonfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351856" start="7640" end="7655" title="El Polin Spring" label="El Polin Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180059" start="7661" end="7673" title="Coyote Gulch (California)" label="Coyote Gulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q242446" start="7745" end="7754" title="Lucasfilm" label="Lucasfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533683" start="7790" end="7819" title="Letterman Digital Arts Center" label="Letterman Digital Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="7945" end="7957" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q631915" start="8167" end="8177" title="San Rafael, California" label="San Rafael"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="8326" end="8354" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q448118" start="8567" end="8580" title="Donald Fisher" label="Donald Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q420822" start="8593" end="8600" title="Gap (clothing)" label="the Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q913672" start="8907" end="8941" title="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art" label="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="8973" end="8984" title="Doyle Drive" label="Doyle Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186096" start="9195" end="9207" title="Crissy Field" label="Crissy Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="9220" end="9236" title="Doyle Drive Replacement Project" label="Presidio Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q357126" start="9621" end="9637" title="Andy Goldsworthy" label="Andy Goldsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124539975" start="9894" end="9903" title="Wood Line" label="Wood Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914641" start="10021" end="10033" title="House of Air" label="House of Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="10243" end="10264" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241517" start="10500" end="10519" title="Presidio Go Shuttle" label="Presidio Go Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140138" start="10524" end="10528" title="San Francisco Municipal Railway" label="Muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869826" start="10543" end="10561" title="Battery Chamberlin" label="Battery Chamberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q684879" start="10612" end="10623" title="Baker Beach" label="Baker Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438659" start="10641" end="10651" title="Fort Point, San Francisco" label="Fort Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617591" start="10872" end="10920" title="Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary" label="Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186096" start="11054" end="11066" title="Crissy Field" label="Crissy Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="11130" end="11148" title="Golden Gate Bridge" label="Golden Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186096" start="11563" end="11582" title="Crissy Field" label="Crissy Field Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096700" start="11591" end="11602" title="United States Army Air Service" label="Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="11603" end="11612" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="11613" end="11628" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="11645" end="11650" title="urban area" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q948732" start="11651" end="11674" title="environmental education" label="environmental education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579459" start="11804" end="11842" title="Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy" label="Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55706997" start="11868" end="11879" title="tidal marsh" label="tidal marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101629" start="12114" end="12131" title="George Hargreaves" label="George Hargreaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="12908" end="12916" title="Caltrans" label="Caltrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413987" start="12922" end="12967" title="San Francisco County Transportation Authority" label="San Francisco County Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q598406" start="13269" end="13275" title="Ohlone" label="Ohlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q259729" start="13393" end="13407" title="Tubac, Arizona" label="Tubac, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="13485" end="13493" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000321" start="13559" end="13574" title="Mission Dolores" label="Mission Dolores"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="13611" end="13620" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="13638" end="13652" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438659" start="13662" end="13685" title="Fort Point, San Francisco" label="Castillo de San Joaquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="13690" end="13699" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="13796" end="13802" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291384" start="14575" end="14590" title="Mariano Vallejo" label="Mariano Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932118" start="14605" end="14611" title="Presidio of Sonoma" label="Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17557" start="14743" end="14759" title="Bear Flag Revolt" label="Bear Flag Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="14842" end="14857" title="John C. Fremont" label="John C. Fremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q220032" start="14946" end="14957" title="Golden Gate" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="15094" end="15103" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361140" start="15698" end="15720" title="Albert Sydney Johnston" label="Albert Sydney Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="15872" end="15888" title="Confederate Army" label="Confederate Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q943277" start="15911" end="15927" title="Battle of Shiloh" label="Battle of Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="16035" end="16041" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="16235" end="16249" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635052" start="16264" end="16285" title="Modoc War" label="Modoc Indian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="16548" end="16556" title="Yosemite" label="Yosemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q152660" start="16561" end="16582" title="Sequoia National Park" label="Sequoia National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858437" start="17045" end="17057" title="Camp Merriam, California" label="Camp Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="17204" end="17222" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="17274" end="17290" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002108" start="17297" end="17312" title="Buffalo Soldier" label="Buffalo Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547016" start="17319" end="17339" title="10th Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="9th Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414587" start="17426" end="17439" title="San Juan Hill" label="San Juan Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="17443" end="17447" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="17462" end="17486" title="San Francisco earthquake" label="San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497814" start="17555" end="17572" title="Frederick Funston" label="Frederick Funston"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="17593" end="17607" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438659" start="17906" end="17925" title="Fort Winfield Scott" label="Fort Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="18114" end="18130" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926257" start="18146" end="18173" title="Mexican Punitive Expedition" label="Mexican Punitive Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="18201" end="18213" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107876" start="18429" end="18453" title="Presidio Fire Department" label="Presidio Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q250578" start="18561" end="18600" title="Panama–Pacific International Exposition" label="Panama–Pacific International Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="18834" end="18846" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634606" start="19221" end="19243" title="30th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="30th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q464172" start="19616" end="19652" title="American Expeditionary Force Siberia" label="American Expeditionary Force Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="19713" end="19730" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186096" start="19948" end="19960" title="Crissy Field" label="Crissy Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q627716" start="19983" end="20000" title="military aviation" label="military aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="20233" end="20247" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="20252" end="20267" title="U.S. Army Air Forces" label="Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="20588" end="20604" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="20845" end="20852" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q201633" start="20857" end="20865" title="Iwo Jima" label="Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987773" start="21163" end="21186" title="Western Defense Command" label="Western Defense Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700829" start="21196" end="21210" title="John L. DeWitt" label="John L. DeWitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="21379" end="21410" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="21586" end="21642" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="removal of ethnic Japanese residents to internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q246612" start="21714" end="21724" title="Sixth United States Army" label="Sixth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q346551" start="21757" end="21772" title="Joseph Stilwell" label="Joseph Stilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="21998" end="22010" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297" start="22063" end="22090" title="United Nations Headquarters" label="United Nations Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="22189" end="22208" title="UN General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="22299" end="22309" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q295875" start="22503" end="22515" title="ANZUS Treaty" label="ANZUS Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="22536" end="22545" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="22547" end="22558" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q694604" start="22577" end="22601" title="Japan-US security treaty" label="Japan-US security treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="22762" end="22773" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241545" start="22882" end="22897" title="Presidio mutiny" label="Presidio mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961647" start="22935" end="22943" title="XV Corps (United States)" label="XV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="23154" end="23166" title="Desert Storm" label="Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q689764" start="23277" end="23296" title="Army National Guard" label="Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="23301" end="23318" title="U.S. Army Reserve" label="U.S. Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q246612" start="23381" end="23391" title="Sixth United States Army" label="Sixth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="23473" end="23477" title="Base Realignment and Closure" label="BRAC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23607" end="23660" title="Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996" label="Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596857" start="23668" end="23696" title="104th United States Congress" label="104th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="23716" end="23732" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533683" start="23871" end="23900" title="Letterman Digital Arts Center" label="Letterman Digital Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715936" start="23938" end="23969" title="The Bay School of San Francisco" label="The Bay School of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="24005" end="24036" title="Doyle Drive Replacement Project" label="Doyle Drive Replacement Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="24538" end="24559" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579459" start="24589" end="24627" title="Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy" label="Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q237360" start="24646" end="24666" title="49-Mile Scenic Drive" label="49-Mile Scenic Drive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24669" end="24709" title="Spanish missions in California#Military districts" label="Military Districts in Spanish California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291288" start="24713" end="24738" title="Rancho San Ramon (Amador)" label="Rancho San Ramon (Amador)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565540" start="24740" end="24769" title="List of beaches in California" label="List of beaches in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819508" start="24771" end="24801" title="List of California state parks" label="List of California state parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q120399227" start="24804" end="24838" title="Bibliography of California history" label="Bibliography of California history"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="25484" end="25500" title="creative commons" label="creative commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="25608" end="25619" title="UC Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376844" start="25620" end="25625" title="CyArk" label="CyArk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59483" wikidata="Q70538" url="?curid=59483" title="Carl Wilhelm Scheele">
<text>Carl Wilhelm Scheele (, ; 9 December 1742 – 21 May 1786) was a German Swedish pharmaceutical chemist. 

Scheele discovered oxygen (although Joseph Priestley published his findings first), and identified molybdenum, tungsten, barium, nitrogen, and chlorine, among others. Scheele discovered organic acids tartaric, oxalic, uric, lactic, and citric, as well as hydrofluoric, hydrocyanic, and arsenic acids. He preferred speaking German to Swedish his whole life, as German was commonly spoken among Swedish pharmacists.

==Biography==
Scheele was born in Stralsund, in western Pomerania, which at the time was a Swedish Dominion inside the Holy Roman Empire. Scheele&#x27;s father, Joachim (or Johann) Christian Scheele, was a grain dealer and brewer from a respected Pomeranian family. His mother was Margaretha Eleanore Warnekros.

Friends of Scheele&#x27;s parents taught him the art of reading prescriptions and the meaning of chemical and pharmaceutical signs. Then, in 1757, at the age of fourteen, Carl was sent to Gothenburg as an apprentice pharmacist to another family friend and apothecary, Martin Andreas Bauch. Scheele retained this position for eight years. During this time he ran experiments late into the night and read the works of Nicolas Lemery, Caspar Neumann, Johann von Löwenstern-Kunckel and Georg Ernst Stahl (the champion of the phlogiston theory). Much of Scheele&#x27;s later theoretical speculations were based upon Stahl.

In 1765 Scheele worked under the progressive and well-informed apothecary C. M. Kjellström in Malmö, and became acquainted with Anders Jahan Retzius who was a lecturer at the University of Lund and later a professor of chemistry at Stockholm. Scheele arrived in Stockholm between 1767 and 1769 and worked as a pharmacist. During this period he discovered tartaric acid and with his friend, Retzius, studied the relation of quicklime to calcium carbonate. While in the capital, he also became acquainted with figures including Abraham Bäck, Peter Jonas Bergius, Bengt Bergius and Carl Friedreich von Schultzenheim.

In the fall of 1770 Scheele became director of the laboratory of the great pharmacy of Locke, at Uppsala, about 65 km (40 mi) north of Stockholm. The laboratory supplied chemicals to Professor of Chemistry Torbern Bergman. A friendship developed between Scheele and Bergman after Scheele analyzed a reaction which Bergman and his assistant, Johan Gottlieb Gahn, could not resolve. The reaction was between melted saltpetre and acetic acid that produced a red vapor. Further study of this reaction later led to Scheele&#x27;s discovery of oxygen (see &quot;The theory of phlogiston&quot; below). Based upon this friendship and respect, Scheele was given free use of Bergman&#x27;s laboratory. Both men were profiting from their working relationship. In 1774 Scheele was nominated by Peter Jonas Bergius to be a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and was elected 4 February 1775. In 1775 Scheele also managed for a short time a pharmacy in Köping. Between the end of 1776 and the beginning of 1777 Scheele established his own business there.

On 29 October 1777, Scheele took his seat for the first and only time at a meeting of the Academy of Sciences and on 11 November passed the examination as apothecary before the Royal Medical College, doing so with the highest honours. After his return to Köping he devoted himself, outside of his business, to scientific researches which resulted in a long series of important papers.

Isaac Asimov called him &quot;hard-luck Scheele&quot; because he made a number of chemical discoveries that were later credited to others.

==Existing theories before Scheele==

By the time he was a teenager, Scheele had learned the dominant theory of gases which in the 1770s was the phlogiston theory. Phlogiston, classified as &quot;matter of fire&quot;, was supposed to be released from any burning material, and when it was exhausted, combustion would stop. When Scheele discovered oxygen he called it &quot;fire air&quot; as it supported combustion. Scheele explained oxygen using phlogistical terms because he did not believe that his discovery disproved the phlogiston theory.

Before Scheele made his discovery of oxygen, he studied air. Air was thought to be an element that made up the environment in which chemical reactions took place but did not interfere with the reactions. Scheele&#x27;s investigation of air enabled him to conclude that air was a mixture of &quot;fire air&quot; and &quot;foul air&quot;; in other words, a mixture of two gases. Scheele performed numerous experiments in which he heated substances such as saltpetre (potassium nitrate), manganese dioxide, heavy metal nitrates, silver carbonate and mercuric oxide. In all of these experiments, he isolated the same gas: his &quot;fire air&quot;, which he believed combined with phlogiston in materials to be released during heat-releasing reactions.

However, his first publication, &quot;Chemische Abhandlung von der Luft und dem Feuer&quot;, was delivered to the printer Swederus in 1775, but not published until 1777, at which time both Joseph Priestley and Antoine Lavoisier had already published their experimental data and conclusions concerning oxygen and the phlogiston theory. Carl was credited for finding oxygen with two other people, Joseph Priestley and Antoine Lavoisier. The first English edition, &quot;Chemical Observation and Experiments on Air and Fire&quot; was published in 1780, with an introduction &quot;Chemical Treatise on Air and Fire&quot;.

==The theory of phlogiston==
Scheele achieved astonishingly prolific and important results without the expensive laboratory equipment to which his Parisian contemporary Antoine Lavoisier was accustomed. Through the studies of Lavoisier, Priestley, Scheele, and others, chemistry was made a standardized field with consistent procedures. Although Scheele was unable to grasp the significance of his discovery of the substance that Lavoisier later named oxygen, his work was essential for the abandonment of the long-held theory of phlogiston.

Scheele&#x27;s study of the gas not yet named oxygen was prompted by a complaint by Torbern Olof Bergman, a professor at Uppsala University who would eventually become Scheele&#x27;s friend. Bergman informed Scheele that the saltpeter he had purchased from Scheele&#x27;s employer, after long heating, produced red vapors (now known to be nitrogen dioxide) when it came into contact with acetic acid. Scheele&#x27;s quick explanation was that the saltpeter had absorbed phlogiston with the heat (had been reduced to nitrite, in modern terms) and gave off a new phlogisticated gas as an active principle when combined with an acid (even a weak acid).

Bergman next suggested that Scheele analyze the properties of manganese(IV) oxide. It was through his studies of manganese(IV) oxide that Scheele developed his concept of &quot;fire air&quot; (his name for oxygen). He ultimately obtained oxygen by heating mercuric oxide, silver carbonate, magnesium nitrate, and other nitrate salts. Scheele wrote about his findings to Lavoisier who was able to see the significance of the results. His discovery of oxygen (ca. 1771) was chronologically earlier than the corresponding work of Priestley and Lavoisier, but he did not publish this discovery until 1777, after both of his rivals had published.

Although Scheele would always believe in some form of the phlogiston theory, his work reduced phlogiston to an unusually simple form, complicated only by the fact that chemists of Scheele&#x27;s day still believed that light and heat were elements and were to be found in combination with them. Thus, Scheele assumed that hydrogen was composed of phlogiston (a reducing principle lost when objects were burned) plus heat. Scheele speculated that his fire air or oxygen (which he found the active part of air, estimating it to compose one quarter of air) combined with the phlogiston in objects to produce either light or heat (light and heat were presumed to be composed of differing proportions of phlogiston and oxygen).

When other chemists later showed water is produced when burning hydrogen and that rusting of metals added weight to them and that passing water over hot iron gave hydrogen, Scheele modified his theory to suggest that oxygen was the salt (or &quot;saline principle&quot; of water), and that when added to iron, water was reproduced, which added weight to the iron as rust.

==New elements and compounds==
In addition to his joint recognition for the discovery of oxygen, Scheele is argued to have been the first to discover other chemical elements such as barium (1772), manganese (1774), molybdenum (1778), and tungsten (1781), as well as several chemical compounds, including citric acid, lactic acid, glycerol, hydrogen cyanide (also known, in aqueous solution, as prussic acid), hydrogen fluoride, and hydrogen sulfide (1777). In addition, he discovered a process similar to pasteurization, along with a means of mass-producing phosphorus (1769), leading Sweden to become one of the world&#x27;s leading producers of matches.
Scheele made one other very important scientific discovery in 1774, arguably more revolutionary than his isolation of oxygen. He identified lime, silica, and iron in a specimen of pyrolusite (impure manganese dioxide) given to him by his friend, Johann Gottlieb Gahn, but could not identify an additional component (this was the manganese, which Scheele recognized was present as a new element, but could not isolate). When he treated the pyrolusite with hydrochloric acid over a warm sand bath, a yellow-green gas with a strong odor was produced. He found that the gas sank to the bottom of an open bottle and was denser than ordinary air. He also noted that the gas was not soluble in water. It turned corks a yellow color and removed all color from wet, blue litmus paper and some flowers. He called this gas with bleaching abilities, &quot;dephlogisticated muriatic acid&quot; (dephlogisticated hydrochloric acid, or oxidized hydrochloric acid). Eventually, Sir Humphry Davy named the gas chlorine, with reference to its pale green colour.

Chlorine&#x27;s bleaching properties were eventually turned into an industry by Berzelius, and became the foundation of a second industry of disinfection and deodorization of putrefied tissue and wounds (including wounds in living humans) in the hands of Labarraque, by 1824.

==Death==
In the fall of 1785, Scheele began to suffer from symptoms described as kidney disease. In early 1786, he also contracted a disease of the skin, which, combined with his kidney problems, so enfeebled him that he could foresee an early death. With that in mind, he married the widow of his predecessor, Pohl, two days before he died, so that he could pass undisputed title to his pharmacy and his possessions to her.

While Scheele&#x27;s experiments generated substances which have long since been found to be hazardous, the compounds and elements he used to start his experiments were dangerous to begin with, especially heavy metals. Like most of his contemporaries, in an age where there were few methods of chemical characterisation, Scheele would smell and taste any new substances he discovered. Cumulative exposure to arsenic, mercury, lead, and their compounds and, perhaps, hydrofluoric acid, which he had discovered, as well as other substances, took their toll on Scheele. He died at the early age of 43, on 21 May 1786, at his home in Köping. Doctors said that he died of mercury poisoning. 

==Published papers==

All of the following papers were published by Scheele within a span of fifteen years.
Scheele&#x27;s papers appeared first in the &quot;Transactions&quot; of the Swedish Academy of Sciences, and in various periodicals such as Lorenz Florenz Friedrich von Crell&#x27;s &quot;Chemische Annalen&quot;. Scheele&#x27;s work was collected and published in four languages beginning with &quot;Mémoires de Chymie&quot; by Mme. Claudine Picardet in 1785 and &quot;Chemical Essays&quot; by Thomas Beddoes in 1786, followed by Latin and German.
Another English translation was published by Dr Leonard Dobbin, in 1931.

==See also==
*Scheelite
*Scheele&#x27;s Green
*Pharmacist
*Pharmacy
*Pneumatic chemistry
*List of independent discoveries

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
*
*Scheele, &quot;Chemical Observations and Experiments on Air and Fire&quot; (1780 translation)
*Excerpts from the Chemical Treatise on Air and Fire
*&quot;Carl Wilhelm Scheele&#x27;s d. Königl. Schwed. Acad. d. Wissenschaft Mitgliedes, Chemische Abhandlung von der Luft und dem Feuer&quot; in German (source of an above lab equipment image)
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70538" start="0" end="20" title="Carl Wilhelm Scheele" label="Carl Wilhelm Scheele"/>
<link wikidata="Q682318" start="63" end="77" title="Swedish Pomerania" label="German Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="123" end="129" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="140" end="156" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="203" end="213" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="215" end="223" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="225" end="231" title="barium" label="barium"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="233" end="241" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="247" end="255" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194322" start="304" end="312" title="Tartaric acid" label="tartaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="314" end="320" title="Oxalic acid" label="oxalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="322" end="326" title="Uric acid" label="uric"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="328" end="334" title="Lactic acid" label="lactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="340" end="346" title="Citric acid" label="citric"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="359" end="371" title="Hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="373" end="384" title="Hydrocyanic acid" label="hydrocyanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q413334" start="390" end="397" title="Arsenic acid" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065" start="553" end="562" title="Stralsund" label="Stralsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148626" start="610" end="626" title="Dominions of Sweden" label="Swedish Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="1020" end="1030" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="1048" end="1058" title="pharmacist" label="pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q704515" start="1248" end="1262" title="Nicolas Lemery" label="Nicolas Lemery"/>
<link wikidata="Q99914" start="1264" end="1278" title="Caspar Neumann (chemist)" label="Caspar Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q74088" start="1280" end="1309" title="Johann von Löwenstern-Kunckel" label="Johann von Löwenstern-Kunckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57566" start="1314" end="1331" title="Georg Ernst Stahl" label="Georg Ernst Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999319" start="1353" end="1370" title="phlogiston theory" label="phlogiston theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211" start="1545" end="1550" title="Malmö" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q491077" start="1579" end="1599" title="Anders Jahan Retzius" label="Anders Jahan Retzius"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="1626" end="1644" title="University of Lund" label="University of Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="1713" end="1722" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="1761" end="1771" title="pharmacist" label="pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194322" start="1806" end="1819" title="tartaric acid" label="tartaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="1874" end="1883" title="Calcium oxide" label="quicklime"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="1887" end="1904" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329835" start="1977" end="1989" title="Abraham Bäck" label="Abraham Bäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612272" start="1991" end="2010" title="Peter Jonas Bergius" label="Peter Jonas Bergius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2012" end="2025" title="Bengt Bergius" label="Bengt Bergius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2030" end="2063" title="Carl Friedreich von Schultzenheim" label="Carl Friedreich von Schultzenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="2163" end="2170" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q201347" start="2272" end="2287" title="Torbern Bergman" label="Torbern Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q353490" start="2407" end="2426" title="Johan Gottlieb Gahn" label="Johan Gottlieb Gahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="2479" end="2488" title="saltpetre" label="saltpetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="2493" end="2504" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="2890" end="2923" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q174126" start="3017" end="3023" title="Köping, Sweden" label="Köping"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="3506" end="3518" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="3993" end="3999" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="4253" end="4256" title="Air" label="Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="4324" end="4342" title="chemical reactions" label="chemical reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="4657" end="4674" title="potassium nitrate" label="potassium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407674" start="4677" end="4694" title="manganese dioxide" label="manganese dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q417067" start="4718" end="4734" title="silver carbonate" label="silver carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q174727" start="4739" end="4753" title="mercuric oxide" label="mercuric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="5130" end="5146" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="5151" end="5168" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="5829" end="5838" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q201347" start="6187" end="6207" title="Torbern Olof Bergman" label="Torbern Olof Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="6224" end="6242" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q407674" start="6816" end="6835" title="manganese(IV) oxide" label="manganese(IV) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q417067" start="7026" end="7042" title="silver carbonate" label="silver carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q411014" start="7044" end="7061" title="magnesium nitrate" label="magnesium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="7073" end="7080" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="8676" end="8682" title="barium" label="barium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="8691" end="8700" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="8709" end="8719" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="8732" end="8740" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="8798" end="8809" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="8811" end="8822" title="lactic acid" label="lactic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="8824" end="8832" title="glycerol" label="glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="8834" end="8850" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="8903" end="8920" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="8926" end="8942" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="8999" end="9013" title="pasteurization" label="pasteurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="9052" end="9062" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="9141" end="9148" title="matches" label="matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="9290" end="9294" title="Lime (mineral)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="9296" end="9302" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="9308" end="9312" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q413293" start="9330" end="9340" title="pyrolusite" label="pyrolusite"/>
<link wikidata="Q353490" start="9396" end="9416" title="Johann Gottlieb Gahn" label="Johann Gottlieb Gahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="9605" end="9622" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="10116" end="10128" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="10143" end="10151" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="10275" end="10284" title="Jöns Jacob Berzelius" label="Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q586230" start="10450" end="10460" title="Antoine Labarraque" label="Labarraque"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="11104" end="11116" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="11307" end="11314" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="11316" end="11323" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="11325" end="11329" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="11341" end="11350" title="chemical compound" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="11365" end="11382" title="hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10571400" start="11529" end="11535" title="Köping" label="Köping"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="11566" end="11583" title="mercury poisoning" label="mercury poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q96581" start="11835" end="11869" title="Lorenz Florenz Friedrich von Crell" label="Lorenz Florenz Friedrich von Crell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184042" start="11883" end="11900" title="Crell&amp;#x27;s Annalen" label="Chemische Annalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14125842" start="12028" end="12045" title="Claudine Picardet" label="Claudine Picardet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422365" start="12089" end="12103" title="Thomas Beddoes" label="Thomas Beddoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585082" start="12188" end="12205" title="Leonard Dobbin (chemist)" label="Dr Leonard Dobbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q409096" start="12231" end="12240" title="Scheelite" label="Scheelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q417286" start="12242" end="12262" title="Scheele&amp;#x27;s Green" label="Scheele&amp;#x27;s Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="12264" end="12274" title="Pharmacist" label="Pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="12276" end="12284" title="Pharmacy" label="Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674742" start="12286" end="12305" title="Pneumatic chemistry" label="Pneumatic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12307" end="12338" title="List of independent discoveries#18th century" label="List of independent discoveries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59485" wikidata="Q227180" url="?curid=59485" title="Yuma">
<text>Yuma can refer to:
==Places==

=== United States ===
* Yuma County, Arizona
** Yuma, Arizona
** Marine Corps Air Station Yuma
** Yuma Proving Ground
** Yuma Proving Ground, Arizona (CDP)
** Yuma Territorial Prison
* Fort Yuma, California
* Yuma County, Colorado
** Yuma, Colorado
* Yuma, Kansas
* Yuma, Kentucky
* Yuma, Michigan, in Springville Township
* Yuma, Tennessee

=== Elsewhere ===
* Yuma Desert, desert in southwest U.S. and northwest Mexico
* Long Island, Bahamas, called Yuma by Native Arawak Indians over 500 years ago
* The Magdalena River, Colombia, also known as the Yuma River
* La Yuma / el Yuma, approbative name for the United States in Cuba
* Yuma River (Dominican Republic)

==People==
* Quechan, also called Yuma, a native people of Arizona
* Juma people, a native people of Brazil
* Suma Indians (Suma also spelled Yuma), a native people of Texas and Chihuahua, Mexico
* Yuma (name), a Japanese given name

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Yuma&quot; (1971 film), TV film starring Clint Walker
* &quot;Yuma&quot; (2012 film), Polish film

==Others==
* USS &quot;Yuma&quot;, name of a number of U.S. Navy ships
* Yuma point, also called an Eden point, type of Paleo-Indian stone projectile point, first found in Yuma County, Colorado
* Yuma War, armed conflict fought primarily between the United States and the Yuma people
* &quot;Yuma&quot; (moth), genus of moths in the subfamily Epipaschiinae

==See also==
*Yoma
*3:10 to Yuma (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227180" start="0" end="4" title="Yuma" label="Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q58698" start="55" end="75" title="Yuma County, Arizona" label="Yuma County, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q79820" start="79" end="92" title="Yuma, Arizona" label="Yuma, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030442" start="96" end="125" title="Marine Corps Air Station Yuma" label="Marine Corps Air Station Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372856" start="129" end="148" title="Yuma Proving Ground" label="Yuma Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372856" start="152" end="186" title="Yuma Proving Ground, Arizona (CDP)" label="Yuma Proving Ground, Arizona (CDP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128074" start="190" end="213" title="Yuma Territorial Prison" label="Yuma Territorial Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472438" start="216" end="225" title="Fort Yuma" label="Fort Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q312744" start="240" end="261" title="Yuma County, Colorado" label="Yuma County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272340" start="265" end="279" title="Yuma, Colorado" label="Yuma, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061029" start="282" end="294" title="Yuma, Kansas" label="Yuma, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061021" start="297" end="311" title="Yuma, Kentucky" label="Yuma, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581254" start="314" end="328" title="Yuma, Michigan" label="Yuma, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061023" start="356" end="371" title="Yuma, Tennessee" label="Yuma, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969338" start="393" end="404" title="Yuma Desert" label="Yuma Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q890879" start="454" end="474" title="Long Island, Bahamas" label="Long Island, Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="538" end="553" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="" start="596" end="613" title=":es:yanqui" label="La Yuma / el Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061044" start="664" end="695" title="Yuma River (Dominican Republic)" label="Yuma River (Dominican Republic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754503" start="710" end="717" title="Quechan" label="Quechan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811213" start="766" end="777" title="Juma people" label="Juma people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135456" start="807" end="819" title="Suma Indians" label="Suma Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573194" start="895" end="906" title="Yuma (name)" label="Yuma (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061025" start="960" end="988" title="Yuma (1971 film)" label="&amp;quot;Yuma&amp;quot; (1971 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165847" start="1022" end="1050" title="Yuma (2012 film)" label="&amp;quot;Yuma&amp;quot; (2012 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875735" start="1078" end="1098" title="USS Yuma" label="USS &amp;quot;Yuma&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336970" start="1165" end="1175" title="Eden point" label="Eden point"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061051" start="1261" end="1269" title="Yuma War" label="Yuma War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1351" end="1374" title="Yuma (moth)" label="&amp;quot;Yuma&amp;quot; (moth)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055773" start="1408" end="1421" title="Epipaschiinae" label="Epipaschiinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063210" start="1437" end="1441" title="Yoma" label="Yoma"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1443" end="1472" title="3:10 to Yuma (disambiguation)" label="3:10 to Yuma (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59493" wikidata="Q127933" url="?curid=59493" title="Fireworks">
<text>Fireworks are low explosive pyrotechnic devices used for aesthetic and entertainment purposes. They are most commonly used in fireworks displays (also called a fireworks show or pyrotechnics), combining a large number of devices in an outdoor setting. Such displays are the focal point of many cultural and religious celebrations, though mismanagement could lead to fireworks accidents.

Fireworks take many forms to produce four primary effects: noise, light, smoke, and floating materials (confetti most notably). They may be designed to burn with colored flames and sparks including red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple and silver. They are generally classified by where they perform, either &#x27;ground&#x27; or &#x27;aerial&#x27;. Aerial fireworks may have their own propulsion (skyrocket) or be shot into the air by a mortar (aerial shell).

Most fireworks consist of a paper or pasteboard tube or casing filled with the combustible material, often pyrotechnic stars. A number of these tubes or cases may be combined so as to make when kindled, a great variety of sparkling shapes, often variously colored.

A skyrocket is a common form of firework, although the first skyrockets were used in warfare. The aerial shell, however, is the backbone of today&#x27;s commercial aerial display, and a smaller version for consumer use is known as the festival ball in the United States.

Fireworks were originally invented in China. China remains the largest manufacturer and exporter of fireworks in the world.

== Terminology ==

=== Silent fireworks ===
&#x27;Silent&#x27; fireworks displays are becoming popular due to concerns that noise effects traumatize pets, wildlife, and some humans. However, these are not a new type of firework and they are not completely silent. &quot;Silent firework displays&quot; refers to displays which simply exclude large, spectacular, noisy fireworks and make greater use of smaller, quieter devices.

==History==




The earliest fireworks came from China during the Song dynasty (960–1279). Fireworks were used to accompany many festivities. In China, pyrotechnicians were respected for their knowledge of complex techniques in creating fireworks and mounting firework displays.

During the Han dynasty (202 BC – 220 AD), people threw bamboo stems into a fire to produce an explosion with a loud sound. In later times, gunpowder packed into small containers was used to mimic the sounds of burning bamboo. Exploding bamboo stems and gunpowder firecrackers were interchangeably known as &quot;baozhu&quot; (爆竹) or &quot;baogan&quot; (爆竿). During the Song dynasty, people manufactured the first firecrackers comprising tubes made from rolled sheets of paper containing gunpowder and a fuse. They also strung these firecrackers together into large clusters, known as &quot;bian&quot; (lit. &quot;whip&quot;) or &quot;bianpao&quot; (lit. &quot;whip cannon&quot;), so the firecrackers could be set off one by one in close sequence. By the 12th and possibly the 11th century, the term &quot;baozhang&quot; (爆仗) was used to specifically refer to gunpowder firecrackers. The first usage of the term was in the &quot;Dreams of the Glories of the Eastern Capital&quot; (東京夢華錄; about 1148) by Meng Yuanlao.

During the Song dynasty, common folk could purchase fireworks such as firecrackers from market vendors. Grand displays of fireworks were also known to be held. In 1110, according to the &quot;Dreams of the Glories of the Eastern Capital&quot;, a large fireworks display mounted by the military was held to entertain Emperor Huizong of Song (r. 1100–1125). The &quot;Qidong Yeyu&quot; (齊東野語; 1264) states that a rocket-propelled firework called a &quot;dilaoshu&quot; (地老鼠; lit. &quot;earth rat&quot;) went off near the Empress Dowager Gong Sheng and startled her during a feast held in her honor by her son Emperor Lizong of Song (r. 1224–1264). This type of firework was one of the earliest examples of rocket propulsion. Around 1280, a Syrian named Hasan al-Rammah wrote of rockets, fireworks, and other incendiaries, using terms that suggested he derived his knowledge from Chinese sources, such as his references to fireworks as &quot;Chinese flowers&quot;.

Colored fireworks were developed from earlier (possibly Han dynasty or soon thereafter) Chinese application of chemical substances to create colored smoke and fire. Such application appears in the &quot;Huolongjing&quot; (14th century) and &quot;Wubeizhi&quot; (preface of 1621, printed 1628), which describes recipes, several of which used low-nitrate gunpowder, to create military signal smokes with various colors. In the &quot;Wubei Huolongjing&quot; (武備火龍經; Ming, completed after 1628), two formulas appears for firework-like signals, the &quot;sanzhangju&quot; (三丈菊) and &quot;baizhanglian&quot; (百丈蓮), that produces silver sparkles in the smoke. In the &quot;Huoxilüe&quot; (火戲略; 1753) by Zhao Xuemin (趙學敏), there are several recipes with low-nitrate gunpowder and other chemical substances to tint flames and smoke. These included, for instance, arsenical sulphide for yellow, copper acetate (verdigris) for green, lead carbonate for lilac-white, and mercurous chloride (calomel) for white. The Chinese pyrotechnics were described by the French author Antoine Caillot (1818): &quot;It is certain that the variety of colours which the Chinese have the secret of giving to flame is the greatest mystery of their fireworks.&quot; Similarly, the English geographer Sir John Barrow (ca. 1797) wrote &quot;The diversity of colours indeed with which the Chinese have the secret of cloathing fire seems to be the chief merit of their pyrotechny.&quot;

Fireworks were produced in Europe by the 14th century, becoming popular by the 17th century. Lev Izmailov, ambassador of Peter the Great, once reported from China: &quot;They make such fireworks that no one in Europe has ever seen.&quot; In 1758, the Jesuit missionary Pierre Nicolas le Chéron d&#x27;Incarville, living in Beijing, wrote about the methods and composition of Chinese fireworks to the Paris Academy of Sciences, which published the account five years later. Amédée-François Frézier published his revised work &quot;Traité des feux d&#x27;artice pour le spectacle&quot; (Treatise on Fireworks) in 1747 (originally 1706), covering the recreational and ceremonial uses of fireworks, rather than their military uses. &quot;Music for the Royal Fireworks&quot; was composed by George Frideric Handel in 1749 to celebrate the Peace treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, which had been declared the previous year.

&quot;Prior to the nineteenth century and the advent of modern chemistry they [fireworks] must have been relatively dull and unexciting.&quot; Bertholet in 1786 discovered that oxidations with potassium chlorate resulted in a violet emission. Subsequent developments revealed that oxidations with the chlorates of barium, strontium, copper, and sodium result in intense emission of bright colors. The isolation of metallic magnesium and aluminium marked another breakthrough as these metals burn with an intense silvery light.

==Pyrotechnic compounds==

Colors in fireworks are usually generated by pyrotechnic stars—usually just called stars—which produce intense light when ignited. Stars contain four basic types of ingredients.
* A fuel
* An oxidizer—a compound that combines with the fuel to produce intense heat
* Color-producing salts (when the fuel itself is not the colorant)
* A binder which holds the pellet together.

Some of the more common color-producing compounds are tabulated here. The color of a compound in a firework will be the same as its color in a flame test (shown at right). Not all compounds that produce a colored flame are appropriate for coloring fireworks, however. Ideal colorants will produce a pure, intense color when present in moderate concentration.

The color of sparks is limited to red/orange, yellow/gold and white/silver. This is explained by light emission from an incandescent solid particle in contrast to the element-specific emission from the vapor phase of a flame. Light emitted from a solid particle is defined by black-body radiation. Low boiling metals can form sparks with an intensively colored glowing shell surrounding the basic particle. This is caused by vapor phase combustion of the metal.

The brightest stars, often called Mag Stars, are fueled by aluminium. Magnesium is rarely used in the fireworks industry due to its lack of ability to form a protective oxide layer. Often an alloy of both metals called magnalium is used.

Many of the chemicals used in the manufacture of fireworks are non-toxic, while many more have some degree of toxicity, can cause skin sensitivity, or exist in dust form and are thereby inhalation hazards. Still others are poisons if directly ingested or inhaled.

===Common elements in pyrotechnics===
The following table lists the principal elements used in modern pyrotechnics. Some elements are used in their elemental form such as particles of titanium, aluminium, iron, zirconium, and magnesium. These elements burn in the presence of air (O2) or oxidants (perchlorate, chlorate). Most elements in pyrotechnics are in the form of salts.

== Types ==
=== Aerial fireworks ===
==== Roman candle ====
A Roman candle is a long tube containing several large stars which fire at a regular interval. These are commonly arranged in fan shapes or crisscrossing shapes, at a closer proximity to the audience. Some larger Roman candles contain small shells (bombettes) rather than stars.

==== Mine ====
A mine (a.k.a. pot à feu) is a firework that expels stars and/or other garnitures into the sky. Shot from a mortar like a shell, a mine consists of a canister with the lift charge on the bottom with the effects placed on top. Mines can project small reports, serpents, and small shells, as well as just stars. Although mines up to diameter appear on occasion, they are usually in diameter.

==== Skyrocket ====
==== Cake ====
A cake is a cluster of individual tubes linked by fuse that fires a series of aerial effects. Tube diameters can range in size from , and a single cake can have more than 1,000 shots. The variety of effects within individual cakes is often such that they defy descriptive titles and are instead given cryptic names such as &quot;Bermuda Triangle&quot;, &quot;Pyro Glyphics&quot;, &quot;Waco Wakeup&quot;, and &quot;Poisonous Spider&quot;, to name a few. Others are simply quantities of shells fused together in single-shot tubes.

=== Ground fireworks ===
==== Sparkler ====
==== Firecracker ====
==== Bang snap ====
== List of public display effects ==

=== Crossette ===
A shell containing several large stars that travel a short distance before breaking apart into smaller stars, creating a crisscrossing grid-like effect. Strictly speaking, a crossette star should split into four pieces which fly off symmetrically, making a cross. Once limited to silver or gold effects, colored crossettes such as red, green, or white are now very common.

=== Chrysanthemum ===

A spherical break of colored stars, similar to a peony, but with stars that leave a visible trail of sparks.

=== Dahlia ===
Essentially the same as a peony shell, but with fewer and larger stars. These stars travel a longer-than-usual distance from the shell break before burning out. For instance, if a peony shell is made with a star size designed for a shell, it is then considered a dahlia. Some dahlia shells are cylindrical rather than spherical to allow for larger stars.

=== Diadem ===
A type of chrysanthemum or peony, with a center cluster of non-moving stars, normally of a contrasting color or effect.

=== Fish ===
Inserts that propel themselves rapidly away from the shell burst, often resembling fish swimming away.

=== Horsetail ===
Named for the shape of its break, this shell features heavy long-burning tailed stars that only travel a short distance from the shell burst before free-falling to the ground. Also known as a waterfall shell. Sometimes there is a glittering through the &quot;waterfall&quot;.

=== Kamuro ===
Kamuro is a Japanese word meaning &quot;boys haircut&quot;, which is what this shell resembles when fully exploded in the air. It is a dense burst of glittering silver or gold stars which leave a heavy glitter trail and shine bright in the night&#x27;s sky.

=== Multi-break shells ===
A large shell containing several smaller shells of various sizes and types. The initial burst scatters the shells across the sky before they explode. Also called a bouquet shell. When a shell contains smaller shells of the same size and type, the effect is usually referred to as &quot;Thousands&quot;. Very large bouquet shells (up to ) are frequently used in Japan.

=== Palm ===
A shell containing a relatively few large comet stars arranged in such a way as to burst with large arms or tendrils, producing a palm tree-like effect. Proper palm shells feature a thick rising tail that displays as the shell ascends, thereby simulating the tree trunk to further enhance the &quot;palm tree&quot; effect. One might also see a burst of color inside the palm burst (given by a small insert shell) to simulate coconuts.

=== Peony ===
A spherical break of colored stars that burn without a tail effect. The peony is the most commonly seen shell type.

=== Ring ===
A shell with stars specially arranged so as to create a ring. Variations include smiley faces, hearts, and clovers.

=== Salute ===
A shell intended to produce a loud report rather than a visual effect. Salute shells usually contain flash powder, producing a quick flash followed by a very loud report resembling military artillery. Titanium may be added to the flash powder mix to produce a cloud of bright sparks around the flash. Salutes are commonly used in large quantities during finales to create intense noise and brightness. They are often cylindrical in shape to allow for a larger payload of flash powder, but ball shapes are common and cheaper as well. Salutes are also called Maroons.

=== Spider ===
A shell containing a fast burning tailed or charcoal star that is burst very hard so that the stars travel in a straight and flat trajectory before slightly falling and burning out. This appears in the sky as a series of radial lines much like the legs of a spider.

=== Time Rain ===
An effect created by large, slow-burning stars within a shell that leave a trail of large glittering sparks behind and make a sizzling noise. The &quot;time&quot; refers to the fact that these stars burn away gradually, as opposed to the standard brocade &quot;rain&quot; effect where a large amount of glitter material is released at once.

=== Willow ===
A willow is similar to a chrysanthemum, but with long-burning silver or gold stars that produce a soft, dome-shaped weeping willow-like effect.

=== Farfalle ===
Farfalle is an effect in Italian fireworks with spinning silver sprays in the air.

=== Tourbillion ===
A tourbillion is similar to a farfalle but has spinning stars.

== Audio effects ==

=== Bang ===
The bang is the most common effect in fireworks and sounds like artillery cannon being fired; technically a &quot;report&quot;. Silent fireworks have all of the visual effects, however. The &quot;salute&quot; effect is even more pronounced and sometimes is banned.

=== Crackle ===
The firework produces a crackling sound.

=== Hummer ===
Tiny tube fireworks that are ejected into the air spinning with such force that they shred their outer coating, in doing so they whizz and hum.

=== Whistle ===
High pitched often very loud screaming and screeching created by the resonance of gas. This is caused by a very fast strobing (on/off burning stage) of the fuel. The rapid bursts of gas from the fuel vibrate the air many hundreds of times per second causing the familiar whistling sound. It is not, as is commonly thought, made in the conventional way that musical instruments are using specific tube shapes or apertures. Common whistle fuels contain benzoate or salicylate compounds and a suitable oxidizer such as potassium perchlorate.

==Safety and environmental impact==

Improper use of fireworks is dangerous, both to the person operating them (risks of burns and wounds) and to bystanders; in addition, they may start fires on landing. To prevent fireworks accidents, the use of fireworks is legally restricted in many countries. In such countries, display fireworks are restricted for use by professionals; smaller consumer versions may or may not be available to the public.

===Effects on animals===
Birds and animals, both domestic and wild, can be frightened by their noise, leading to them running away, often into danger, or hurting themselves on fences or in other ways in an attempt to escape the perceived danger. 

Majority of dogs experience distress, fear and anxiety during fireworks. In 2016, following a petition signed by more than 100,000 Brits, House of Commons of the United Kingdom debated a motion to restrict firework use. 

Fireworks also affect birds, especially larger birds like geese, eagles and others. According to a study by Max Planck Institute and Netherlands Institute of Ecology, many birds abruptly leave their sleeping sites on New Year&#x27;s Eve, and some fly up to 500 km non-stop to get away from human settlements. On average, about 1000 times more birds are in flight on New Year&#x27;s Eve than on other nights. Frightened birds also may abandon nests and not return to complete rearing their young. A scientific study from 2022 indicates that fireworks might have some sort of lasting effect on birds, with many birds spending more time to find food in the weeks after New Year&#x27;s Eve fireworks.

===Pollution===

Fireworks produce smoke and dust that may contain residues of heavy metals, sulfur-coal compounds and some low concentration toxic chemicals. These by-products of fireworks combustion will vary depending on the mix of ingredients of a particular firework. (The color green, for instance, may be produced by adding the various compounds and salts of barium, some of which are toxic, and some of which are not.) Some fishers have noticed and reported to environmental authorities that firework residues can hurt fish and other water-life because some may contain toxic compounds (such as antimony sulfide or arsenic). This is a subject of much debate due to the fact that large-scale pollution from other sources makes it difficult to measure the amount of pollution that comes specifically from fireworks. The possible toxicity of any fallout may also be affected by the amount of black powder used, type of oxidizer, colors produced and launch method.

Perchlorate salts, when in solid form, dissolve and move rapidly in groundwater and surface water. Even in low concentrations in drinking water supplies, perchlorate ions are known to inhibit the uptake of iodine by the thyroid gland. As of 2010, there are no federal drinking water standards for perchlorates in the United States, but the
US Environmental Protection Agency has studied the impacts of perchlorates on the environment as well as drinking water.

Several U.S. states have enacted drinking water standard for perchlorates, including Massachusetts in 2006. California&#x27;s legislature enacted AB 826, the Perchlorate Contamination Prevention Act of 2003, requiring California&#x27;s Department of Toxic Substance Control (DTSC) to adopt regulations specifying best management practices for perchlorate-containing substances. The Perchlorate Best Management Practices were adopted on 31 December 2005 and became operative on 1 July 2006. California issued drinking water standards in 2007. Several other states, including Arizona, Maryland, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, and Texas have established non-enforceable, advisory levels for perchlorates.

The courts have also taken action with regard to perchlorate contamination. For example, in 2003, a federal district court in California found that Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) applied because perchlorate is ignitable and therefore a &quot;characteristic&quot; hazardous waste.

Pollutants from fireworks raise concerns because of potential health risks associated with the products of combustion during the liquid phase and the solid phase after they have cooled as well as the gases produced, particularly the carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. For persons with asthma or other respiratory conditions, the smoke from fireworks may aggravate existing health problems.

Pollution is also a concern because fireworks often contain heavy metals as source of color. However, gunpowder smoke and the solid residues are basic, and as such the cumulative effect of fireworks on acid rain is uncertain. What is not disputed is that most consumer fireworks leave behind a considerable amount of solid debris, including both readily biodegradable components as well as nondegradable plastic items. Concerns over pollution, consumer safety, and debris have restricted the sale and use of consumer fireworks in many countries. Professional displays, on the other hand, remain popular around the world.

Others argue that alleged concern over pollution from fireworks constitutes a red herring, since the amount of contamination from fireworks is minuscule in comparison to emissions from sources such as the burning of fossil fuels. In the US, some states and local governments restrict the use of fireworks in accordance with the Clean Air Act which allows laws relating to the prevention and control of outdoor air pollution to be enacted.

Some companies within the U.S. fireworks industry claim they are working with Chinese manufacturers to reduce and ultimately hope to eliminate of the pollutant perchlorate.

==Government regulations around the world==
===Australia===

Fireworks are illegal in most Australian states and territories, unless part of a display by a licensed pyrotechnician and with a permit. However Tasmania, ACT and Northern Territory allow consumer use with a permit (dependent on calendar date and circumstances). On 1 July for Territory Day one can freely use fireworks without a permit in the Northern Territory.

Small novelties such as party poppers and sparklers are legal for consumers across Australia.

On 24 August 2009, the ACT Government announced a complete ban on backyard fireworks.

=== Canada ===

The use, storage and sale of commercial-grade fireworks in Canada is licensed by Natural Resources Canada&#x27;s Explosive Regulatory Division (ERD). Unlike their consumer counterpart, commercial-grade fireworks function differently, and come in a wide range of sizes from up to or more in diameter. Commercial grade fireworks require a Fireworks Operator Certificate (FOC), obtained from the ERD by completing a one-day safety course. There are two categories of FOC: one for pyrotechnics (those used on stage and in movies) and another for display fireworks (those used in dedicated fireworks shows). Each requires completion of its own course, although there are special categories of FOC which allow visiting operators to run their shows with the assistance of a Canadian supervisor.

The display fireworks FOC has two levels: assistant, and fully licensed. A fully licensed display fireworks operator can also be further endorsed for marine launch, flying saucers, and other more technically demanding fireworks displays.

The pyrotechnician FOC has three levels: pyrotechnician (which allows work under a supervisor), supervising pyrotechnician, and special effects pyrotechnician (which allows the fabrication of certain types of pyrotechnic devices). Additionally, a special effects pyrotechnician can be endorsed for the use of detonating cord.

Since commercial-grade fireworks are shells which are loaded into separate mortars by hand, there is danger in every stage of the setup. Setup of these fireworks involves the placement and securing of mortars on wooden or wire racks; loading of the shells; and if electronically firing, wiring and testing. The mortars are generally made of FRE (fiber-reinforced epoxy) or HDPE (high-density polyethylene). Older mortars made of sheet steel have been banned by most countries due to the problem of shrapnel produced during a misfire.

Setup of mortars in Canada for an oblong firing site require that a mortar be configured at an angle of 10 to 15 degrees down-range with a safety distance of at least down-range and surrounding the mortars, plus distance adjustments for wind speed and direction. In June 2007, the ERD approved circular firing sites for use with vertically fired mortars with a safety distance of at least radius, plus distance adjustments for wind speed and direction.

Loading of shells is a delicate process, and must be done with caution, and a loader must ensure not only the mortar is clean, but also make sure that no part of their body is directly over the mortar in case of a premature fire. Wiring the shells is a painstaking process; whether the shells are being fired manually or electronically, any &quot;chain fusing&quot; or wiring of electrical ignitors, care must be taken to prevent the fuse (an electrical match, often incorrectly called a squib) from igniting. If the setup is wired electrically, the electrical matches are usually plugged into a &quot;firing rail&quot; or &quot;breakout box&quot; that runs back to the main firing board; from there, the Firing Board is simply hooked up to a car battery, and can proceed with firing the show when ready.

Since commercial-grade fireworks are so much larger and more powerful, setup, and firing crews are always under great pressure to ensure they safely set up, fire, and clean up after a show.

===Chile===
In Chile, the manufacture, importation, possession and use of fireworks is prohibited to unauthorized individuals; only certified firework companies can legally use fireworks. As they are considered a type of explosive, offenders can in principle be tried before military courts, although this is unusual in practice.

===China===
=== European Union ===
The European Union&#x27;s policy is aimed at harmonising and standardising the EU member states&#x27; policies on the regulation of production, transportation, sale, consumption and overall safety of fireworks across Europe.

==== Belgium ====

In Belgium, each municipality can decide how to regulate fireworks. During New Year&#x27;s Eve, lighting fireworks without a licence is allowed in 35% of the 308 Flemish municipalities, in around 50% a permit from the burgemeester (mayor) is required, and around 14% of municipalities have banned consumer fireworks altogether.

==== Finland ====

In Finland those under 18 years old haven&#x27;t been allowed to buy any fireworks since 2009. Safety goggles are required. The use of fireworks is generally allowed on the evening and night of New Year&#x27;s Eve, 31 December. In some municipalities of Western Finland it is allowed to use fireworks without a fire station&#x27;s permission on the last weekend of August. With the fire station&#x27;s permission, fireworks can be used year-round.

==== Germany ====
In Germany, amateurs over 18 years old are allowed to buy and ignite fireworks of Category F2 for several hours on 31 December and 1 January; each German municipality is authorised to limit the number of hours this may last locally. The sale of Category F3 and F4 fireworks to consumers is prohibited. Lighting fireworks is forbidden near churches, hospitals, retirement homes and wooden or thatch-roofed buildings. All major German cities organise professional fireworks shows.

In addition to the previously existing regulations, there was a nationwide ban on the sale of category F2 fireworks to consumers on New Year&#x27;s Eve 2020/2021 during the COVID-19 pandemic, with the aim to relieve the burden on hospitals by reducing the number of emergencies due to injuries caused by fireworks on New Year&#x27;s Eve. On the 2024–2025 New Year&#x27;s eve and day, five were killed and 100+ were injured due to unusually intense widespread criminality and negligence.

==== Italy ====
In 2015, the Italian town of Collecchio mandated silent fireworks, being among the first to make the switch without losing the beauty of the visual displays.

==== Netherlands ====
In the Netherlands, fireworks cannot be sold to anyone under the age of 16. It may only be sold during a period of three days before a new year. If one of these days is a Sunday, that day is excluded from sale and sale may commence one day earlier.

==== Republic of Ireland ====

In the Republic of Ireland, fireworks are illegal and possession is punishable by huge fines and/or prison. However, around Halloween a large amount of fireworks are set off, due to the ease of being able to purchase from Northern Ireland.

==== Sweden ====
In Sweden, fireworks can only be purchased and used by people 18 or older. Firecrackers used to be banned, but are now allowed under European Union fireworks policy.

=== Iceland ===
In Iceland, the Icelandic law states that anyone may purchase and use fireworks during a certain period around New Year&#x27;s Eve. Most places that sell fireworks in Iceland make their own rules about age of buyers, usually it is around 16. The people of Reykjavík spend enormous sums of money on fireworks, most of which are fired as midnight approaches on 31 December. As a result, every New Year&#x27;s Eve the city is lit up with fireworks displays.

=== New Zealand ===
Fireworks in New Zealand are available from 2 to 5 November, around Guy Fawkes Day, and may be purchased only by those 18 years of age and older (up from 14 years pre-2007). Despite the restriction on when fireworks may be sold, there is no restriction regarding when fireworks may be used. The types of fireworks available to the public are multi-shot &quot;cakes&quot;, Roman candles, single shot shooters, ground and wall spinners, fountains, cones, sparklers, and various novelties, such as smoke bombs and Pharaoh&#x27;s serpents. Consumer fireworks are also not allowed to be louder than 90 decibels.

=== Norway ===
In Norway, fireworks can only be purchased and used by people 18 or older. Sale is restricted to a few days before New Year&#x27;s Eve. Rockets are not allowed.

=== United Kingdom ===
Fireworks in the UK have become more strictly regulated since 1997. Since 2005, the law has been harmonised gradually, in accordance with other EU member state laws.

Fireworks are mostly used in England, Scotland and Wales around Diwali (late October or early November), on Guy Fawkes Night, 5 November and on New Year&#x27;s Eve. In the UK, responsibility for the safety of firework displays is shared between the Health and Safety Executive, fire brigades and local authorities. Currently, there is no national system of licensing for fireworks operators, but in order to purchase large display fireworks, operators must have licensed explosives storage and public liability insurance.

Category 1 fireworks are restricted to persons aged 16 and over, while the age limit on both Category 2 and 3 fireworks is eighteen, and the sale and possession of Category 4 fireworks is restricted to licensed professionals only. Fireworks are not permitted to be set off between 11pm and 7am with exceptions only for:
* Bonfire Night (5 November) (permitted until midnight)
* The Chinese New Year (permitted until 1am)
* Diwali (permitted until 1am)
* New Year (permitted on New Year&#x27;s Eve until 1am on New Year&#x27;s Day)

The maximum legal NEC (net explosive content) of a UK firework available to the public is two kilograms. Jumping jacks, strings of firecrackers, shell firing tubes, bangers and mini-rockets were all banned during the late 1990s. In 2004, single-shot air bombs and bottle rockets were banned, and rocket sizes were limited. From March 2008 any firework with more than 5% flashpowder per tube has been classified 1.3G. The aim of these measures was to eliminate &quot;pocket money&quot; fireworks, and to limit the disruptive effects of loud bangs.

=== United States ===

In the United States, fireworks laws vary widely from state to state or county to county. Federal, state, and local authorities govern the use of display fireworks in the United States. The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) regulates consumer fireworks at the federal level through the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (FHSA). The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) sets forth a set of codes that give the minimum standards of display fireworks use and safety in the U.S. Both state and local jurisdictions can further add restrictions on the use and safety requirements of display fireworks. There are currently 46 states in the United States in which fireworks are legal for consumer use.

==Fireworks celebrations throughout the world==
===Australia===
In Australia, fireworks displays are frequently used in the celebration of public holidays, particularly New Year&#x27;s Eve and Australia Day. The most famous is the Sydney New Year&#x27;s Eve &quot;Midnight Fireworks&quot;. In the Northern Territory, &quot;Cracker Night&quot; is celebrated every 1 July on Territory Day, where residents are allowed to buy and use fireworks without a permit.

===Catalonia===
Fireworks are an essential element of popular festival in Catalonia, especially the patron saint day for each Catalan town or city, usually called Festa Major. Coet (rocket) is the generic term for all kinds of pyrotechnic devices. Professional aerial displays are less common than the use of ground based fireworks by members of ritual crews.

The Correfoc (firerun) is an element of many festivals, in which crews of diables (devils) dance through the streets to beating drums, holding maces above their heads upon which are mounted carretilles which spin, producing a shower of sparks culminating in an explosive pop. There are three types, les normals, les xiuladores, which emit a whistling sound, and les Arboç, which produce a large umbrella of sparks. Those that emit sparks but do not spin are called francesos and a larger, more potent version are called portuguessos. Those that emit only light are simulators and those that serve to ignite all types of coets are called botafoc, only used by the cap de la colla, or crew chief, who decides when ignition occurs. In many cases, the devils light their carretilles simultaneously by holding all of their maces together and once ignited, begin dancing to the beat of pounding drums. The character of Llucifer carries a larger and more elaborate mace called a ceptrot which is said to &quot;dominate over all,&quot; pictured at right. 

Pyrotechnics feature in several other Catalan festes:

Nit de San Joan (St. John’s Night, June 14) townsfolk set off rockets from all over town and light bonfires. 

Parliament de Diables (the infernal parliament) is a ritual performance by crews of devils in which characters such as Lucifer, the Diablessa (portrayed by a man in women’s clothes), and other members of the crew declaim satiric verses commenting on current events, punctuated by pyrotechnic dances. 

La Patum is celebrated in Berga on Corpus Christi, which has featured a ball de diables called Els Plens since 1628. In 2005, UNESCO declared La Patum one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.

The correfoc of the festa major of Vilanova i la Geltrú culminates in a sostre de foc (ceiling of fire) during which a mass of coets attached to wires are strung above the central plaza enabling the assembled multitude to be showered with sparks and explosions from the sky. 
===France===

In France, fireworks are traditionally displayed on the eve of Bastille day (14 July) to commemorate the French revolution and the storming of the Bastille on that same day in 1789. Every city in France lights up the sky for the occasion with a special mention to Paris that offers a spectacle around the Eiffel Tower.

===Hungary===

In Hungary fireworks are used on 20 August, which is a national celebration day 

===India===

Indians throughout the world celebrate with fireworks as part of their popular &quot;festival of lights&quot; (Diwali) in Oct-Nov every year.

===Japan===
During the summer in Japan, are held nearly every day someplace in the country, numbering more than 200 during August alone. The festivals consist of large fireworks shows, the largest of which use between 100,000 and 120,000 rounds (Tondabayashi, Osaka), and can attract more than 800,000 spectators. Street vendors set up stalls to sell various drinks and staple Japanese food (such as yakisoba, okonomiyaki, takoyaki, kakigōri (shaved ice), and traditionally held festival games, such as &quot;kingyo-sukui&quot;, or goldfish scooping.

Even today, men and women attend these events wearing the traditional yukata, summer kimono, or jinbei, and gather in large social circles of family or friends to sit picnic-like, eating and drinking, while watching the show.

The first fireworks festival in Japan was held in 1733 when Tokugawa Yoshimune, the eight shogun of the Edo Period, decreed a festival be held on the Sumida River on July 9th every year to mourn those who died in famine and other disasters. This event is recognized as the start of the Sumidagawa Fireworks Festival, and is one of the most recognizable fireworks festivals in Japan.

===Malta===
Fireworks have been used in Malta for hundreds of years. When the islands were ruled by the Order of St John, fireworks were used on special occasions such as the election of a new Grand Master, the appointment of a new Pope or the birth of a prince.

Nowadays, fireworks are used in village feasts throughout the summer. The Malta International Fireworks Festival is also held annually.

===Monte-Carlo International Fireworks Festival===
Pyrotechnics experts from around the world have competed in Monte Carlo, Monaco, since 1966. The festival runs from July to August every year, and the winner returns in 18 November for the fireworks display on the night before the National Day of Monaco. The event is held in Port Hercule, beginning at around 9:30pm every night, depending on the sunset.

===Singapore===


The Singapore Fireworks Celebrations (previously the Singapore Fireworks Festival) is an annual event held in Singapore as part of its National Day celebrations. The festival features local and foreign teams which launch displays on different nights. While currently non-competitive in nature, the organizer has plans to introduce a competitive element in the future.

The annual festival has grown in magnitude, from 4,000 rounds used in 2004, to 6,000 in 2005, to more than 9,100 in 2006.

===South Korea===

Busan International Fireworks Festival is one of the most significant fireworks festivals in Asia.

===Switzerland===
In Switzerland fireworks are often used on 1 August, which is a national celebration day.

===United Kingdom===
One of the biggest occasions for fireworks in the UK is Guy Fawkes Night held each year on 5 November, to celebrate the foiling of the Catholic Gunpowder Plot on 5 November 1605, an attempt to kill King James I. &quot;The Guardian&quot; newspaper said in 2008 that Britain&#x27;s biggest Guy Fawkes night events were:
* After Dark fireworks, Sheffield
* Bangers on the Beach (Holyhead Round Table charity fireworks), Holyhead
* Bonfire in Battle, East Sussex
* Blackheath Fireworks, London
* Bught Park fireworks, Inverness
* Fireworks with Vikings, Tutbury, Staffordshire
* Flaming Tar Barrels, Ottery St Mary
* Glasgow Green fireworks
* Halloween Happening fireworks, Derry
* Midsummer Common, Cambridge
* Sparks in the Park (Cardiff Round Table charity fireworks), Cardiff

The main firework celebrations in the UK are by the public who buy from many suppliers.

===United States===

America&#x27;s earliest settlers brought their enthusiasm for fireworks to the United States. Fireworks and black ash were used to celebrate important events long before the American Revolutionary War. The first celebration of Independence Day was in 1777, six years before Americans knew whether or not the new nation would survive the war; fireworks were a part of all festivities. In 1789, George Washington&#x27;s inauguration was accompanied by a fireworks display.. George Marshall was an American naval hero during the War of 1812 and other campaigns. He was a Master Gunner and pyrotechnics specialist who wrote &quot; Marshall&#x27;s Practical Marine Gunnery&quot; in 1822. The book outlines chemical formulas for the composition of fireworks. This early fascination with fireworks&#x27; noise and color continues today with fireworks displays commonly included in Independence Day celebrations.

In 2004, Disneyland, in Anaheim, California, pioneered the commercial use of aerial fireworks launched with compressed air rather than gunpowder. The display shell explodes in the air using an electronic timer. The advantages of compressed air launch are a reduction in fumes, and much greater accuracy in height and timing. The Walt Disney Company is now the largest consumer of fireworks in the world.

=== Halloween ===
;Canada
Fireworks are a popular tradition during Halloween in Vancouver.

;Ireland
In the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland there are many fireworks displays, during Halloween. The sale of fireworks is strongly restricted in the Republic of Ireland, although many illegal fireworks are sold throughout October or smuggled from Northern Ireland. The maximum punishment for possessing fireworks without a licence, or lighting fireworks in a public place, is a €10,000 fine and a five-year prison sentence.

;United States
Two firework displays on All Hallows&#x27; Eve in the United States are the &quot;Happy Hallowishes&quot; show at Walt Disney World&#x27;s Magic Kingdom &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Not-So-Scary Halloween Party&quot; event, which began in 2005, and the &quot;Halloween Screams&quot; at Disneyland Park, which began in 2009.

==Uses other than public displays==
In addition to large public displays, people often buy small quantities of fireworks for their own celebrations. Fireworks on general sale are usually less powerful than professional fireworks. Types include firecrackers, rockets, cakes (multishot aerial fireworks), and smoke balls.

Fireworks can also be used in an agricultural capacity as to frighten away birds.

== Culture ==

=== Competitions ===
Pyrotechnical competitions are held in many countries. Among them are the Montreal Fireworks Festival, an annual competition held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Le Festival d&#x27;Art Pyrotechnique, held in the summer annually at the Bay of Cannes in Côte d&#x27;Azur, France; and the Philippine International Pyromusical Competition, held in Manila, Philippines amongst the top fireworks companies in the world.

=== Clubs and organizations ===
Enthusiasts in the United States have formed clubs which unite hobbyists and professionals. The groups provide safety instruction and organize meetings and private &quot;shoots&quot; at remote premises where members shoot commercial fireworks as well as fire pieces of their own manufacture. Clubs secure permission to fire items otherwise banned by state or local ordinances. Competition among members and between clubs, demonstrating everything from single shells to elaborate displays choreographed to music, are held. One of the oldest clubs is Crackerjacks, Inc., organized in 1976 in the Eastern Seaboard region.

Though based in the US, membership of the Pyrotechnics Guild International, Inc. (PGI) is annual convention founded in 1969, it hosts some the world&#x27;s biggest fireworks displays occur. Aside from the nightly firework shows, one of the most popular events of the convention is a unique event where individual classes of hand-built fireworks are competitively judged, ranging from simple fireworks rockets to extremely large and complex aerial shells. Some of the biggest, most intricate fireworks displays in the United States take place during the convention week.

== Growth ==
According to industry data, the purchase of fireworks by American consumers has markedly increased since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the year preceding the pandemic, the consumer fireworks industry reported sales of approximately $1 billion. However, this figure almost doubled in 2020, reaching $2.3 billion. In contrast, commercial fireworks sales amounted to a smaller figure of $400 million. For context, consumer fireworks revenue was significantly lower at $645 million in 2012, indicating a steady growth trend in the market. Industry projections currently anticipate a further increase, forecasting fireworks sales to reach $3.3 billion by 2028.

==See also==
*List of fireworks accidents and incidents

==References==

* Quote from Dave Whysall of Dave Whysall&#x27;s International Fireworks located in Orton, ON. www.dwfireworks.com

==Further reading==
* Melanie Doderer-Winkler, &quot;Magnificent Entertainments: Temporary Architecture for Georgian Festivals&quot; (London and New Haven, Yale University Press for The Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art, December 2013). and .
* 
* 

==External links==

* NOVA Online Kaboom! with pyrotechnics, anatomy of fireworks, etc
* Canadian Fireworks Association ACP
*Scientific American article, &quot;Firework Formula&quot;, 16-July-1881, pp. 42</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="0" end="9" title="Fireworks" label="Fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="14" end="27" title="Explosive" label="low explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q474100" start="28" end="39" title="Pyrotechnics" label="pyrotechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200538" start="317" end="329" title="Celebration (party)" label="celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037209" start="366" end="385" title="List of fireworks accidents and incidents" label="fireworks accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q815530" start="492" end="500" title="confetti" label="confetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583685" start="777" end="787" title="Air propulsion" label="propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q336382" start="789" end="798" title="skyrocket" label="skyrocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="829" end="835" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="837" end="849" title="aerial shell" label="aerial shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="881" end="886" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432723" start="890" end="900" title="Card stock" label="pasteboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="932" end="943" title="combustion" label="combustible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263722" start="960" end="977" title="pyrotechnic stars" label="pyrotechnic stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="1204" end="1211" title="warfare" label="warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434077" start="1417" end="1434" title="List of Chinese inventions" label="invented in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="2010" end="2022" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="2235" end="2246" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q588748" start="2487" end="2499" title="firecrackers" label="firecrackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241399" start="3152" end="3196" title="Dongjing Meng Hua Lu" label="Dreams of the Glories of the Eastern Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7486" start="3557" end="3580" title="Emperor Huizong of Song" label="Emperor Huizong of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409248" start="3760" end="3775" title="Empress Dowager" label="Empress Dowager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497" start="3848" end="3870" title="Emperor Lizong of Song" label="Emperor Lizong of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="4260" end="4271" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q988866" start="4407" end="4418" title="Huolongjing" label="Huolongjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553722" start="4450" end="4458" title="Wubeizhi" label="Wubeizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="4667" end="4671" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853756" start="5264" end="5279" title="Antoine Caillot" label="Antoine Caillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972" start="5473" end="5488" title="Sir John Barrow" label="Sir John Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="5778" end="5793" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386443" start="5926" end="5968" title="Pierre Nicolas d&amp;#x27;Incarville" label="Pierre Nicolas le Chéron d&amp;#x27;Incarville"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="5980" end="5987" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="6057" end="6082" title="Paris Academy of Sciences" label="Paris Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736087" start="6130" end="6153" title="Amédée-François Frézier" label="Amédée-François Frézier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147529" start="6391" end="6420" title="Music for the Royal Fireworks" label="Music for the Royal Fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="6443" end="6465" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156086" start="6491" end="6522" title="Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748)" label="Peace treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263722" start="7168" end="7184" title="pyrotechnic star" label="pyrotechnic star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263719" start="7523" end="7548" title="Pyrotechnic colorant" label="color-producing compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q898373" start="7642" end="7652" title="flame test" label="flame test"/>
<link wikidata="Q911679" start="7872" end="7878" title="Spark (fire)" label="sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="8135" end="8155" title="black-body radiation" label="black-body radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="8381" end="8390" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="8392" end="8401" title="Magnesium" label="Magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347937" start="8541" end="8550" title="magnalium" label="magnalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q664571" start="10036" end="10040" title="Fuse (explosives)" label="fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="12747" end="12752" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151588" start="12810" end="12815" title="Comet (pyrotechnics)" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995186" start="13581" end="13593" title="flash powder" label="flash powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772355" start="14037" end="14043" title="Maroon (rocket)" label="Maroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170518" start="16229" end="16234" title="burn (injury)" label="burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q184753" start="16239" end="16244" title="wound" label="wound"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037209" start="16323" end="16342" title="List of fireworks accidents and incidents" label="fireworks accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="16940" end="16978" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="17082" end="17087" title="geese" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="17089" end="17095" title="eagles" label="eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q158085" start="17132" end="17152" title="Max Planck Institute" label="Max Planck Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="17157" end="17189" title="University of Amsterdam" label="Netherlands Institute of Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="17801" end="17813" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="18088" end="18094" title="barium" label="barium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774970" start="18325" end="18341" title="antimony sulfide" label="antimony sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="18345" end="18352" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="18619" end="18631" title="black powder" label="black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q407189" start="18692" end="18703" title="Perchlorate" label="Perchlorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="18704" end="18709" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="19032" end="19066" title="US Environmental Protection Agency" label="US Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="20470" end="20476" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="21526" end="21539" title="Clean Air Act (United States)" label="Clean Air Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="21903" end="21912" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="22019" end="22027" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="22029" end="22032" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="22037" end="22055" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q349770" start="22518" end="22542" title="Natural Resources Canada" label="Natural Resources Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q143983" start="24155" end="24160" title="epoxy" label="epoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641430" start="24165" end="24169" title="HDPE" label="HDPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821717" start="25269" end="25274" title="squib (explosive)" label="squib"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="25793" end="25798" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="26148" end="26162" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="26223" end="26239" title="Member state of the European Union" label="EU member states"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="26392" end="26399" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="26464" end="26483" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610835" start="26547" end="26573" title="List of municipalities of the Flemish Region" label="308 Flemish municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q177529" start="26607" end="26619" title="burgemeester" label="burgemeester"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="26621" end="26626" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="26740" end="26747" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="27207" end="27214" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="27595" end="27601" title="Thatching" label="thatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83889294" start="27857" end="27874" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Germany" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765125" start="28025" end="28066" title="2024–2025 German New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve pyrotechnics incidents" label="the 2024–2025 New Year&amp;#x27;s eve and day"/>
<link wikidata="Q100779" start="28217" end="28227" title="Collecchio" label="Collecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="28376" end="28387" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="28657" end="28676" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="28774" end="28783" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="28872" end="28888" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="28911" end="28917" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q588748" start="28983" end="28994" title="Fire cracker" label="Firecracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742663" start="29041" end="29072" title="Fireworks policy in the European Union" label="European Union fireworks policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="29094" end="29101" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="29347" end="29356" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="29580" end="29591" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="30193" end="30199" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="30606" end="30612" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941792" start="30650" end="30678" title="Bonfire Night" label="Guy Fawkes Night, 5 November"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="30686" end="30705" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478750" start="30791" end="30818" title="Health and Safety Executive" label="Health and Safety Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q844844" start="31387" end="31400" title="Guy Fawkes Night" label="Bonfire Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="31447" end="31463" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="31488" end="31494" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34812" start="31519" end="31527" title="New Year" label="New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="31575" end="31594" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="32175" end="32188" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806416" start="32507" end="32543" title="National Fire Protection Association" label="National Fire Protection Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="32944" end="32953" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="33046" end="33065" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q502375" start="33070" end="33083" title="Australia Day" label="Australia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660053" start="33108" end="33134" title="Sydney New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="Sydney New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="33174" end="33192" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q113040064" start="33250" end="33263" title="Territory Day" label="Territory Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="33411" end="33420" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816129" start="35215" end="35223" title="La Patum" label="La Patum"/>
<link wikidata="Q152395" start="35250" end="35264" title="Feast of Corpus Christi" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="35341" end="35347" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="35733" end="35739" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="35861" end="35885" title="storming of the Bastille" label="storming of the Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="36035" end="36047" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="36271" end="36277" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q490928" start="36549" end="36568" title="Tondabayashi, Osaka" label="Tondabayashi, Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144102" start="36703" end="36711" title="yakisoba" label="yakisoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q701075" start="36713" end="36724" title="okonomiyaki" label="okonomiyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q905527" start="36726" end="36734" title="takoyaki" label="takoyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q905204" start="36736" end="36744" title="kakigōri" label="kakigōri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564031" start="36835" end="36852" title="goldfish scooping" label="goldfish scooping"/>
<link wikidata="Q849302" start="36925" end="36931" title="yukata" label="yukata"/>
<link wikidata="Q483444" start="36940" end="36946" title="kimono" label="kimono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044952" start="36951" end="36957" title="jinbei" label="jinbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q319664" start="37142" end="37160" title="Tokugawa Yoshimune" label="Tokugawa Yoshimune"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="37186" end="37196" title="Edo period" label="Edo Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119229" start="37368" end="37397" title="Sumidagawa Fireworks Festival" label="Sumidagawa Fireworks Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355522" start="37557" end="37586" title="Hospitaller Malta" label="ruled by the Order of St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q952136" start="37659" end="37671" title="List of Grand Masters of the Knights Hospitaller" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="37698" end="37702" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="37978" end="37989" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898571" start="38149" end="38171" title="National Day of Monaco" label="National Day of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="38194" end="38206" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercule"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="38402" end="38411" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q57598" start="38427" end="38439" title="National Day" label="National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="38924" end="38935" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q844844" start="39089" end="39105" title="Guy Fawkes Night" label="Guy Fawkes Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="39177" end="39191" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="39231" end="39243" title="James I of England" label="King James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q257446" start="39387" end="39407" title="Holyhead" label="Bangers on the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q737593" start="39472" end="39491" title="Battle, East Sussex" label="Battle, East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="39494" end="39514" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath Fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986188" start="39525" end="39535" title="Bught Park" label="Bught Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856912" start="39559" end="39581" title="Tutbury Castle" label="Fireworks with Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247828" start="39608" end="39627" title="Ottery St Mary" label="Flaming Tar Barrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566834" start="39646" end="39659" title="Glasgow Green" label="Glasgow Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="39672" end="39701" title="Derry" label="Halloween Happening fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843033" start="39711" end="39727" title="Midsummer Common" label="Midsummer Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573719" start="39741" end="39759" title="Sparks in the Park" label="Sparks in the Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="39999" end="40012" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="40094" end="40120" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="40147" end="40163" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="40313" end="40330" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="40835" end="40845" title="Disneyland Park (Anaheim)" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="40850" end="40869" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q143746" start="40934" end="40948" title="compressed air" label="compressed air"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="40961" end="40970" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="41155" end="41174" title="Walt Disney Company" label="Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="41311" end="41320" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="41339" end="41358" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="41363" end="41379" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="41422" end="41431" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643036" start="41858" end="41875" title="HalloWishes" label="Happy Hallowishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="41890" end="41907" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324340" start="41915" end="41928" title="Magic Kingdom" label="Magic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838556" start="41935" end="41977" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Not-So-Scary Halloween Party" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Not-So-Scary Halloween Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643118" start="42026" end="42043" title="Halloween Screams" label="Halloween Screams"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="42053" end="42068" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339909" start="42471" end="42493" title="bird scarer" label="to frighten away birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146522" start="42606" end="42633" title="L&amp;#x27;International des Feux Loto-Québec" label="Montreal Fireworks Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="42781" end="42797" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569997" start="42815" end="42863" title="Philippine International Pyromusical Competition" label="Philippine International Pyromusical Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821539" start="43638" end="43670" title="Pyrotechnics Guild International" label="Pyrotechnics Guild International"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="44302" end="44319" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037209" start="44860" end="44901" title="List of fireworks accidents and incidents" label="List of fireworks accidents and incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="45422" end="45441" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59495" wikidata="Q560589" url="?curid=59495" title="Method acting">
<text>Method acting, known as the Method, is a range of rehearsal techniques, as formulated by a number of different theatre practitioners, that seeks to encourage sincere and expressive performances through identifying with, understanding, and experiencing a character&#x27;s inner motivation and emotions. These techniques are built on Stanislavski&#x27;s system, developed by the Russian actor and director Konstantin Stanislavski and captured in his books &quot;An Actor Prepares&quot;, &quot;Building a Character&quot;, and &quot;Creating a Role&quot;.

Among those who have contributed to the development of the Method, three teachers are associated with &quot;having set the standard of its success&quot;, each emphasizing different aspects of the approach: Lee Strasberg (the psychological aspects), Stella Adler (the sociological aspects), and Sanford Meisner (the behavioral aspects). The approach was first developed when they worked together at the Group Theatre in New York and later at the Actors Studio.

== History and development ==
&quot;The Method&quot; is an elaboration of the &quot;system&quot; of acting developed by the Russian theatre practitioner Konstantin Stanislavski. In the first three decades of the 20th century, Stanislavski organized his training, preparation, and rehearsal techniques into a coherent, systematic methodology. The &quot;method&quot; brought together and built on: (1) the director-centred, unified aesthetic and disciplined, ensemble approach of the Meiningen company; (2) the actor-centred realism of the Maly Theatre; (3) and the naturalistic staging of André Antoine and the independent theatre movement.

The &quot;system&quot; cultivates what Stanislavski calls the &quot;art of experiencing&quot;, to which he contrasts the &quot;art of representation&quot;. It mobilizes the actor&#x27;s conscious thought and will, in order to activate other, less-controllable psychological processes, like emotional experience and subconscious behavior, both sympathetically and indirectly. In rehearsal, the actor searches for inner motives to justify action and the definition of what the character seeks to achieve at any given moment (a &quot;task&quot;). Later, Stanislavski further elaborated the &quot;system&quot; with a more physically grounded rehearsal process, which is known as the &quot;Method of Physical Action&quot;. Minimizing at-the-table discussions, he now encouraged an &quot;active analysis&quot;, in which the sequence of dramatic situations are improvised. &quot;The best analysis of a play&quot;, Stanislavski argued, &quot;is to take action in the given circumstances.&quot;

As well as Stanislavski&#x27;s early work, the ideas and techniques of Yevgeny Vakhtangov (a Russian-Armenian student who had died in 1922 at age 39) were also an important influence on the development of the Method. Vakhtangov&#x27;s &quot;object exercises&quot; were developed further by Uta Hagen as a means for actor training and the maintenance of skills. Strasberg attributed to Vakhtangov the distinction between Stanislavski&#x27;s process of &quot;justifying&quot; behavior with the inner motivational forces that prompt that behavior in the character and the &quot;motivating&quot; behavior with imagined or recalled experiences relating to the actor and substituted for those relating to the character. Following this distinction, actors ask themselves &quot;What would motivate me, the actor, to behave in the way the character does?&quot; The contrast is the Stanislavskian question, &quot;Given the particular circumstances of the play, how would I behave, what would I do, how would I feel, how would I react?&quot;

=== United States ===
In the United States, the transmission of the earliest phase of Stanislavski&#x27;s work via the students of the First Studio of the Moscow Art Theatre (MAT) revolutionized acting in the West. When the MAT toured the US in the early 1920s, Richard Boleslawski, one of Stanislavski&#x27;s students from the First Studio, presented a series of lectures on the &quot;system&quot; that were eventually published as &quot;Acting: The First Six Lessons&quot; (1933). The interest generated led to a decision by Boleslawski and Maria Ouspenskaya (another student at the First Studio who later became an acting teacher) to emigrate to the US and to establish the American Laboratory Theatre.

However, the version of Stanislavski&#x27;s practice these students took to the US with them was that developed in the 1910s, rather than the more fully elaborated version of the &quot;system&quot; detailed in Stanislavski&#x27;s acting manuals from the 1930s, &quot;An Actor&#x27;s Work&quot; and &quot;An Actor&#x27;s Work on a Role&quot;. The first half of &quot;An Actor&#x27;s Work&quot;, which treated the psychological elements of training, was published in a heavily abridged and misleadingly translated version in the US as &quot;An Actor Prepares&quot; in 1936. English-language readers often confused the first volume on psychological processes with the &quot;system&quot; as a whole. Many of the American practitioners who came to be identified with the Method were taught by Boleslawski and Ouspenskaya at the American Laboratory Theatre. The approaches to acting subsequently developed by their students—including Lee Strasberg, Stella Adler, and Sanford Meisner—are often confused with Stanislavski&#x27;s &quot;system&quot;.

Stella Adler, an actress and acting teacher whose students included Marlon Brando, Warren Beatty, and Robert De Niro, also broke with Strasberg after she studied with Stanislavski. Her version of the method is based on the idea that actors should stimulate emotional experience by imagining the scene&#x27;s &quot;given circumstances&quot;, rather than recalling experiences from their own lives. Adler&#x27;s approach also seeks to stimulate the actor&#x27;s imagination through the use of &quot;as ifs&quot;, which substitute more personally affecting imagined situations for the circumstances experienced by the character.

Alfred Hitchcock described his work with Montgomery Clift in &quot;I Confess&quot; as difficult &quot;because you know, he was a method actor&quot;. He recalled similar problems with Paul Newman in &quot;Torn Curtain&quot;. Lillian Gish quipped: &quot;It&#x27;s ridiculous. How would you portray death if you had to experience it first?&quot; Charles Laughton, who worked closely for a time with Bertolt Brecht, argued that &quot;Method actors give you a photograph&quot;, while &quot;real actors give you an oil painting.&quot;

During the filming of &quot;Marathon Man&quot; (1976), Laurence Olivier, who had lost patience with Method acting two decades earlier while filming &quot;The Prince and the Showgirl&quot; (1957), was said to have quipped to Dustin Hoffman, after Hoffman stayed up all night to match his character&#x27;s situation, that Hoffman should &quot;try acting ... It&#x27;s so much easier.&quot; In an interview on &quot;Inside the Actors Studio&quot;, Hoffman said that this story had been distorted: he had been up all night at the Studio 54 nightclub for personal rather than professional reasons and Olivier, who understood this, was joking.

Strasberg&#x27;s students included many prominent American actors of the latter half of the 20th century, including Paul Newman, Al Pacino, George Peppard, Dustin Hoffman, James Dean, Marilyn Monroe, Jane Fonda, Jack Nicholson, and Mickey Rourke.

=== India ===
In Indian cinema, a form of Method acting was developed independently from American cinema. Dilip Kumar, a Hindi cinema actor who debuted in the 1940s and eventually became one of the biggest Indian movie stars of the 1950s and 1960s, was a pioneer of this technique, predating Hollywood Method actors such as Marlon Brando. Kumar inspired many future Indian actors, including Amitabh Bachchan, Naseeruddin Shah, Nawazuddin Siddiqui, Irrfan Khan and many more. Kumar, who pioneered his own form of method acting without any acting school experience, was described as &quot;the ultimate method actor&quot; by filmmaker Satyajit Ray.

In the south, method acting was extensively practiced at first by Malayalam actor Sathyan and later by Tamil actor Sivaji Ganeshan and later by prominent actors like Mammootty, Mohanlal and Kamal Haasan.

Method acting is being discussed more in India with the rise of OTT streaming platforms that feature several popular web series exploring genres seldom featured in Indian cinema. The increasing viewership of these platforms has given space to the next generation of method actors in India, including Rajkumar Rao, Amit Sadh, Pawan Kalyan, Ali Fazal and Vicky Kaushal.

=== Henry Irving&#x27;s &#x27;Dual Consciousness&#x27; System ===
The techniques used by the English actor Henry Irving, who died in 1905, are a precursor to the established ideas about method acting. These were described by Bram Stoker, author of Dracula, in two chapters of his book Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving, published in 1907. Stoker had worked in close cooperation with Irving as the business manager of  the Lyceum Theatre in London, which Irving owned.

Some quotes from Stoker’s book:Irving and I were alone together one hot afternoon in August 1889, crossing in the steamer from Southsea to the Isle of Wight, and were talking of that phase of Stage Art which deals with the conception and development of character. In the course of our conversation, whilst he was explaining to me the absolute necessity of an actor&#x27;s understanding the prime qualities of a character in order that he may make it throughout consistent, he said these words: “If you do not pass a character through your own mind it can never be sincere”. I was much struck with the phrase... Lest I should forget the exact words I wrote them then and there in my pocket-book. I entered them later in my diary. p. 244

Quoting Irving: ‘It is most important that an actor should learn that he is a figure in a picture, and that the least exaggeration destroys the harmony of the composition. All the members of the company should work toward a common end, with the nicest subordination of their individuality to the general purpose.’ p.252

And quoting Irving again: ‘Has not the actor who can... make his feelings a part of his art an advantage over the actor who never feels, but makes his observations solely from the feelings of others? It is necessary to this art that the mind should have, as it were, a double consciousness, in which all the emotions proper to the occasion may have full swing, while the actor is all the time on the alert for every detail of his method... The actor who combines the electric force of a strong personality with a mastery of the resources of his art, must have a greater power over his audiences than the passionless actor who gives a most artistic simulation of the emotions he never experiences.’ p.256

‘For the purely monkey arts of life there is no future they stand only in the crude glare of the present, and there is no softness for them, in the twilight of either hope or memory. With the true artist the internal force is the first requisite the external appearance being merely the medium through which this is made known to others.’ p.257. 

‘If an actor has to learn of others often primarily through his own emotions, it is surely necessary that he learn first to know himself. He need not take himself as a standard of perfection though poor human nature is apt to lean that way; but he can accept himself as something that he knows. If he cannot get that far he will never know anything. With himself then, and his self-knowledge as a foothold, he may begin to understand others.’ p.258It has been suggested that Bram Stoker used Irving&#x27;s techniques to help him capture authenticity of tone while writing Dracula. 

== Techniques ==
Among the concepts and techniques of Method acting are substitution, &quot;as if&quot;, sense memory, affective memory, and animal work (all of which were first developed by Stanislavski). Contemporary Method actors sometimes seek help from psychologists in the development of their roles.

In Strasberg&#x27;s approach, actors make use of experiences from their own lives to bring them closer to the experience of their characters. This technique, which Stanislavski came to call emotion memory (Strasberg tends to use the alternative formulation, &quot;affective memory&quot;), involves the recall of sensations involved in experiences that made a significant emotional impact on the actor. Without faking or forcing, actors allow those sensations to stimulate a response and try not to inhibit themselves.

Stanislavski also took great interest in &quot;Perezhivanie&quot; (&quot;re-living,&quot; particularly emotional experiences) and how it could be utilized to create different characters. &quot;Perezhivanie&quot; was a term formerly used in psychology that became popularized when Stanislavski began using it as an acting approach. Stanislavski believed that actors needed to go beyond imitation and encouraged actors to explore their emotions heavily. He defended the idea that the actor needed to experience what the character was experiencing.

Stanislavski&#x27;s approach rejected emotion memory except as a last resort and prioritized physical action as an indirect pathway to emotional expression. This can be seen in Stanislavki&#x27;s notes for Leonidov in the production plan for &quot;Othello&quot; and in Benedetti&#x27;s discussion of his training of actors at home and later abroad. Stanislavski confirmed this emphasis in his discussions with Harold Clurman in late 1935.

In training, as distinct from rehearsal process, the recall of sensations to provoke emotional experience and the development of a vividly imagined fictional experience remained a central part both of Stanislavski&#x27;s and the various Method-based approaches that developed out of it.

A widespread misconception about Method acting—particularly in the popular media—equates Method actors with actors who choose to remain in character even offstage or off-camera for the duration of a project. In his book &quot;A Dream of Passion&quot;, Strasberg wrote that Stanislavski, early in his directing career, &quot;require[d] his actors to live &#x27;in character&#x27; off stage&quot;, but that &quot;the results were never fully satisfactory&quot;. Stanislavski did experiment with this approach in his own acting before he became a professional actor and founded the Moscow Art Theatre, though he soon abandoned it. Some Method actors employ this technique, such as Daniel Day-Lewis, but Strasberg did not include it as part of his teachings and it &quot;is not part of the Method approach&quot;.

While Strasberg focused on the memory-recall aspect of the method, Adler&#x27;s approach centered on the idea that actors should find truth in the script, inner emotions, experiences, and circumstances of the character. Her teachings have been carried on through Larry Moss, a successor and student of Adler. Moss is the author of the acting textbook &quot;The Intent to Live&quot;, in which he maintains the basic training of Adler&#x27;s techniques. The book introduces &quot;given circumstances&quot;, which are the facts about the character given in the script, and &quot;interpretation&quot;, which is the truths about the character not given in the script. This constitutes the actor&#x27;s assumptions about the character they are playing.

According to Moss, there are three things that an actor needs to know about their character to find truth in their performance. These things are objectives, obstacles, and intentions. The &quot;objective&quot; is what a character needs to fulfill in a given scene. The &quot;super objective&quot; is the character&#x27;s wishes or dreams throughout the entire story. &quot;Obstacle&quot; is what stands in the way of the character&#x27;s objectives. &quot;Intention&quot; comprises the actions a character takes to overcome obstacles and achieve objectives. Moss advocates the position that if an actor understands these facts about their character, they will be able to find truth in their performance, creating a realistic presentation. Moss emphasizes this by claiming that the actor does not want to become the character, rather, the character lives through the actor&#x27;s justification of the character&#x27;s truths within themselves.

== Psychological effects ==
Method acting has been studied for the possible effects it has on the actor&#x27;s physical and emotional well-being. Oftentimes, method actors delve into previous emotional experiences, be they joyful or traumatic. The psychological effects, like emotional fatigue, come when suppressed or unresolved raw emotions are dredged up to add to the character, not just from employing personal emotions in performance. On the other hand, it has been suggested that actors have stronger emotional regulation. This may be due to the actor&#x27;s constant need to conjure up certain emotions and have control over them.

Fatigue, or emotional fatigue, comes mainly when actors &quot;create dissonance between their actions and their actual feelings&quot;. A mode of acting referred to as &quot;surface acting&quot; involves only changing one&#x27;s actions without altering the deeper thought processes. Method acting, when employed correctly, is mainly deep acting, or changing thoughts as well as actions, proven to generally avoid excessive fatigue. Surface acting is statistically &quot;positively associated with a negative mood and this explains some of the association of surface acting with increased emotional exhaustion&quot;. This negative mood that is created leads to fear, anxiety, feelings of shame and sleep deprivation.

Raw emotion (unresolved emotions conjured up for acting) may result in sleep deprivation and the cyclical nature of the ensuing side effects. Sleep deprivation alone can lead to impaired function, causing some individuals to have &quot;acute episodes of psychosis&quot;. Sleep deprivation initiates chemical changes in the brain that can lead to behavior similar to psychotic individuals. These episodes can lead to more lasting psychological damage. In cases where raw emotion that has not been resolved, or traumas have been evoked before closure has been reached by the individual, the emotion can result in greater emotional instability and an increased sense of anxiety, fear or shame.

However, method acting and acting as a whole can also pose a lot of benefits to the actor. Research has found that actors have a strong theory of mind (The capacity to understand other people by ascribing mental states to them), and improve one&#x27;s skills in empathy (The capacity to understand other people&#x27;s emotional states). It has been argued that children trained in the method can better understand their own emotions and the emotions of others. Actors have also been found to have increased memory skills. A study found that when non-actors were taught the memorization techniques actors used, their memory increased significantly.

== See also ==

* Ivana Chubbuck
* Ion Cojar
* List of acting techniques
* Sanford Meisner
* Konstantin Stanislavski
* Lee Strasberg

== Citations ==
== General and cited sources ==
=== Primary sources ===

* Adler, Stella. 2000. &quot;The Art of Acting&quot;. Ed. Howard Kissel. New York: Applause. .
* Adler, Stella. 1990. &quot;The Technique of Acting&quot;. New York: Bantam. .
* Hagen, Uta and Haskel Frankel. 1973. &quot;Respect for Acting&quot;. New York: Macmillan. .
* Hagen, Uta. 1991. &quot;A Challenge for the Actor&quot;. New York: Scribner. .
* Meisner, Sanford, and Dennis Longwell. 1987. &quot;Sanford Meisner on Acting&quot;. New York: Vintage. .
* Stanislavski, Konstantin. 1936. &quot;An Actor Prepares&quot;. London: Methuen, 1988. .
* Stanislavski, Konstantin. 1938. &quot;An Actor&#x27;s Work: A Student&#x27;s Diary&quot;. Trans. and ed. Jean Benedetti. London and New York: Routledge, 2008. .
* Stanislavski, Konstantin. 1957. &quot;An Actor&#x27;s Work on a Role&quot;. Trans. and ed. Jean Benedetti. London and New York: Routledge, 2010. .
* Strasberg, Lee. 1965. &quot;Strasberg at the Actors Studio: Tape-Recorded Sessions&quot;. Ed. Robert H. Hethmon. New York: Theater Communications Group.
* Strasberg, Lee. 1987. &quot;A Dream of Passion: The Development of the Method&quot;. Ed. Evangeline Morphos. New York: Plume, 1988. .
* Strasberg, Lee. 2010. &quot;The Lee Strasberg Notes&quot;. Ed. Lola Cohen. London: Routledge. .
=== Secondary sources ===

* Abramson, Leslie H. 2015. &quot;Hitchcock and the Anxiety of Authorship.&quot;. New York: Palgrave. .
* Banham, Martin, ed. 1998. &quot;The Cambridge Guide to Theatre&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. .
* Benedetti, Jean. 1989. &quot;Stanislavski: An Introduction&quot;. Revised edition. Original edition published in 1982. London: Methuen. .
* Benedetti, Jean. 1998. &quot;Stanislavski and the Actor&quot;. London: Methuen. .
* Benedetti, Jean. 1999a. &quot;Stanislavski: His Life and Art&quot;. Revised edition. Original edition published in 1988. London: Methuen. .
* Benedetti, Jean. 1999b. &quot;Stanislavsky and the Moscow Art Theatre, 1898–1938&quot;. In Leach and Borovsky (1999, 254–277).
* Blum, Richard A. 1984. &quot;American Film Acting: The Stanislavski Heritage&quot;. Studies in Cinema 28. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Press.
* Braun, Edward. 1982. &quot;Stanislavsky and Chekhov&quot;. &quot;The Director and the Stage: From Naturalism to Grotowski&quot;. London: Methuen. . p. 59–76.
* Carnicke, Sharon M. 1998. &quot;Stanislavsky in Focus&quot;. Russian Theatre Archive Ser. London: Harwood Academic Publishers. .
* Carnicke, Sharon M. 2000. &quot;Stanislavsky&#x27;s System: Pathways for the Actor&quot;. In Hodge (2000, 11–36).
* Carnicke, Sharon M. 2009. &quot;Stanislavsky in Focus: An Acting Master for the Twenty-First Century&quot;. 2nd ed. of Carnicke (1998). Routledge Theatre Classics. London: Routledge. .
* Counsell, Colin. 1996. &quot;Signs of Performance: An Introduction to Twentieth-Century Theatre&quot;. London and New York: Routledge. .
* Daily Telegraph, The. 2013. &quot;The Method Madness of Daniel Day-Lewis&quot;. &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; 23 January 2013. Web. Accessed 13 August 2016.
* Encyclopædia Britannica. 2013. &quot;Stella Adler (American Actress)&quot;. &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica Online&quot;. Web. 27 October 2011.
* Flom, Eric L. 2009. &quot;Silent Film Stars on the Stages of Seattle: A History of Performances by Hollywood Notables&quot;. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. .
* French, Philip. 2008. &quot;Philip French&#x27;s Screen Legends: Charles Laughton&quot;. &quot;The Guardian&quot;. 21 September 2008. Web. Accessed 31 August 2016.
* Gallagher-Ross, Jacob. 2018. &quot;Theaters of the Everyday&quot;. Evanston: Northwestern University Press..
* Golub, Spencer. 1998. &quot;Stanislavsky, Konstantin (Sergeevich)&quot;. In Banham (1998, 1032–1033).
* Gordon, Marc. 2000. &quot;Salvaging Strasberg at the Fin de Siècle&quot;. In Krasner (2000, 43–60).
* Gordon, Robert. 2006. &quot;The Purpose of Playing: Modern Acting Theories in Perspective&quot;. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P. .
* Gussow, Mel. 1982. &quot;Obituary: Lee Strasberg of Actors Studio Dead&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; 18 February 1982. Web. Accessed 4 March 2014.
* Hayward, Susan. 1996. &quot;Key Concepts in Cinema Studies&quot;. Key Concepts ser. London: Routledge. .
* Hodge, Alison, ed. 2000. &quot;Twentieth-Century Actor Training&quot;. London and New York: Routledge. .
* Hull, S. Loraine. 1985. &quot;Strasberg&#x27;s Method as Taught by Lorrie Hull&quot;. Woodbridge, CN: Ox Bow. .
* Innes, Christopher, ed. 2000. &quot;A Sourcebook on Naturalist Theatre&quot;. London and New York: Routledge. .
* Kase, Larina. 2011. &quot;Clients, Clients, and More Clients!: Create an Endless Stream of New Business with the Power of Psychology&quot;. New York: McGraw–Hill. .
* Krasner, David, ed. 2000a. &quot;Method Acting Reconsidered: Theory, Practice, Future&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s P. .
* Krasner, David. 2000b. &quot;Strasberg, Adler, Meisner: Method Acting&quot;. In Hodge (2000, 129–150).
* Leach, Robert. 2004. &quot;Makers of Modern Theatre: An Introduction&quot;. London: Routledge. .
* Leach, Robert, and Victor Borovsky, eds. 1999. &quot;A History of Russian Theatre&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. .
* Lewis, Robert. 2003. &quot;Slings and Arrows: Theater in My Life&quot;. New York: Hal Leonard Corporation. .
* Magarshack, David. 1950. &quot;Stanislavsky: A Life&quot;. London and Boston: Faber, 1986. .
* Milling, Jane, and Graham Ley. 2001. &quot;Modern Theories of Performance: From Stanislavski to Boal&quot;. Basingstoke, Hampshire and New York: Palgrave. .
* Roach, Joseph R. 1985. &quot;The Player&#x27;s Passion: Studies in the Science of Acting&quot;. Theater:Theory/Text/Performance Ser. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P. .
* Skog, Jason. 2010. &quot;Acting: A Practical Guide to Pursuing the Art&quot;. Mankato, MN: Compass Point. .
* Toporkov, Vasily Osipovich. 2001. &quot;Stanislavski in Rehearsal: The Final Years&quot;. Trans. Jean Benedetti. London: Methuen. .
* Whyman, Rose. 2008. &quot;The Stanislavsky System of Acting: Legacy and Influence in Modern Performance&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q560589" start="0" end="13" title="Method acting" label="Method acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q560589" start="24" end="34" title="Method acting" label="the Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777541" start="111" end="131" title="theatre practitioner" label="theatre practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089649" start="332" end="358" title="Stanislavski&amp;#x27;s system" label="Stanislavski&amp;#x27;s system"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="404" end="427" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Konstantin Stanislavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400310" start="460" end="477" title="An Actor Prepares" label="An Actor Prepares"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848804" start="491" end="511" title="Building a Character" label="Building a Character"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154819" start="529" end="544" title="Creating a Role" label="Creating a Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="759" end="772" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="802" end="814" title="Stella Adler" label="Stella Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358028" start="847" end="862" title="Sanford Meisner" label="Sanford Meisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q378577" start="955" end="968" title="Group Theatre (New York City)" label="Group Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q216458" start="998" end="1011" title="Actors Studio" label="Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777541" start="1146" end="1166" title="theatre practitioner" label="theatre practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="1167" end="1190" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Konstantin Stanislavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q367541" start="1226" end="1238" title="Twentieth-century theatre" label="20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="1332" end="1338" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q858403" start="1436" end="1453" title="Gesamtkunstwerk" label="unified aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="1471" end="1479" title="Ensemble cast" label="ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q881131" start="1496" end="1513" title="Meiningen Ensemble" label="Meiningen company"/>
<link wikidata="Q9485200" start="1537" end="1544" title="Realism (theatre)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369676" start="1552" end="1564" title="Maly Theatre (Moscow)" label="Maly Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q56001" start="1578" end="1590" title="Naturalism (theatre)" label="naturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q529001" start="1602" end="1615" title="André Antoine" label="André Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243126" start="1782" end="1803" title="art of representation" label="art of representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="1841" end="1850" title="Consciousness" label="conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q364340" start="1863" end="1867" title="Will (philosophy)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q848369" start="1970" end="1982" title="subconscious" label="subconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089649" start="2340" end="2365" title="Method of Physical Action" label="Method of Physical Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="2509" end="2519" title="Improvisation" label="improvised"/>
<link wikidata="Q440723" start="2713" end="2731" title="Yevgeny Vakhtangov" label="Yevgeny Vakhtangov"/>
<link wikidata="Q64260" start="2932" end="2941" title="Uta Hagen" label="Uta Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q840812" start="3829" end="3847" title="Moscow Art Theatre" label="Moscow Art Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="3883" end="3887" title="Western culture" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347264" start="3936" end="3955" title="Richard Boleslawski" label="Richard Boleslawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q255808" start="4217" end="4234" title="Maria Ouspenskaya" label="Maria Ouspenskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744299" start="4351" end="4378" title="American Laboratory Theatre" label="American Laboratory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400310" start="4920" end="4937" title="An Actor Prepares" label="An Actor Prepares"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="5324" end="5336" title="Stella Adler" label="Stella Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358028" start="5342" end="5357" title="Sanford Meisner" label="Sanford Meisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="5423" end="5435" title="Stella Adler" label="Stella Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="5491" end="5504" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="5506" end="5519" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="5525" end="5539" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="6050" end="6066" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193102" start="6091" end="6107" title="Montgomery Clift" label="Montgomery Clift"/>
<link wikidata="Q512247" start="6117" end="6126" title="I Confess (film)" label="I Confess"/>
<link wikidata="Q372174" start="6254" end="6266" title="Torn Curtain" label="Torn Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104183" start="6274" end="6286" title="Lillian Gish" label="Lillian Gish"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264" start="6393" end="6409" title="Charles Laughton" label="Charles Laughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="6446" end="6460" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195727" start="6608" end="6620" title="Marathon Man (film)" label="Marathon Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="6635" end="6651" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161196" start="6734" end="6761" title="The Prince and the Showgirl" label="The Prince and the Showgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144268" start="6993" end="7017" title="Inside the Actors Studio" label="Inside the Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q607212" start="7106" end="7115" title="Studio 54" label="Studio 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="7335" end="7346" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="7348" end="7357" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q36980" start="7359" end="7373" title="George Peppard" label="George Peppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="7375" end="7389" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q83359" start="7391" end="7401" title="James Dean" label="James Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="7403" end="7417" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="7419" end="7429" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="7431" end="7445" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178552" start="7451" end="7464" title="Mickey Rourke" label="Mickey Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="7484" end="7497" title="Cinema of India" label="Indian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q377789" start="7573" end="7584" title="Dilip Kumar" label="Dilip Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="7588" end="7600" title="Bollywood" label="Hindi cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337738" start="7680" end="7690" title="movie star" label="movie star"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="7791" end="7804" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q9570" start="7858" end="7874" title="Amitabh Bachchan" label="Amitabh Bachchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q469945" start="7876" end="7892" title="Naseeruddin Shah" label="Naseeruddin Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995800" start="7894" end="7913" title="Nawazuddin Siddiqui" label="Nawazuddin Siddiqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q360927" start="7915" end="7926" title="Irrfan Khan" label="Irrfan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8873" start="8099" end="8111" title="Satyajit Ray" label="Satyajit Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426186" start="8196" end="8203" title="Sathyan (Malayalam actor)" label="Sathyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395425" start="8229" end="8244" title="Sivaji Ganeshan" label="Sivaji Ganeshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721855" start="8280" end="8289" title="Mammootty" label="Mammootty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050534" start="8291" end="8299" title="Mohanlal" label="Mohanlal"/>
<link wikidata="Q381477" start="8304" end="8316" title="Kamal Haasan" label="Kamal Haasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107035379" start="8383" end="8406" title="List of streaming media services" label="OTT streaming platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285367" start="8619" end="8631" title="Rajkummar Rao" label="Rajkumar Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746871" start="8633" end="8642" title="Amit Sadh" label="Amit Sadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067643" start="8644" end="8656" title="Pawan Kalyan" label="Pawan Kalyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724794" start="8658" end="8667" title="Ali Fazal" label="Ali Fazal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063646" start="8672" end="8685" title="Vicky Kaushal" label="Vicky Kaushal"/>
<link wikidata="Q32505" start="8795" end="8807" title="Henry Irving" label="Henry Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="8913" end="8924" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="8936" end="8943" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170537" start="8973" end="9011" title="Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving" label="Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661445" start="9115" end="9129" title="Lyceum Theatre, London" label="Lyceum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="11845" end="11852" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941361" start="11928" end="11940" title="substitution (theatre)" label="substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688891" start="11975" end="11991" title="affective memory" label="affective memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376996" start="13436" end="13444" title="Leonid Leonidov" label="Leonidov"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="13478" end="13485" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783427" start="13640" end="13654" title="Harold Clurman" label="Harold Clurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q840812" start="14537" end="14555" title="Moscow Art Theatre" label="Moscow Art Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="14636" end="14652" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490837" start="15031" end="15041" title="Larry Moss (acting coach)" label="Larry Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267800" start="16968" end="16988" title="Emotional self-regulation" label="emotional regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364801" start="17888" end="17905" title="sleep deprivation" label="sleep deprivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="18071" end="18080" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="18645" end="18659" title="theory of mind" label="theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="18771" end="18778" title="empathy" label="empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097937" start="19176" end="19190" title="Ivana Chubbuck" label="Ivana Chubbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062994" start="19193" end="19202" title="Ion Cojar" label="Ion Cojar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604934" start="19205" end="19230" title="List of acting techniques" label="List of acting techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358028" start="19233" end="19248" title="Sanford Meisner" label="Sanford Meisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="19251" end="19274" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Konstantin Stanislavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="19277" end="19290" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="19367" end="19380" title="Stella Adler" label="Adler, Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="19462" end="19475" title="Stella Adler" label="Adler, Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q64260" start="19542" end="19552" title="Uta Hagen" label="Hagen, Uta"/>
<link wikidata="Q64260" start="19636" end="19646" title="Uta Hagen" label="Hagen, Uta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358028" start="19717" end="19733" title="Sanford Meisner" label="Meisner, Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="19824" end="19848" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Stanislavski, Konstantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400310" start="19862" end="19879" title="An Actor Prepares" label="An Actor Prepares"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="19914" end="19938" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Stanislavski, Konstantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="20077" end="20101" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Stanislavski, Konstantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="20226" end="20240" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Strasberg, Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="20381" end="20395" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Strasberg, Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="20517" end="20531" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Strasberg, Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49492" start="21518" end="21525" title="Michael Chekhov" label="Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489956" start="24495" end="24508" title="Robert Lewis (actor)" label="Lewis, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237036" start="24606" end="24623" title="David Magarshack" label="Magarshack, David"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59497" wikidata="Q170731" url="?curid=59497" title="Solubility">
<text>In chemistry, solubility is the ability of a substance, the solute, to form a solution with another substance, the solvent. Insolubility is the opposite property, the inability of the solute to form such a solution.

The extent of the solubility of a substance in a specific solvent is generally measured as the concentration of the solute in a solution, one in which no more solute can be dissolved. At this point, the two substances are said to be at the solubility equilibrium. For some solutes and solvents, there may be no such limit, in which case the two substances are said to be &quot;miscible in all proportions&quot; (or just &quot;miscible&quot;).

The solute can be a solid, a liquid, or a gas, while the solvent is usually solid or liquid. Both may be pure substances, or may themselves be solutions. Gases are always miscible in all proportions, except in very extreme situations, and a solid or liquid can be &quot;dissolved&quot; in a gas only by passing into the gaseous state first.

The solubility mainly depends on the composition of solute and solvent (including their pH and the presence of other dissolved substances) as well as on temperature and pressure. The dependency can often be explained in terms of interactions between the particles (atoms, molecules, or ions) of the two substances, and of thermodynamic concepts such as enthalpy and entropy.

Under certain conditions, the concentration of the solute can exceed its usual solubility limit. The result is a supersaturated solution, which is metastable and will rapidly exclude the excess solute if a suitable nucleation site appears.

The concept of solubility does not apply when there is an irreversible chemical reaction between the two substances, such as the reaction of calcium hydroxide with hydrochloric acid; even though one might say, informally, that one &quot;dissolved&quot; the other. The solubility is also not the same as the rate of solution, which is how fast a solid solute dissolves in a liquid solvent. This property depends on many other variables, such as the physical form of the two substances and the manner and intensity of mixing.

The concept and measure of solubility are extremely important in many sciences besides chemistry, such as geology, biology, physics, and oceanography, as well as in engineering, medicine, agriculture, and even in non-technical activities like painting, cleaning, cooking, and brewing. Most chemical reactions of scientific, industrial, or practical interest only happen after the reagents have been dissolved in a suitable solvent. Water is by far the most common such solvent.

The term &quot;soluble&quot; is sometimes used for materials that can form colloidal suspensions of very fine solid particles in a liquid. The quantitative solubility of such substances is generally not well-defined, however.

==Quantification of solubility==
The solubility of a specific solute in a specific solvent is generally expressed as the concentration of a saturated solution of the two. Any of the several ways of expressing concentration of solutions can be used, such as the mass, volume, or amount in moles of the solute for a specific mass, volume, or mole amount of the solvent or of the solution.

===Per quantity of solvent===

In particular, chemical handbooks often express the solubility as grams of solute per 100 millilitres of solvent (g/(100 mL), often written as g/100 ml), or as grams of solute per decilitre of solvent (g/dL); or, less commonly, as grams of solute per litre of solvent (g/L). The quantity of solvent can instead be expressed in mass, as grams of solute per 100 grams of solvent (g/(100 g), often written as g/100 g), or as grams of solute per kilogram of solvent (g/kg). The number may be expressed as a percentage in this case, and the abbreviation &quot;w/w&quot; may be used to indicate &quot;weight per weight&quot;. (The values in g/L and g/kg are similar for water, but that may not be the case for other solvents.)

Alternatively, the solubility of a solute can be expressed in moles instead of mass. For example, if the quantity of solvent is given in kilograms, the value is the molality of the solution (mol/kg).

===Per quantity of solution===

The solubility of a substance in a liquid may also be expressed as the quantity of solute per quantity of &quot;solution&quot;, rather than of solvent. For example, following the common practice in titration, it may be expressed as moles of solute per litre of solution (mol/L), the molarity of the latter.

In more specialized contexts the solubility may be given by the mole fraction (moles of solute per total moles of solute plus solvent) or by the mass fraction at equilibrium (mass of solute per mass of solute plus solvent). Both are dimensionless numbers between 0 and 1 which may be expressed as percentages (%).

===Liquid and gaseous solutes===

For solutions of liquids or gases in liquids, the quantities of both substances may be given volume rather than mass or mole amount; such as litre of solute per litre of solvent, or litre of solute per litre of solution. The value may be given as a percentage, and the abbreviation &quot;v/v&quot; for &quot;volume per volume&quot; may be used to indicate this choice.

===Conversion of solubility values===

Conversion between these various ways of measuring solubility may not be trivial, since it may require knowing the density of the solution — which is often not measured, and cannot be predicted. While the total mass is conserved by dissolution, the final volume may be different from both the volume of the solvent and the sum of the two volumes.

Moreover, many solids (such as acids and salts) will dissociate in non-trivial ways when dissolved; conversely, the solvent may form coordination complexes with the molecules or ions of the solute. In those cases, the sum of the moles of molecules of solute and solvent is not really the total moles of independent particles solution. To sidestep that problem, the solubility per mole of solution is usually computed and quoted as if the solute does not dissociate or form complexes—that is, by pretending that the mole amount of solution is the sum of the mole amounts of the two substances.

==Qualifiers used to describe extent of solubility==
The extent of solubility ranges widely, from infinitely soluble (without limit, i.e. miscible) such as ethanol in water, to essentially insoluble, such as titanium dioxide in water. A number of other descriptive terms are also used to qualify the extent of solubility for a given application. For example, U.S. Pharmacopoeia gives the following terms, according to the mass &quot;m&quot;sv of solvent required to dissolve one unit of mass &quot;m&quot;su of solute: (The solubilities of the examples are approximate, for water at 20–25 °C.)

The thresholds to describe something as insoluble, or similar terms, may depend on the application. For example, one source states that substances are described as &quot;insoluble&quot; when their solubility is less than 0.1 g per 100 mL of solvent.

==Molecular view==
Solubility occurs under dynamic equilibrium, which means that solubility results from the simultaneous and opposing processes of dissolution and phase joining (e.g. precipitation of solids). A stable state of the solubility equilibrium occurs when the rates of dissolution and re-joining are equal, meaning the relative amounts of dissolved and non-dissolved materials are equal. If the solvent is removed, all of the substance that had dissolved is recovered.

The term &quot;solubility&quot; is also used in some fields where the solute is altered by solvolysis. For example, many metals and their oxides are said to be &quot;soluble in hydrochloric acid&quot;, although in fact the aqueous acid irreversibly degrades the solid to give soluble products. Most ionic solids dissociate when dissolved in polar solvents. In those cases where the solute is not recovered upon evaporation of the solvent, the process is referred to as solvolysis. The thermodynamic concept of solubility does not apply straightforwardly to solvolysis.

When a solute dissolves, it may form several species in the solution. For example, an aqueous solution of cobalt(II) chloride can afford , each of which interconverts.

==Factors affecting solubility==
Solubility is defined for specific phases. For example, the solubility of aragonite and calcite in water are expected to differ, even though they are both polymorphs of calcium carbonate and have the same chemical formula.

The solubility of one substance in another is determined by the balance of intermolecular forces between the solvent and solute, and the entropy change that accompanies the solvation. Factors such as temperature and pressure will alter this balance, thus changing the solubility.

Solubility may also strongly depend on the presence of other species dissolved in the solvent, for example, complex-forming anions (ligands) in liquids. Solubility will also depend on the excess or deficiency of a common ion in the solution, a phenomenon known as the common-ion effect. To a lesser extent, solubility will depend on the ionic strength of solutions. The last two effects can be quantified using the equation for solubility equilibrium.

For a solid that dissolves in a redox reaction, solubility is expected to depend on the potential (within the range of potentials under which the solid remains the thermodynamically stable phase). For example, solubility of gold in high-temperature water is observed to be almost an order of magnitude higher (i.e. about ten times higher) when the redox potential is controlled using a highly oxidizing Fe3O4-Fe2O3 redox buffer than with a moderately oxidizing Ni-NiO buffer.
Solubility (metastable, at concentrations approaching saturation) also depends on the physical size of the crystal or droplet of solute (or, strictly speaking, on the specific surface area or molar surface area of the solute). For quantification, see the equation in the article on solubility equilibrium. For highly defective crystals, solubility may increase with the increasing degree of disorder. Both of these effects occur because of the dependence of solubility constant on the Gibbs energy of the crystal. The last two effects, although often difficult to measure, are of practical importance. For example, they provide the driving force for precipitate aging (the crystal size spontaneously increasing with time).

===Temperature===
The solubility of a given solute in a given solvent is function of temperature. Depending on the change in enthalpy (Δ&quot;H&quot;) of the dissolution reaction, &quot;i.e.&quot;, on the endothermic (Δ&quot;H&quot; &gt; 0) or exothermic (Δ&quot;H&quot; &lt; 0) character of the dissolution reaction, the solubility of a given compound may increase or decrease with temperature. The van &#x27;t Hoff equation relates the change of solubility equilibrium constant (&quot;K&quot;sp) to temperature change and to reaction enthalpy change. For most solids and liquids, their solubility increases with temperature because their dissolution reaction is endothermic (Δ&quot;H&quot; &gt; 0). In liquid water at high temperatures, (e.g. that approaching the critical temperature), the solubility of ionic solutes tends to decrease due to the change of properties and structure of liquid water; the lower dielectric constant results in a less polar solvent and in a change of hydration energy affecting the Δ&quot;G&quot; of the dissolution reaction.

Gaseous solutes exhibit more complex behavior with temperature. As the temperature is raised, gases usually become less soluble in water (exothermic dissolution reaction related to their hydration) (to a minimum, which is below 120 °C for most permanent gases), but more soluble in organic solvents (endothermic dissolution reaction related to their solvation).

The chart shows solubility curves for some typical solid inorganic salts in liquid water (temperature is in degrees Celsius, i.e. kelvins minus 273.15). Many salts behave like barium nitrate and disodium hydrogen arsenate, and show a large increase in solubility with temperature (Δ&quot;H&quot; &gt; 0). Some solutes (e.g. sodium chloride in water) exhibit solubility that is fairly independent of temperature (Δ&quot;H&quot; ≈ 0). A few, such as calcium sulfate (gypsum) and cerium(III) sulfate, become less soluble in water as temperature increases (Δ&quot;H&quot; &lt; 0). This is also the case for calcium hydroxide (portlandite), whose solubility at 70 °C is about half of its value at 25 °C. The dissolution of calcium hydroxide in water is also an exothermic process (Δ&quot;H&quot; &lt; 0). As dictated by the van &#x27;t Hoff equation and Le Chatelier&#x27;s principle, low temperatures favor dissolution of Ca(OH)2. Portlandite solubility increases at low temperature. This temperature dependence is sometimes referred to as &quot;retrograde&quot; or &quot;inverse&quot; solubility. Occasionally, a more complex pattern is observed, as with sodium sulfate, where the less soluble decahydrate crystal (mirabilite) loses water of crystallization at 32 °C to form a more soluble anhydrous phase (thenardite) with a smaller change in Gibbs free energy (Δ&quot;G&quot;) in the dissolution reaction.

The solubility of organic compounds nearly always increases with temperature. The technique of recrystallization, used for purification of solids, depends on a solute&#x27;s different solubilities in hot and cold solvent. A few exceptions exist, such as certain cyclodextrins.

===Pressure===
For condensed phases (solids and liquids), the pressure dependence of solubility is typically weak and usually neglected in practice. Assuming an ideal solution, the dependence can be quantified as:

:formula_1

where the index formula_2 iterates the components, formula_3 is the mole fraction of the formula_2-th component in the solution, formula_5 is the pressure, the index formula_6 refers to constant temperature, formula_7 is the partial molar volume of the formula_2-th component in the solution, formula_9 is the partial molar volume of the formula_10-th component in the dissolving solid, and formula_11 is the universal gas constant.

The pressure dependence of solubility does occasionally have practical significance. For example, precipitation fouling of oil fields and wells by calcium sulfate (which decreases its solubility with decreasing pressure) can result in decreased productivity with time.

==Solubility of gases==
Henry&#x27;s law is used to quantify the solubility of gases in solvents. The solubility of a gas in a solvent is directly proportional to the partial pressure of that gas above the solvent. This relationship is similar to Raoult&#x27;s law and can be written as:
:formula_12
where formula_13 is a temperature-dependent constant (for example, 769.2 L·atm/mol for dioxygen (O2) in water at 298 K), formula_14 is the partial pressure (in atm), and formula_15 is the concentration of the dissolved gas in the liquid (in mol/L).

The solubility of gases is sometimes also quantified using Bunsen solubility coefficient.

In the presence of small bubbles, the solubility of the gas does not depend on the bubble radius in any other way than through the effect of the radius on pressure (i.e. the solubility of gas in the liquid in contact with small bubbles is increased due to pressure increase by Δ&quot;p&quot; = 2γ/&quot;r&quot;; see Young–Laplace equation).

Henry&#x27;s law is valid for gases that do not undergo change of chemical speciation on dissolution. Sieverts&#x27; law shows a case when this assumption does not hold.

The carbon dioxide solubility in seawater is also affected by temperature, pH of the solution, and by the carbonate buffer. The decrease of solubility of carbon dioxide in seawater when temperature increases is also an important retroaction factor (positive feedback) exacerbating past and future climate changes as observed in ice cores from the Vostok site in Antarctica. At the geological time scale, because of the Milankovich cycles, when the astronomical parameters of the Earth orbit and its rotation axis progressively change and modify the solar irradiance at the Earth surface, temperature starts to increase. When a deglaciation period is initiated, the progressive warming of the oceans releases CO2 into the atmosphere because of its lower solubility in warmer sea water. In turn, higher levels of CO2 in the atmosphere increase the greenhouse effect and carbon dioxide acts as an amplifier of the general warming.

==Polarity==
A popular aphorism used for predicting solubility is &quot;&quot;like dissolves like&quot; also expressed in the Latin language as &quot;Similia similibus solventur&quot;&quot;. This statement indicates that a solute will dissolve best in a solvent that has a similar chemical structure to itself, based on favorable entropy of mixing. This view is simplistic, but it is a useful rule of thumb. The overall solvation capacity of a solvent depends primarily on its polarity. For example, a very polar (hydrophilic) solute such as urea is very soluble in highly polar water, less soluble in fairly polar methanol, and practically insoluble in non-polar solvents such as benzene. In contrast, a non-polar or lipophilic solute such as naphthalene is insoluble in water, fairly soluble in methanol, and highly soluble in non-polar benzene.

In even more simple terms a simple ionic compound (with positive and negative ions) such as sodium chloride (common salt) is easily soluble in a highly polar solvent (with some separation of positive (δ+) and negative (δ-) charges in the covalent molecule) such as water, as thus the sea is salty as it accumulates dissolved salts since early geological ages.

The solubility is favored by entropy of mixing (Δ&quot;S&quot;) and depends on enthalpy of dissolution (Δ&quot;H&quot;) and the hydrophobic effect. The free energy of dissolution (Gibbs energy) depends on temperature and is given by the relationship: Δ&quot;G&quot; = Δ&quot;H&quot; – TΔ&quot;S&quot;. Smaller Δ&quot;G&quot; means greater solubility.

Chemists often exploit differences in solubilities to separate and purify compounds from reaction mixtures, using the technique of liquid-liquid extraction. This applies in vast areas of chemistry from drug synthesis to spent nuclear fuel reprocessing.

==Rate of dissolution==
Dissolution is not an instantaneous process. The rate of solubilization (in kg/s) is related to the solubility product and the surface area of the material. The speed at which a solid dissolves may depend on its crystallinity or lack thereof in the case of amorphous solids and the surface area (crystallite size) and the presence of polymorphism. Many practical systems illustrate this effect, for example in designing methods for controlled drug delivery. In some cases, solubility equilibria can take a long time to establish (hours, days, months, or many years; depending on the nature of the solute and other factors).

The rate of dissolution can be often expressed by the Noyes–Whitney equation or the Nernst and Brunner equation of the form:
:formula_16

where:
* formula_17 = mass of dissolved material
* formula_18 = time
* formula_19 = surface area of the interface between the dissolving substance and the solvent
* formula_20 = diffusion coefficient
* formula_21 = thickness of the boundary layer of the solvent at the surface of the dissolving substance
* formula_22 = mass concentration of the substance on the surface
* formula_23 = mass concentration of the substance in the bulk of the solvent

For dissolution limited by diffusion (or mass transfer if mixing is present), formula_22 is equal to the solubility of the substance. When the dissolution rate of a pure substance is normalized to the surface area of the solid (which usually changes with time during the dissolution process), then it is expressed in kg/m2s and referred to as &quot;intrinsic dissolution rate&quot;. The intrinsic dissolution rate is defined by the United States Pharmacopeia.

Dissolution rates vary by orders of magnitude between different systems. Typically, very low dissolution rates parallel low solubilities, and substances with high solubilities exhibit high dissolution rates, as suggested by the Noyes-Whitney equation.

==Theories of solubility==

===Solubility product===

Solubility constants are used to describe saturated solutions of ionic compounds of relatively low solubility (see solubility equilibrium). The solubility constant is a special case of an equilibrium constant. Since it is a product of ion concentrations in equilibrium, it is also known as the solubility product. It describes the balance between dissolved ions from the salt and undissolved salt. The solubility constant is also &quot;applicable&quot; (i.e. useful) to precipitation, the reverse of the dissolving reaction. As with other equilibrium constants, temperature can affect the numerical value of solubility constant. While the solubility constant is not as simple as solubility, the value of this constant is generally independent of the presence of other species in the solvent.

===Other theories===
The Flory–Huggins solution theory is a theoretical model describing the solubility of polymers. The Hansen solubility parameters and the Hildebrand solubility parameters are empirical methods for the prediction of solubility. It is also possible to predict solubility from other physical constants such as the enthalpy of fusion.

The octanol-water partition coefficient, usually expressed as its logarithm (Log P), is a measure of differential solubility of a compound in a hydrophobic solvent (1-octanol) and a hydrophilic solvent (water). The logarithm of these two values enables compounds to be ranked in terms of hydrophilicity (or hydrophobicity).

The energy change associated with dissolving is usually given per mole of solute as the enthalpy of solution.

==Applications==
Solubility is of fundamental importance in a large number of scientific disciplines and practical applications, ranging from ore processing and nuclear reprocessing to the use of medicines, and the transport of pollutants.

Solubility is often said to be one of the &quot;characteristic properties of a substance&quot;, which means that solubility is commonly used to describe the substance, to indicate a substance&#x27;s polarity, to help to distinguish it from other substances, and as a guide to applications of the substance. For example, indigo is described as &quot;insoluble in water, alcohol, or ether but soluble in chloroform, nitrobenzene, or concentrated sulfuric acid&quot;.

Solubility of a substance is useful when separating mixtures. For example, a mixture of salt (sodium chloride) and silica may be separated by dissolving the salt in water, and filtering off the undissolved silica. The synthesis of chemical compounds, by the milligram in a laboratory, or by the ton in industry, both make use of the relative solubilities of the desired product, as well as unreacted starting materials, byproducts, and side products to achieve separation.

Another example of this is the synthesis of benzoic acid from phenylmagnesium bromide and dry ice. Benzoic acid is more soluble in an organic solvent such as dichloromethane or diethyl ether, and when shaken with this organic solvent in a separatory funnel, will preferentially dissolve in the organic layer. The other reaction products, including the magnesium bromide, will remain in the aqueous layer, clearly showing that separation based on solubility is achieved. This process, known as liquid–liquid extraction, is an important technique in synthetic chemistry. Recycling is used to ensure maximum extraction.

===Differential solubility===
In flowing systems, differences in solubility often determine the dissolution-precipitation driven transport of species. This happens when different parts of the system experience different conditions. Even slightly different conditions can result in significant effects, given sufficient time.

For example, relatively low solubility compounds are found to be soluble in more extreme environments, resulting in geochemical and geological effects of the activity of hydrothermal fluids in the Earth&#x27;s crust. These are often the source of high quality economic mineral deposits and precious or semi-precious gems. In the same way, compounds with low solubility will dissolve over extended time (geological time), resulting in significant effects such as extensive cave systems or Karstic land surfaces.

==Solubility of ionic compounds in water==

Some ionic compounds (salts) dissolve in water, which arises because of the attraction between positive and negative charges (see: solvation). For example, the salt&#x27;s positive ions (e.g. Ag+) attract the partially negative oxygen atom in . Likewise, the salt&#x27;s negative ions (e.g. Cl−) attract the partially positive hydrogens in . Note: the oxygen atom is partially negative because it is more electronegative than hydrogen, and vice versa (see: chemical polarity).

However, there is a limit to how much salt can be dissolved in a given volume of water. This concentration is the solubility and related to the solubility product, &quot;K&quot;sp. This equilibrium constant depends on the type of salt ( vs. , for example), temperature, and the common ion effect.

One can calculate the amount of that will dissolve in 1 liter of pure water as follows:

:&quot;K&quot;sp = [Ag+] × [Cl−] / M2 (definition of solubility product; M = mol/L)
:&quot;K&quot;sp = 1.8 × 10−10 (from a table of solubility products)
[Ag+] = [Cl−], in the absence of other silver or chloride salts, so
:[Ag+]2 = 1.8 × 10−10 M2
:[Ag+] = 1.34 × 10−5 mol/L

The result: 1 liter of water can dissolve 1.34 × 10−5 moles of at room temperature. Compared with other salts, is poorly soluble in water. For instance, table salt () has a much higher &quot;K&quot;sp = 36 and is, therefore, more soluble. The following table gives an overview of solubility rules for various ionic compounds.

==Solubility of organic compounds==
The principle outlined above under polarity, that &quot;like dissolves like&quot;, is the usual guide to solubility with organic systems. For example, petroleum jelly will dissolve in gasoline because both petroleum jelly and gasoline are non-polar hydrocarbons. It will not, on the other hand, dissolve in ethyl alcohol or water, since the polarity of these solvents is too high. Sugar will not dissolve in gasoline, since sugar is too polar in comparison with gasoline. A mixture of gasoline and sugar can therefore be separated by filtration or extraction with water.

==Solid solution==
This term is often used in the field of metallurgy to refer to the extent that an alloying element will dissolve into the base metal without forming a separate phase. The solvus or solubility line (or curve) is the line (or lines) on a phase diagram that give the limits of solute addition. That is, the lines show the maximum amount of a component that can be added to another component and still be in solid solution. In the solid&#x27;s crystalline structure, the &#x27;solute&#x27; element can either take the place of the matrix within the lattice (a substitutional position; for example, chromium in iron) or take a place in a space between the lattice points (an interstitial position; for example, carbon in iron).

In microelectronic fabrication, solid solubility refers to the maximum concentration of impurities one can place into the substrate.

In solid compounds (as opposed to elements), the solubility of a solute element can also depend on the phases separating out in equilibrium. For example, amount of Sn soluble in the ZnSb phase can depend significantly on whether the phases separating out in equilibrium are (Zn4Sb3+Sn(L)) or (ZnSnSb2+Sn(L)). Besides these, the ZnSb compound with Sn as a solute can separate out into other combinations of phases after the solubility limit is reached depending on the initial chemical composition during synthesis. Each combination produces a different solubility of Sn in ZnSb. Hence solubility studies in compounds, concluded upon the first instance of observing secondary phases separating out might underestimate solubility. While the maximum number of phases separating out at once in equilibrium can be determined by the Gibb&#x27;s phase rule, for chemical compounds there is no limit on the number of such phase separating combinations itself. Hence, establishing the &quot;maximum solubility&quot; in solid compounds experimentally can be difficult, requiring equilibration of many samples. If the dominant crystallographic defect (mostly interstitial or substitutional point defects) involved in the solid-solution can be chemically intuited beforehand, then using some simple thermodynamic guidelines can considerably reduce the number of samples required to establish maximum solubility.

==Incongruent dissolution==
Many substances dissolve congruently (i.e. the composition of the solid and the dissolved solute stoichiometrically match). However, some substances may dissolve incongruently, whereby the composition of the solute in solution does not match that of the solid. This solubilization is accompanied by alteration of the &quot;primary solid&quot; and possibly formation of a secondary solid phase. However, in general, some primary solid also remains and a complex solubility equilibrium establishes. For example, dissolution of albite may result in formation of gibbsite.

In this case, the solubility of albite is expected to depend on the solid-to-solvent ratio. This kind of solubility is of great importance in geology, where it results in formation of metamorphic rocks.

In principle, both congruent and incongruent dissolution can lead to the formation of secondary solid phases in equilibrium. So, in the field of Materials Science, the solubility for both cases is described more generally on chemical composition phase diagrams.

==Solubility prediction==
Solubility is a property of interest in many aspects of science, including but not limited to: environmental predictions, biochemistry, pharmacy, drug-design, agrochemical design, and protein ligand binding. Aqueous solubility is of fundamental interest owing to the vital biological and transportation functions played by water. In addition, to this clear scientific interest in water solubility and solvent effects; accurate predictions of solubility are important industrially. The ability to accurately predict a molecule&#x27;s solubility represents potentially large financial savings in many chemical product development processes, such as pharmaceuticals. In the pharmaceutical industry, solubility predictions form part of the early stage lead optimisation process of drug candidates. Solubility remains a concern all the way to formulation. A number of methods have been applied to such predictions including quantitative structure–activity relationships (QSAR), quantitative structure–property relationships (QSPR) and data mining. These models provide efficient predictions of solubility and represent the current standard. The draw back such models is that they can lack physical insight. A method founded in physical theory, capable of achieving similar levels of accuracy at an sensible cost, would be a powerful tool scientifically and industrially.

Methods founded in physical theory tend to use thermodynamic cycles, a concept from classical thermodynamics. The two common thermodynamic cycles used involve either the calculation of the free energy of sublimation (solid to gas without going through a liquid state) and the free energy of solvating a gaseous molecule (gas to solution), or the free energy of fusion (solid to a molten phase) and the free energy of mixing (molten to solution). These two process are represented in the following diagrams.


These cycles have been used for attempts at first principles predictions (solving using the fundamental physical equations) using physically motivated solvent models, to create parametric equations and QSPR models and combinations of the two. The use of these cycles enables the calculation of the solvation free energy indirectly via either gas (in the sublimation cycle) or a melt (fusion cycle). This is helpful as calculating the free energy of solvation directly is extremely difficult. The free energy of solvation can be converted to a solubility value using various formulae, the most general case being shown below, where the numerator is the free energy of solvation, &quot;R&quot; is the gas constant and &quot;T&quot; is the temperature in kelvins.

:formula_25

Well known fitted equations for solubility prediction are the general solubility equations. These equations stem from the work of Yalkowsky &quot;et al&quot;. The original formula is given first, followed by a revised formula which takes a different assumption of complete miscibility in octanol.

:formula_26

:formula_27
These equations are founded on the principles of the fusion cycle.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3" end="12" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="14" end="24" title="Solubility" label="solubility"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="45" end="54" title="chemical substance" label="substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="60" end="66" title="solute" label="solute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="78" end="86" title="solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="115" end="122" title="solvent" label="solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="124" end="136" title="Solubility" label="Insolubility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="312" end="325" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q863829" start="457" end="479" title="solubility equilibrium" label="solubility equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q906367" start="594" end="602" title="miscibility" label="miscible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="681" end="686" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="690" end="696" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="703" end="706" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1091" end="1093" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="1268" end="1272" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="1275" end="1283" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1289" end="1292" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="1325" end="1338" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161064" start="1356" end="1364" title="enthalpy" label="enthalpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="1369" end="1376" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334104" start="1492" end="1515" title="supersaturation" label="supersaturated solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="1526" end="1536" title="metastability" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q909022" start="1594" end="1604" title="nucleation" label="nucleation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="1691" end="1708" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="1761" end="1778" title="calcium hydroxide" label="calcium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="1784" end="1801" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="1927" end="1943" title="rate of solution" label="rate of solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="2251" end="2258" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="2260" end="2267" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2269" end="2276" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="2282" end="2294" title="oceanography" label="oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="2310" end="2321" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2323" end="2331" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2333" end="2344" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="2388" end="2396" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12773274" start="2398" end="2406" title="cleaning" label="cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="2408" end="2415" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="2421" end="2428" title="brewing" label="brewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356542" start="2525" end="2532" title="reagent" label="reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="2577" end="2582" title="Water" label="Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="2699" end="2720" title="colloid" label="colloidal suspensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="3112" end="3116" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="3118" end="3124" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="3129" end="3144" title="mole (unit)" label="amount in moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338914" start="3294" end="3302" title="handbook" label="handbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q41803" start="3336" end="3340" title="gram" label="gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="3360" end="3371" title="millilitres" label="millilitres"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="3450" end="3459" title="decilitre" label="decilitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="3521" end="3526" title="litre" label="litre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="3712" end="3720" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="4129" end="4138" title="kilograms" label="kilograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q172623" start="4157" end="4165" title="molality" label="molality"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="4423" end="4432" title="titration" label="titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="4508" end="4516" title="molarity" label="molarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q125264" start="4597" end="4610" title="mole fraction" label="mole fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q899138" start="4678" end="4691" title="mass fraction (chemistry)" label="mass fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="4766" end="4779" title="Dimensionless quantity" label="dimensionless"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229" start="4830" end="4841" title="percentages" label="percentages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="5670" end="5674" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="5680" end="5685" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189673" start="5692" end="5702" title="dissociation (chemistry)" label="dissociate"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="5772" end="5792" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q906367" start="6371" end="6379" title="miscible" label="miscible"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="6389" end="6396" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193521" start="6441" end="6457" title="titanium dioxide" label="titanium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271952" start="6592" end="6610" title="U.S. Pharmacopoeia" label="U.S. Pharmacopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="7227" end="7238" title="solvation" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="7263" end="7276" title="precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="7280" end="7286" title="solids" label="solids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628534" start="7651" end="7661" title="solvolysis" label="solvolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="7698" end="7703" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="8216" end="8223" title="aqueous" label="aqueous"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="8367" end="8373" title="phase (matter)" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="8406" end="8415" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="8420" end="8427" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="8487" end="8497" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="polymorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="8501" end="8518" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="8537" end="8553" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q245031" start="8631" end="8651" title="intermolecular force" label="intermolecular force"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="8693" end="8700" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="8945" end="8953" title="complex (chemistry)" label="complex-"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="8969" end="8975" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754887" start="9105" end="9122" title="common-ion effect" label="common-ion effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q898396" start="9174" end="9188" title="ionic strength" label="ionic strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q863829" start="9265" end="9287" title="solubility equilibrium" label="solubility equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864382" start="9705" end="9717" title="redox buffer" label="redox buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="9751" end="9753" title="Nickel" label="Ni"/>
<link wikidata="Q411221" start="9754" end="9757" title="Nickel(II) oxide" label="NiO"/>
<link wikidata="Q622205" start="9933" end="9954" title="specific surface area" label="specific surface area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10048" end="10070" title="Solubility equilibrium#Particle size effect" label="solubility equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q903984" start="10416" end="10433" title="Ostwald ripening" label="precipitate aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q161064" start="10615" end="10623" title="enthalpy" label="enthalpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="10695" end="10706" title="Endothermic process" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="10734" end="10744" title="Exothermic process" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q574862" start="10890" end="10915" title="van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation" label="van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="10949" end="10969" title="equilibrium constant" label="equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q161064" start="11026" end="11034" title="enthalpy" label="enthalpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="11256" end="11276" title="critical temperature" label="critical temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027242" start="11402" end="11421" title="dielectric constant" label="dielectric constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="11440" end="11453" title="polar solvent" label="polar solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="11549" end="11552" title="Gas" label="Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="11979" end="11984" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="12028" end="12035" title="Celsius" label="Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="12042" end="12048" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407666" start="12088" end="12102" title="barium nitrate" label="barium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557463" start="12107" end="12133" title="disodium hydrogen arsenate" label="disodium hydrogen arsenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="12236" end="12251" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="12360" end="12375" title="calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="12377" end="12383" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634258" start="12389" end="12408" title="cerium(III) sulfate" label="cerium(III) sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="12515" end="12532" title="calcium hydroxide" label="calcium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q301805" start="12534" end="12545" title="portlandite" label="portlandite"/>
<link wikidata="Q574862" start="12731" end="12756" title="van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation" label="van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192690" start="12761" end="12790" title="Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211737" start="13064" end="13078" title="sodium sulfate" label="sodium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="13107" end="13114" title="hydrate" label="hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q419296" start="13124" end="13134" title="mirabilite" label="mirabilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q504492" start="13142" end="13166" title="water of crystallization" label="water of crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745207" start="13199" end="13208" title="anhydrous" label="anhydrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q419238" start="13216" end="13226" title="thenardite" label="thenardite"/>
<link wikidata="Q334631" start="13253" end="13270" title="Gibbs free energy" label="Gibbs free energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="13336" end="13353" title="organic compounds" label="organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q61847" start="13413" end="13430" title="Recrystallization (chemistry)" label="recrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q40417805" start="13580" end="13592" title="cyclodextrin" label="cyclodextrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779030" start="13757" end="13771" title="ideal solution" label="ideal solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088946" start="14048" end="14068" title="partial molar volume" label="partial molar volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q182333" start="14232" end="14254" title="universal gas constant" label="universal gas constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14355" end="14376" title="Fouling#Precipitation fouling" label="precipitation fouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="14404" end="14419" title="calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q285804" start="14551" end="14567" title="Henry&amp;#x27;s law" label="Henry&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q27165" start="14694" end="14710" title="partial pressure" label="partial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q241687" start="14774" end="14791" title="Raoult&amp;#x27;s law" label="Raoult&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="14900" end="14901" title="litre" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="Q177974" start="14902" end="14905" title="Atmosphere (unit)" label="atm"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="14906" end="14909" title="Mole (unit)" label="mol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14914" end="14922" title="Oxygen#Allotropes" label="dioxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="15015" end="15028" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q285804" start="15136" end="15165" title="Bunsen solubility coefficient" label="Bunsen solubility coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q75794" start="15193" end="15199" title="Liquid bubble" label="bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q905258" start="15484" end="15506" title="Young–Laplace equation" label="Young–Laplace equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511810" start="15612" end="15630" title="Sieverts&amp;#x27; law" label="Sieverts&amp;#x27; law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="15685" end="15699" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="15714" end="15722" title="seawater" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="15787" end="15796" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="15978" end="15993" title="climate change (general concept)" label="climate changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="16043" end="16053" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="16062" end="16077" title="geological time" label="geological time"/>
<link wikidata="Q211446" start="16100" end="16117" title="Milankovich cycle" label="Milankovich cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="16230" end="16246" title="solar irradiance" label="solar irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="16527" end="16544" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="16633" end="16641" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16736" end="16741" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q500256" start="16891" end="16909" title="chemical structure" label="chemical structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000031" start="16940" end="16957" title="entropy of mixing" label="entropy of mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="17087" end="17095" title="Chemical polarity" label="polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="17124" end="17135" title="hydrophile" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="17152" end="17156" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="17225" end="17233" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="17291" end="17298" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="17328" end="17338" title="lipophilicity" label="lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="17354" end="17365" title="naphthalene" label="naphthalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="17494" end="17508" title="ionic compound" label="ionic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="17551" end="17566" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="17611" end="17616" title="Chemical polarity" label="polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="17724" end="17729" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000031" start="17849" end="17866" title="entropy of mixing" label="entropy of mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q900787" start="17899" end="17922" title="enthalpy of dissolution" label="enthalpy of dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q899157" start="17948" end="17966" title="hydrophobic effect" label="hydrophobic effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146448" start="17972" end="17983" title="Thermodynamic free energy" label="free energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334631" start="18000" end="18012" title="Gibbs energy" label="Gibbs energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q780219" start="18303" end="18327" title="liquid-liquid extraction" label="liquid-liquid extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623868" start="18392" end="18410" title="spent nuclear fuel" label="spent nuclear fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="18707" end="18716" title="amorphous" label="amorphous"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="18784" end="18796" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392806" start="18893" end="18906" title="drug delivery" label="drug delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q561905" start="19129" end="19151" title="Noyes–Whitney equation" label="Noyes–Whitney equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q604008" start="19391" end="19412" title="diffusion coefficient" label="diffusion coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="19690" end="19699" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q909534" start="19704" end="19717" title="mass transfer" label="mass transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271952" start="20095" end="20121" title="United States Pharmacopeia" label="United States Pharmacopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863829" start="20431" end="20450" title="Solubility constant" label="Solubility constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q863829" start="20546" end="20568" title="solubility equilibrium" label="solubility equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="20619" end="20639" title="equilibrium constant" label="equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q863829" start="20725" end="20743" title="solubility product" label="solubility product"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="20901" end="20914" title="precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="20993" end="21004" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461964" start="21249" end="21278" title="Flory–Huggins solution theory" label="Flory–Huggins solution theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054793" start="21345" end="21373" title="Hansen solubility parameters" label="Hansen solubility parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895235" start="21382" end="21413" title="Hildebrand solubility parameter" label="Hildebrand solubility parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q484790" start="21555" end="21573" title="enthalpy of fusion" label="enthalpy of fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977980" start="21580" end="21615" title="octanol-water partition coefficient" label="octanol-water partition coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="21642" end="21651" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="21720" end="21731" title="hydrophobe" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161666" start="21741" end="21750" title="1-octanol" label="1-octanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="21758" end="21769" title="hydrophile" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q900787" start="21989" end="22009" title="enthalpy of solution" label="enthalpy of solution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22573" end="22579" title="Indigo dye#Chemical properties" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="22697" end="22710" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="22813" end="22828" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q191700" start="23237" end="23249" title="benzoic acid" label="benzoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q115469" start="23255" end="23278" title="phenylmagnesium bromide" label="phenylmagnesium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q194306" start="23283" end="23290" title="dry ice" label="dry ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="23351" end="23366" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="23370" end="23383" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q910239" start="23432" end="23449" title="separatory funnel" label="separatory funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q780219" start="23686" end="23710" title="liquid–liquid extraction" label="liquid–liquid extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q273499" start="23741" end="23760" title="synthetic chemistry" label="synthetic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="24715" end="24720" title="salts" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="24824" end="24833" title="solvation" label="solvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="25098" end="25113" title="electronegativity" label="electronegative"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="25150" end="25167" title="chemical polarity" label="chemical polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q863829" start="25315" end="25333" title="solubility product" label="solubility product"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="25886" end="25891" title="mole (unit)" label="moles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26230" end="26238" title="#Polarity" label="polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q457239" start="26346" end="26361" title="petroleum jelly" label="petroleum jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="26379" end="26387" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="26502" end="26515" title="ethyl alcohol" label="ethyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q244772" start="26729" end="26739" title="filtration" label="filtration"/>
<link wikidata="Q780219" start="26743" end="26753" title="solvent extraction" label="extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="26826" end="26836" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="26868" end="26873" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428855" start="26908" end="26918" title="base metal" label="base metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="26946" end="26951" title="Phase (matter)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="26957" end="26963" title="solvus" label="solvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186693" start="27022" end="27035" title="phase diagram" label="phase diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="27190" end="27204" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263816" start="28120" end="28140" title="chemical composition" label="chemical composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q752412" start="28483" end="28493" title="phase rule" label="phase rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q898226" start="28760" end="28783" title="crystallographic defect" label="crystallographic defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941746" start="29235" end="29248" title="Incongruent transition" label="incongruently"/>
<link wikidata="Q182264" start="29598" end="29604" title="albite" label="albite"/>
<link wikidata="Q408516" start="29632" end="29640" title="gibbsite" label="gibbsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="29827" end="29843" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="29992" end="30009" title="Materials Science" label="Materials Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263816" start="30072" end="30092" title="chemical composition" label="chemical composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q186693" start="30093" end="30106" title="phase diagram" label="phase diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q766383" start="31055" end="31099" title="quantitative structure–activity relationship" label="quantitative structure–activity relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="31166" end="31177" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="31597" end="31611" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="31707" end="31718" title="Sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484790" start="31849" end="31870" title="enthalpy of fusion" label="free energy of fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908915" start="32163" end="32177" title="solvent models" label="solvent models"/>
<link wikidata="Q182333" start="32711" end="32723" title="gas constant" label="gas constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="32764" end="32770" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59503" wikidata="Q864231" url="?curid=59503" title="Bioaccumulation">
<text>Bioaccumulation is the gradual accumulation of substances, such as pesticides or other chemicals, in an organism. Bioaccumulation occurs when an organism absorbs a substance faster than it can be lost or eliminated by catabolism and excretion. Thus, the longer the biological half-life of a toxic substance, the greater the risk of chronic poisoning, even if environmental levels of the toxin are not very high. Bioaccumulation, for example in fish, can be predicted by models. Hypothesis for molecular size cutoff criteria for use as bioaccumulation potential indicators are not supported by data. Biotransformation can strongly modify bioaccumulation of chemicals in an organism.

Toxicity induced by metals is associated with bioaccumulation and biomagnification. Storage or uptake of a metal faster than it is metabolized and excreted leads to the accumulation of that metal. The presence of various chemicals and harmful substances in the environment can be analyzed and assessed with a proper knowledge on bioaccumulation helping with chemical control and usage.

An organism can take up chemicals by breathing, absorbing through skin or swallowing. When the concentration of a chemical is higher within the organism compared to its surroundings (air or water), it is referred to as bioconcentration. Biomagnification is another process related to bioaccumulation as the concentration of the chemical or metal increases as it moves up from one trophic level to another. Naturally, the process of bioaccumulation is necessary for an organism to grow and develop; however, the accumulation of harmful substances can also occur.

== Examples ==

=== Terrestrial examples ===
An example of poisoning in the workplace can be seen from the phrase &quot;mad as a hatter&quot; (18th and 19th century England). Mercury was used in stiffening the felt that was used to make hats. This forms organic species such as methylmercury, which is lipid-soluble (fat-soluble), and tends to accumulate in the brain, resulting in mercury poisoning. Other lipid-soluble poisons include tetraethyllead compounds (the lead in leaded petrol), and DDT. These compounds are stored in the body fat, and when the fatty tissues are used for energy, the compounds are released and cause acute poisoning.

Strontium-90, part of the fallout from atomic bombs, is chemically similar enough to calcium that it is taken up in forming bones, where its radiation can cause damage for a long time.

Some animal species use bioaccumulation as a mode of defense: by consuming toxic plants or animal prey, an animal may accumulate the toxin, which then presents a deterrent to a potential predator. One example is the tobacco hornworm, which concentrates nicotine to a toxic level in its body as it consumes tobacco plants. Poisoning of small consumers can be passed along the food chain to affect the consumers later in the chain.

Other compounds that are not normally considered toxic can be accumulated to toxic levels in organisms. The classic example is vitamin A, which becomes concentrated in livers of carnivores, e.g. polar bears: as a pure carnivore that feeds on other carnivores (seals), they accumulate extremely large amounts of vitamin A in their livers. It was known by the native peoples of the Arctic that the livers of carnivores should not be eaten, but Arctic explorers have suffered hypervitaminosis A from eating the livers of bears; and there has been at least one example of similar poisoning of Antarctic explorers eating husky dog livers. One notable example of this is the expedition of Sir Douglas Mawson, whose exploration companion died from eating the liver of one of their dogs.

=== Aquatic examples ===
Coastal fish (such as the smooth toadfish) and seabirds (such as the Atlantic puffin) are often monitored for heavy metal bioaccumulation. Methylmercury gets into freshwater systems through industrial emissions and rain. As its concentration increases up the food web, it can reach dangerous levels for both fish and the humans who rely on fish as a food source.

Fish are typically assessed for bioaccumulation when they have been exposed to chemicals that are in their aqueous phases. Commonly tested fish species include the common carp, rainbow trout, and bluegill sunfish. Generally, fish are exposed to bioconcentration and bioaccumulation of organic chemicals in the environment through lipid layer uptake of water-borne chemicals. In other cases, the fish are exposed through ingestion/digestion of substances or organisms in the aquatic environment which contain the harmful chemicals.

Naturally produced toxins can also bioaccumulate. The marine algal blooms known as &quot;red tides&quot; can result in local filter-feeding organisms such as mussels and oysters becoming toxic; coral reef fish can be responsible for the poisoning known as ciguatera when they accumulate a toxin called ciguatoxin from reef algae. In some eutrophic aquatic systems, biodilution can occur. This is a decrease in a contaminant with an increase in trophic level, due to higher concentrations of algae and bacteria diluting the concentration of the pollutant.

Wetland acidification can raise the chemical or metal concentrations, which leads to an increased bioavailability in marine plants and freshwater biota. Plants situated there which includes both rooted and submerged plants can be influenced by the bioavailability of metals.

== Studies of turtles as model species ==

Bioaccumulation in turtles occurs when synthetic organic contaminants (i.e., PFAS), heavy metals, or high levels of trace elements enter a singular organism, potentially affecting their health. Although there are ongoing studies of bioaccumulation in turtles, factors like pollution, climate change, and shifting landscape can affect the amounts of these toxins in the ecosystem.

The most common elements studied in turtles are mercury, cadmium, argon, and selenium. Heavy metals are released into rivers, streams, lakes, oceans, and other aquatic environments, and the plants that live in these environments will absorb the metals. Since the levels of trace elements are high in aquatic ecosystems, turtles will naturally consume various trace elements throughout various aquatic environments by eating plants and sediments. Once these substances enter the bloodstream and muscle tissue, they will increase in concentration and will become toxic to the turtles, perhaps causing metabolic, endocrine system, and reproductive failure.

Some marine turtles are used as experimental subjects to analyze bioaccumulation because of their shoreline habitats, which facilitate the collection of blood samples and other data. The turtle species are very diverse and contribute greatly to biodiversity, so many researchers find it valuable to collect data from various species. Freshwater turtles are another model species for investigating bioaccumulation. Due to their relatively limited home-range freshwater turtles can be associated with a particular catchment and its chemical contaminant profile.

=== Developmental effects of turtles ===
Toxic concentrations in turtle eggs may damage the developmental process of the turtle. For example, in the Australian freshwater short-neck turtle (&quot;Emydura macquarii macquarii&quot;), environmental PFAS concentrations were bioaccumulated by the mother and then offloaded into their eggs that impacted developmental metabolic processes and fat stores. Furthermore, there is evidence PFAS impacted the gut microbiome in exposed turtles.

In terms of toxic levels of heavy metals, it was observed to decrease egg-hatching rates in the Amazon River turtle, &quot;Podocnemis expansa&quot;. In this particular turtle egg, the heavy metals reduce the fat in the eggs and change how water is filtered throughout the embryo; this can affect the survival rate of the turtle egg.

== See also ==
* Biomagnification (magnification of toxins with increasing trophic level)
* Chelation therapy
* Drug accumulation ratio
* Environmental impact of pesticides
* International POPs Elimination Network
* Persistent organic pollutants
* Phytoremediation (removal of pollutants by bioaccumulation in plants)

==References==
==External links==
* Bioaccumulation &amp; Biomagnification
* Biomagnification graphic
* Biomagnification Definition Page
* Criteria used by the PBT Profiler
* Bioaccumulation &amp; Biotransformation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="0" end="15" title="Bioaccumulation" label="Bioaccumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="67" end="77" title="pesticides" label="pesticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="218" end="228" title="catabolism" label="catabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185557" start="233" end="242" title="excretion" label="excretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="265" end="285" title="biological half-life" label="biological half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="291" end="306" title="Toxin" label="toxic substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18621601" start="340" end="349" title="poisoning" label="poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804196" start="359" end="378" title="Measured environmental concentration" label="environmental level"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="444" end="448" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q864895" start="599" end="616" title="Biotransformation" label="Biotransformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304799" start="749" end="765" title="biomagnification" label="biomagnification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904036" start="1289" end="1305" title="bioconcentration" label="bioconcentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053008" start="1450" end="1463" title="trophic level" label="trophic level"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146144" start="1753" end="1768" title="mad as a hatter" label="mad as a hatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="1808" end="1815" title="Mercury (element)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="1911" end="1924" title="methylmercury" label="methylmercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="1941" end="1948" title="soluble" label="soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="2015" end="2032" title="mercury poisoning" label="mercury poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q266210" start="2070" end="2084" title="tetraethyllead" label="tetraethyllead"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="2100" end="2104" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="2115" end="2121" title="petrol" label="petrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="2128" end="2131" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="2190" end="2203" title="adipose tissue" label="fatty tissues"/>
<link wikidata="Q544529" start="2280" end="2292" title="Strontium-90" label="Strontium-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="2306" end="2313" title="Nuclear fallout" label="fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2319" end="2330" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q917177" start="2396" end="2409" title="osteogenesis" label="forming bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366539" start="2682" end="2698" title="Manduca sexta" label="tobacco hornworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="2719" end="2727" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="2772" end="2779" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="3024" end="3033" title="vitamin A" label="vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="3065" end="3070" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="3075" end="3084" title="carnivore" label="carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="3092" end="3102" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100515" start="3370" end="3388" title="hypervitaminosis A" label="hypervitaminosis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q124562" start="3486" end="3505" title="Xavier Mertz" label="Antarctic explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244349" start="3513" end="3518" title="husky" label="husky"/>
<link wikidata="Q434281" start="3580" end="3598" title="Douglas Mawson" label="Sir Douglas Mawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138349" start="3703" end="3715" title="Coastal fish" label="Coastal fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180766" start="3729" end="3744" title="smooth toadfish" label="smooth toadfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="3750" end="3757" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q26685" start="3772" end="3787" title="Atlantic puffin" label="Atlantic puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="3813" end="3824" title="heavy metal (chemistry)" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="3842" end="3855" title="Methylmercury" label="Methylmercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="3866" end="3876" title="Fresh water" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q81110" start="4231" end="4242" title="Common Carp" label="common carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="4244" end="4257" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148148" start="4263" end="4279" title="bluegill sunfish" label="bluegill sunfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904036" start="4312" end="4328" title="bioconcentration" label="bioconcentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="4660" end="4671" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869728" start="4688" end="4696" title="red tide" label="red tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="4757" end="4763" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="4769" end="4775" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q181831" start="4855" end="4864" title="ciguatera" label="ciguatera"/>
<link wikidata="Q62010324" start="4901" end="4911" title="ciguatoxin" label="ciguatoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914761" start="4964" end="4975" title="biodilution" label="biodilution"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="5163" end="5176" title="Ocean acidification" label="acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="5253" end="5268" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailability"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="5493" end="5499" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q648037" start="5551" end="5555" title="PFAS" label="PFAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="5747" end="5756" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="5758" end="5772" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="5903" end="5910" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="5912" end="5919" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="5921" end="5926" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="5932" end="5940" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063950" start="7267" end="7294" title="Emydura macquarii" label="Emydura macquarii macquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625714" start="7678" end="7696" title="Arrau turtle" label="Podocnemis expansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304799" start="7906" end="7922" title="Biomagnification" label="Biomagnification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053008" start="7964" end="7977" title="trophic level" label="trophic level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069061" start="7981" end="7998" title="Chelation therapy" label="Chelation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274758" start="8001" end="8024" title="Drug accumulation ratio" label="Drug accumulation ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610532" start="8027" end="8061" title="Environmental impact of pesticides" label="Environmental impact of pesticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081649" start="8064" end="8102" title="International POPs Elimination Network" label="International POPs Elimination Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q912951" start="8105" end="8134" title="Persistent organic pollutants" label="Persistent organic pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q283180" start="8137" end="8153" title="Phytoremediation" label="Phytoremediation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59506" wikidata="Q930585" url="?curid=59506" title="Gemara">
<text>The Gemara (also transliterated Gemarah, or in Yiddish Gemore) is an essential component of the Talmud, comprising a collection of rabbinical analyses and commentaries on the Mishnah and presented in 63 books. The term is derived from the Aramaic word and rooted in the Semitic word (gamar), which means &quot;to finish&quot; or &quot;complete&quot;. Initially, the Gemara was transmitted orally and not permitted to be written down. However, after Judah the Prince compiled the Mishnah around 200 CE, rabbis from Babylonia and the Land of Israel extensively studied the work. Their discussions were eventually documented in a series of books, which would come to be known as the Gemara. The Gemara, when combined with the Mishnah, forms the full Talmud.

There are two versions of the Gemara: the Babylonian Talmud (Talmud Bavli) and the Jerusalem Talmud (Talmud Yerushalmi). The Babylonian Talmud, compiled by scholars in Babylonia around 500 CE and primarily from the academies of Sura, Pumbedita, and Nehardea, is the more commonly cited version when referring to the &quot;Gemara&quot; or &quot;Talmud&quot; without further qualification. The main compilers of the Babylonian Talmud were Ravina and Rav Ashi.

The Jerusalem Talmud, also known as the Palestinian Talmud, was compiled by Jewish scholars in the Land of Israel, primarily from the academies of Tiberias and Caesarea, around 350–400 CE.

The Talmud is organized into six &quot;sedarim&quot;, or &quot;orders,&quot; which include Zeraim, Moed, Nashim, Nezikin, Kodshim, and Taharot.

In 1923, Polish Rabbi Meir Shapiro introduced a contemporary practice called &quot;Daf Yomi,&quot; or &quot;daily page,&quot; wherein participants study one page of the Talmud daily in cycles lasting seven and a half years each. This initiative ensures that both scholars and laypeople across the globe engage in the comprehensive study of the entire Talmud.

==Gemara and Mishnah==

The Gemara and the Mishnah together make up the Talmud. The Talmud thus comprises two components: the Mishnah – the core text; and the Gemara – analysis and commentary which &quot;completes&quot; the Talmud (see Structure of the Talmud).
Maimonides describes the Gemara component as:
The rabbis of the Mishnah are known as &quot;Tannaim&quot; (sing. &quot;Tanna&quot; ). The rabbis of the Gemara are referred to as &quot;Amoraim&quot; (sing. &quot;Amora&quot; אמורא). The analysis of the Amoraim, recorded as &quot;gemara&quot;, is thus focused on clarifying the positions, views, and word choice of the Tannaim.

Because there are two Gemaras, as mentioned above, there are in fact two Talmuds: the Jerusalem Talmud (Hebrew: , &quot;Talmud Yerushalmi&quot;), and the Babylonian Talmud (Hebrew: , &quot;Talmud Bavli&quot;), corresponding to the Jerusalem Gemara and the Babylonian Gemara; both share the same Mishnah. The Gemara is mostly written in Aramaic, the Jerusalem Gemara in Western Aramaic and the Babylonian in Eastern Aramaic, but both contain portions in Hebrew. Sometimes the language changes in the middle of a story.

==Origins of the word==

In a narrow sense, the word refers to the mastery and transmission of existing tradition, as opposed to , which means the deriving of new results by logic. Both activities are represented in the as one literary work.

The Aramaic noun &quot;gemar&quot; (and &quot;gemara&quot;) was formed from the verb that means &quot;learn.&quot; This substantive noun thus designates what was learned, and the learning transmitted to scholars by tradition, though it connotes in a more limited sense to exposition of the Mishnah. The word therefore gained currency as a designation of the Talmud. In the modern editions, the term &quot;gemara&quot; occurs frequently in this sense—but in nearly every case it was substituted at a later time for the objectionable word &quot;talmud&quot;, which was prohibited by the Christian censors. The only passage in which &quot;gemara&quot; occurs with the meaning of &quot;Talmud&quot; in the strict sense, and not censored, is &quot;Eruvin&quot; 32b, where it is used by Rav Nahman, a Babylonian amora (3rd C.). Later editions of the Talmud frequently substitute for the word &quot;Gemara&quot; the Aramaic abbreviation for &quot;the six orders of the Mishnah,&quot; pronounced as &quot;Shas,&quot; which has become a popular designation for the Babylonian Talmud.

==The &quot;Sugya&quot;==

The building block of gemara is known as a sugya, &quot;a self-contained basic unit of Talmudic discussion&quot; (p. 203) that often centers on a statement from the mishnah, the amoraic rabbis (memra), or simply independent of these. They vary in size and complexity and, though self-contained, may mention or assume knowledge of other sugiyot.

The analysis of the &quot;Amoraim&quot; is generally focused on clarifying the positions, words and views of the &quot;Tannaim&quot;. These debates and exchanges form the &quot;building-blocks&quot; of the ; the name for such a passage of Gemara is a (; plural ). A will typically comprise a detailed proof-based elaboration of the . Every aspect of the text is treated as a subject of close investigation. This analysis is aimed at an exhaustive understanding of the full meaning.

In the Talmud, a is presented as a series of responsive hypotheses and questions – with the Talmudic text as a record of each step in the process of reasoning and derivation. The thus takes the form of a dialectical exchange (by contrast, the states concluded legal opinions – and often differences in opinion between the &quot;Tannaim&quot;. There is little dialogue). The disputants here are termed the (questioner, &quot;one who raises a difficulty&quot;) and (answerer, &quot;one who puts straight&quot;).

The records the semantic disagreements between &quot;Tannaim&quot; and &quot;Amoraim&quot;. Some of these debates were actually conducted by the &quot;Amoraim&quot;, though many of them are hypothetically reconstructed by the Talmud&#x27;s redactors. (Often imputing a view to an earlier authority as to how he may have answered a question: &quot;This is what Rabbi X could have argued ...&quot;) Only rarely are debates formally closed.

==Argumentation and debate==

The distinctive character of the derives largely from the intricate use of argumentation and debate, described above; 
these &quot;back and forth&quot; analytics are characterized by the Talmudic phrase &quot;shakla v&#x27;tarya&quot; (שקלא וטריא; lit. &quot;taking and throwing&quot;). 
In each , either participant may cite scriptural, and proof to build a logical support for their respective opinions. The process of deduction required to derive a conclusion from a prooftext is often logically complex and indirect. &quot;Confronted with a statement on any subject, the Talmudic student will proceed to raise a series of questions before he satisfies himself of having understood its full meaning.&quot; This analysis has been described as &quot;mathematical&quot; in approach; Adin Steinsaltz makes the analogy of the &quot;Amoraim&quot; as scientists investigating the Halakha, where the Tanakh, Mishnah, Tosefta and midrash are the phenomena studied.

===Prooftexts===
Prooftexts quoted to corroborate or disprove the respective opinions and theories will include:
* verses from the Tanakh: the exact language employed is regarded as significant;
* other : cross-references to analogous cases, or to parallel reasoning by the in question;
* &quot;Beraitot&quot; (ברייתות) – uncodified which are also sources of halakha (lit. outside material; sing. ברייתא);
** references to opinions and cases in the (תוספתא);
** references to the ();
* cross-references to other : again to analogous cases or logic.

===Questions addressed===
The actual debate will usually centre on the following categories:

====Language====
Why does the use one word rather than another? If a statement is not clear enough, the seeks to clarify the intention.

====Logic====
Exploring the logical principles underlying the statements, and showing how different understandings of the reasons could lead to differences in their practical application. What underlying principle is entailed in a statement of fact or in a specific instance brought as an illustration? If a statement appears obvious, the seeks the logical reason for its necessity. It seeks to answer under which circumstances a statement is true, and what qualifications are permissible. All statements are examined for internal consistency.
See: List of Talmudic principles and :Category:Talmud concepts and terminology

====Legal====
Resolving contradictions, perceived or actual, between different statements in the , or between the and other traditions; e.g., by stating that: two conflicting sources are dealing with differing circumstances; or that they represent the views of different rabbis. Do certain authorities differ or not? If they do, why do they differ? If a principle is presented as a generalization, the clarifies how much is included; if an exception, how much is excluded.

====Biblical exposition====
Demonstrating how the rulings or disputes derive from interpretations of Biblical texts, the will often ask where in the Torah the derives a particular law. See Talmudic hermeneutics and .

==See also==
* Hadran (Talmud)
* List of masechtot, chapters, mishnahs and pages in the Talmud
* Oral Torah
* 
* Rabbinic works elaborating the analytical methods employed in :
** - R. Aryeh Leib HaCohen Heller
** and - R. Moshe Chaim Luzzatto
** &quot;Mevo haTalmud&quot; - Shmuel HaNagid

==Further reading==
* &quot;Gemara&quot;, &quot;Jewish Encyclopedia&quot;
* &quot;Gemara&quot;, Prof. Eliezer Segal
* &quot;Maimonides introduction to the Mishneh Torah&quot; English translation 
* &quot;Mevo ha-Talmud&quot;, Samuel ha-Nagid
* &quot;Talmudic Method&quot;, Harry Austryn Wolfson
* &quot;The Essential Talmud: Thirtieth Anniversary Edition&quot;, Adin Steinsaltz (Basic Books, 2006). Read more here . See also here .
* &quot;The Talmud: A Reference Guide&quot;, Adin Steinsaltz (Random House, 1996). Read more here .
* &quot;Introduction to The Talmud and Midrash&quot;, H.L. Strack and G. Stemberger (Fortress Press, 1992). 
* &quot;The Infinite Chain: Torah, Masorah, and Man&quot;, Nathan T. Lopes Cardozo (Targum Press Distributed by Philipp Feldheim, 1989). 

==References==
==External links==
* Point by point summary and discussion of the Gemara
* Gemara Marking System: Keys to Structure 
* The Daf Map System: Innovative method that uses geometric shapes to structure the Gemara
* Daf-A-Week: A project to study a daf per week
* The Complete Babylonian Talmud (Aramaic/Hebrew) as scanned images of the pages.
* The Complete Babylonian Talmud (Aramaic/Hebrew) as text. (Also available from other sites )
* A printable chart with listings of all Dappim from each Mesechta 
* Gemara Brochos:&quot;Shema, Tefillah and Brochos&quot;
* Daily Gemara by Rabbi Eli Mansour</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q930585" start="4" end="10" title="Gemara" label="Gemara"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="17" end="31" title="transliteration" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q930585" start="32" end="39" title="Gemara" label="Gemarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="47" end="54" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q930585" start="55" end="61" title="Gemara" label="Gemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="96" end="102" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="175" end="182" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="270" end="277" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380427" start="449" end="465" title="Judah the Prince" label="Judah the Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="514" end="523" title="Jews in Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="532" end="546" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="798" end="815" title="Talmud#Talmud Bavli" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="839" end="855" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446399" start="984" end="988" title="Sura (city)" label="Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067193" start="990" end="999" title="Pumbedita" label="Pumbedita"/>
<link wikidata="Q337751" start="1005" end="1013" title="Nehardea" label="Nehardea"/>
<link wikidata="Q743217" start="1193" end="1199" title="Ravina II" label="Ravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q742620" start="1204" end="1212" title="Rav Ashi" label="Rav Ashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="1362" end="1370" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="1375" end="1383" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915710" start="1572" end="1584" title="Meir Shapiro" label="Meir Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917939" start="1633" end="1641" title="Daf Yomi" label="Daf Yomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="1982" end="1988" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2146" end="2169" title="Talmud#Structure" label="Structure of the Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="2172" end="2182" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q975574" start="2263" end="2270" title="Tannaim" label="Tannaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q474035" start="2355" end="2362" title="Amoraim" label="Amoraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="2634" end="2650" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="2702" end="2719" title="Talmud" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="2884" end="2891" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394214" start="2917" end="2932" title="Western Aramaic languages" label="Western Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="2955" end="2970" title="Eastern Aramaic languages" label="Eastern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="3001" end="3007" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3877" end="3912" title="Talmud#Middle Ages" label="prohibited by the Christian censors"/>
<link wikidata="Q952034" start="4047" end="4065" title="Eruvin (Talmud)" label="&amp;quot;Eruvin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124832" start="4091" end="4101" title="Rav Nachman" label="Rav Nahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="5060" end="5071" title="logical argument" label="proof-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="5298" end="5308" title="hypothesis" label="hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="5446" end="5466" title="Dialectic" label="dialectical exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q931732" start="5492" end="5516" title="posek" label="concluded legal opinions"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="5769" end="5791" title="semantics" label="semantic disagreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="6581" end="6596" title="Logical argument" label="logical support"/>
<link wikidata="Q357304" start="7005" end="7020" title="Adin Steinsaltz" label="Adin Steinsaltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="7069" end="7078" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="7098" end="7105" title="Halakha" label="Halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="7117" end="7123" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="7125" end="7132" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341410" start="7134" end="7141" title="Tosefta" label="Tosefta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891013" start="7146" end="7153" title="Halakhic Midrash" label="midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="7162" end="7171" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="7272" end="7280" title="theory" label="theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q935452" start="7477" end="7485" title="Beraita" label="Beraitot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599045" start="8512" end="8539" title="List of Talmudic principles" label="List of Talmudic principles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8544" end="8585" title=":Category:Talmud concepts and terminology" label=":Category:Talmud concepts and terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="9210" end="9215" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910405" start="9250" end="9271" title="Talmudic hermeneutics" label="Talmudic hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638043" start="9294" end="9309" title="Hadran (Talmud)" label="Hadran (Talmud)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779943" start="9312" end="9373" title="List of masechtot, chapters, mishnahs and pages in the Talmud" label="List of masechtot, chapters, mishnahs and pages in the Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="9376" end="9386" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907499" start="9464" end="9489" title="Aryeh Leib HaCohen Heller" label="Aryeh Leib HaCohen Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q982845" start="9502" end="9522" title="Moshe Chaim Luzzatto" label="Moshe Chaim Luzzatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q467161" start="9554" end="9568" title="Samuel ibn Naghrillah" label="Shmuel HaNagid"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="9694" end="9704" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q201029" start="9725" end="9738" title="Mishneh Torah" label="Mishneh Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q467161" start="9796" end="9811" title="Samuel ibn Naghrela" label="Samuel ha-Nagid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389056" start="9843" end="9864" title="Harry Austryn Wolfson" label="Harry Austryn Wolfson"/>
<link wikidata="Q357304" start="9932" end="9947" title="Adin Steinsaltz" label="Adin Steinsaltz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59508" wikidata="Q6602828" url="?curid=59508" title="List of United States federal legislation">
<text>This is a chronological, but still incomplete, list of United States federal legislation. Congress has enacted approximately 200–600 statutes during each of its 119 biennial terms so more than 30,000 statutes have been enacted since 1789.

At the federal level in the United States, legislation (i.e., &quot;statutes&quot; or &quot;statutory law&quot;) consists exclusively of Acts passed by the Congress of the United States and its predecessor, the Continental Congress, that were either signed into law by the President or passed by Congress after a presidential veto.

Legislation is not the only source of regulations with the force of law. However, most executive branch and judicial branch regulations must originate in a congressional grant of power. &quot;See also&quot;: Executive orders issued by the President; &quot;Code of Federal Regulations&quot; for rules issued by executive branch departments and administrative agencies; and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure of the federal courts.

==Publication of the law==
===Statutes at Large (Stat.)===
Acts of Congress are published in the United States Statutes at Large. Volumes 1 through 18, which have all the statutes passed from 1789 to 1875, are available on-line at the Library of Congress, here. In the list below, statutes are listed by &quot;X Stat. Y&quot;, where X is the volume of the Statutes at Large and Y is the page number, as well as either the chapter or Public Law number. &quot;See examples below.&quot;

===Sessions (Sess.) and Chapters (ch.)===
Each Congress has two to four sessions. Under the numbering system used from 1789 until 1957, the Acts in each session are numbered sequentially as Chapters. This numbering included both laws applicable to the general public and laws relating to specific individuals, e.g., to grant pensions to disabled veterans.

===Examples===
* The Militia Act of 1862 of July 17, 1862, Sess. 2, ch. 201, was the 201st Act of the second session of the 37th Congress.
* The National Banking Act of February 25, 1863, Sess. 3, ch. 58, was the 58th Act of the third session of the 37th Congress.
* The Global Anti-Semitism Review Act of 2004 of October 16, 2004, , , was the 332nd Act of Congress (statute) passed in the 108th Congress. It can be found in volume 118 of the U.S. Statutes at Large, starting at page 1282.
* The Help America Vote Act of October 29, 2002, , , was the 252nd Act of the 107th Congress. It can be found in volume 116 of the U.S. Statutes at Large, starting at page 1666.

==Congress of the Confederation==

* September 22, 1783: Confederation Congress Proclamation of 1783 
* April 23, 1784: Land Ordinance of 1784
* May 21, 1785: Land Ordinance of 1785
* July 13, 1787: Ordinance of 1787: The Northwest Territorial Government (&quot;Northwest Ordinance&quot;)

==United States Congress==
===1789 to 1901: 1st through 56th Congresses===

===1901 to 2001: 57th through 106th Congresses===

===2001 to present: 107th and subsequent Congresses===


==See also==
* Authorization bill
* Appropriations bill (United States)
* List of sources of law in the United States
* List of Uniform Acts (United States)
* Lists by subject
** Agriculture: United States Department of Agriculture#Related legislation
** Civil Rights: Civil Rights Act (disambiguation)
** Defense: United States Department of Defense#Related legislation
** Drugs: Office of National Drug Control Policy#Legislation and executive orders
** Energy: United States Department of Energy#Related legislation and Energy law#Federal laws
**Environment: United States Environmental Protection Agency#Related legislation
** Health and Human Services: United States Department of Health and Human Services#Related legislation
** Judiciary: Judiciary Act (disambiguation)
** Labor: United States Department of Labor#Related legislation
** Slavery: Slave Trade Acts
** Social Security: List of Social Security legislation (United States)
** Taxation: List of tariffs, :Template:US tax acts, and :Category:United States federal taxation legislation
** Transportation: United States Department of Transportation#Related legislation
** Veterans Affairs: United States Department of Veterans Affairs#Related legislation
** Water Resources, Navigation, Environmental Regulation: United States Army Corps of Engineers#Public Laws affecting the Corps of Engineers (partial)

==Sources==
* Acts listed by popular name, via Cornell University
* Statutes at Large
** Volumes 1 through 18, 1789–1875, via Library of Congress
** Volumes 19 through 64, 1875-1950, via Library of Congress
** Volumes 65 through 127, 1951-2013, via Government Publishing Office
* Public laws
** 93rd Congress through current Congress, via Congress.gov
* U.S. Code
** U.S. Code, via Law Revision Counsel of the U.S. House of Representatives
** U.S. Code, via Cornell University
** U.S. Code, via the U.S. Government Publishing Office
** U.S. Code, via FindLaw.com
*Brian K. Landsberg (ed), &quot;Major Acts of Congress&quot;. MacMillan Reference Books (December 2003) 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6602828" start="47" end="88" title="List of United States federal legislation" label="list of United States federal legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="247" end="281" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal level in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="283" end="294" title="legislation" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="308" end="315" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="332" end="345" title="statutory law" label="statutory law"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="377" end="380" title="Act of Congress" label="Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="396" end="425" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congress of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="451" end="471" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="513" end="522" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602907" start="553" end="570" title="List of U.S. presidential vetoes" label="presidential veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="632" end="644" title="Statutory law" label="force of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="660" end="676" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="681" end="696" title="judicial branch" label="judicial branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602824" start="781" end="796" title="List of United States federal executive orders" label="Executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="829" end="856" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440427" start="949" end="981" title="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure" label="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="1065" end="1081" title="Act of Congress" label="Acts of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q909723" start="1103" end="1134" title="United States Statutes at Large" label="United States Statutes at Large"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1468" end="1476" title="#Examples" label="examples"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="1816" end="1824" title="pensions" label="pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857905" start="1869" end="1888" title="Militia Act of 1862" label="Militia Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184853" start="1993" end="2013" title="National Banking Act" label="National Banking Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q685282" start="2344" end="2365" title="Help America Vote Act" label="Help America Vote Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159780" start="2574" end="2617" title="Confederation Congress Proclamation of 1783" label="Confederation Congress Proclamation of 1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483928" start="2637" end="2659" title="Land Ordinance of 1784" label="Land Ordinance of 1784"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217022" start="2676" end="2698" title="Land Ordinance of 1785" label="Land Ordinance of 1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="2716" end="2771" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="Ordinance of 1787: The Northwest Territorial Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825948" start="3006" end="3024" title="Authorization bill" label="Authorization bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821677" start="3027" end="3062" title="Appropriations bill (United States)" label="Appropriations bill (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640182" start="3065" end="3108" title="List of sources of law in the United States" label="List of sources of law in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601434" start="3111" end="3147" title="List of Uniform Acts (United States)" label="List of Uniform Acts (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3183" end="3242" title="United States Department of Agriculture#Related legislation" label="United States Department of Agriculture#Related legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q404355" start="3260" end="3293" title="Civil Rights Act (disambiguation)" label="Civil Rights Act (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3306" end="3361" title="United States Department of Defense#Related legislation" label="United States Department of Defense#Related legislation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3372" end="3443" title="Office of National Drug Control Policy#Legislation and executive orders" label="Office of National Drug Control Policy#Legislation and executive orders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3455" end="3509" title="United States Department of Energy#Related legislation" label="United States Department of Energy#Related legislation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3514" end="3537" title="Energy law#Federal laws" label="Energy law#Federal laws"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3553" end="3618" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency#Related legislation" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency#Related legislation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3649" end="3722" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services#Related legislation" label="United States Department of Health and Human Services#Related legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303046" start="3737" end="3767" title="Judiciary Act (disambiguation)" label="Judiciary Act (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3778" end="3831" title="United States Department of Labor#Related legislation" label="United States Department of Labor#Related legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539168" start="3844" end="3859" title="Slave Trade Act" label="Slave Trade Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597325" start="3881" end="3932" title="List of Social Security legislation (United States)" label="List of Social Security legislation (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642486" start="3946" end="3961" title="List of tariffs in United States" label="List of tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3963" end="3984" title=":Template:US tax acts" label=":Template:US tax acts"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3990" end="4042" title=":Category:United States federal taxation legislation" label=":Category:United States federal taxation legislation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4062" end="4124" title="United States Department of Transportation#Related legislation" label="United States Department of Transportation#Related legislation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4146" end="4210" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs#Related legislation" label="United States Department of Veterans Affairs#Related legislation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4269" end="4351" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers#Public Laws affecting the Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers#Public Laws affecting the Corps of Engineers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59510" wikidata="Q49542" url="?curid=59510" title="Russians">
<text>Russians ( ) are an East Slavic ethnic group native to Eastern Europe. Their mother tongue is Russian, the most spoken Slavic language. The majority of Russians adhere to Orthodox Christianity, ever since the Middle Ages. By total numbers, they compose the largest Slavic and European nation.

Genetic studies show that Russians are closely related to Poles, Belarusians, Ukrainians, as well as Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians, and Finns. They were formed from East Slavic tribes, and their cultural ancestry is based in Kievan Rus&#x27;. The Russian word for the Russians is derived from the people of Rus&#x27; and the territory of Rus&#x27;. Russians share many historical and cultural traits with other European peoples, and especially with other East Slavic ethnic groups, specifically Belarusians and Ukrainians. 

The vast majority of Russians live in native Russia, but notable minorities are scattered throughout other post-Soviet states such as Belarus, Kazakhstan, Moldova, Ukraine, and the Baltic states. A large Russian diaspora (sometimes including Russian-speaking non-Russians), estimated at 25 million people, has developed all over the world, with notable numbers in the United States, Germany, Brazil, and Canada.

==Ethnonym==
There are two Russian words which are commonly translated into English as &quot;Russians&quot;. One is (&quot;russkiye&quot;), which in modern Russia most often means &quot;ethnic Russians&quot;. The other one is (&quot;rossiyane&quot;), derived from (&quot;Rossiya&quot;, Russia), which denotes &quot;people of Russia&quot;, regardless of ethnicity or religious affiliation. In daily usage, those terms are often mixed up, and since Vladimir Putin became president, the ethnic term русские has supplanted the non-ethnic term.

The name of the Russians derives from the early medieval Rus&#x27; people, a group of Norse merchants and warriors who relocated from across the Baltic Sea and played an important part in the foundation of the first East Slavic state that later became the Kievan Rus&#x27;.

The idea of a single &quot;all-Russian nation&quot; encompassing the East Slavic peoples, or a &quot;triune nation&quot; of three brotherly &quot;Great Russian&quot;, &quot;Little Russian&quot; (i.e. Ukrainian), and &quot;White Russian&quot; (i.e. Belarusian) peoples became the official doctrine of the Russian Empire from the beginning of the 19th century onwards.

==History==
=== Ancient history ===
The ancestors of modern Russians are the Slavic tribes, whose original home is thought by some scholars to have been the wooded areas of the Pinsk Marshes, one of the largest wetlands in Europe. The East Slavs gradually settled Western Russia with Moscow included in two waves: one moving from Kiev toward present-day Suzdal and Murom and another from Polotsk toward Novgorod and Rostov. Prior to the Slavic migration in the 6-7th centuries, the Suzdal-Murom and Novgorod-Rostov areas were populated by Finnic peoples, including the Merya, the Muromians, and the Meshchera.

From the 7th century onwards, the East Slavs slowly assimilated the native Finnic peoples, so that by year 1100, the majority of the population in Western Russia was Slavic-speaking. Recent genetic studies confirm the presence of a Finnic substrate in modern Russian population.

Outside archaeological remains, little is known about the predecessors to Russians in general prior to 859 AD, when the &quot;Primary Chronicle&quot; starts its records. By 600 AD, the Slavs are believed to have split linguistically into southern, western, and eastern branches.

=== Medieval history ===
The Rus&#x27; state was established in northern Russia in the year 862, which was ruled by the Varangians. Staraya Ladoga and Novgorod became the first major cities of the new union of immigrants from Scandinavia with the Slavs and Finns. In 882, the prince Oleg seized Kiev, thereby uniting the northern and southern lands of the East Slavs under one authority. The state adopted Christianity from the Byzantine Empire in 988. Kievan Rus&#x27; ultimately disintegrated as a state as a result of in-fighting between members of the princely family that ruled it collectively.

After the 13th century, Moscow became a political and cultural center. Moscow has become a center for the unification of Russian lands. By the end of the 15th century, Moscow united the northeastern and northwestern Russian principalities, overthrew the &quot;Mongol yoke&quot; in 1480, and would be transformed into the Tsardom of Russia after Ivan IV was crowned tsar in 1547.

=== Modern history ===
In 1721, Tsar Peter the Great renamed his state as the Russian Empire, hoping to associate it with historical and cultural achievements of ancient Rus&#x27; – in contrast to his policies oriented towards Western Europe. The state now extended from the eastern borders of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth to the Pacific Ocean, and became a great power; and one of the most powerful states in Europe after the victory over Napoleon. Peasant revolts were common, and all were fiercely suppressed. The Emperor Alexander II abolished Russian serfdom in 1861, but the peasants fared poorly and revolutionary pressures grew. In the following decades, reform efforts such as the Stolypin reforms of 1906–1914, the constitution of 1906, and the State Duma (1906–1917) attempted to open and liberalize the economy and political system, but the Emperors refused to relinquish autocratic rule and resisted sharing their power.
A combination of economic breakdown, war-weariness, and discontent with the autocratic system of government triggered revolution in Russia in 1917. The overthrow of the monarchy initially brought into office a coalition of liberals and moderate socialists, but their failed policies led to seizure of power by the communist Bolsheviks on 25 October 1917 (7 November New Style). In 1922, Soviet Russia, along with Soviet Ukraine, Soviet Belarus, and the Transcaucasian SFSR signed the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR, officially merging all four republics to form the Soviet Union as a country. Between 1922 and 1991, the history of Russia became essentially the history of the Soviet Union, effectively an ideologically based state roughly conterminous with the Russian Empire before the 1918 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. From its first years, government in the Soviet Union based itself on the one-party rule of the Communists, as the Bolsheviks called themselves, beginning in March 1918. The approach to the building of socialism, however, varied over different periods in Soviet history: from the mixed economy and diverse society and culture of the 1920s through the command economy and repressions of the Joseph Stalin era to the &quot;era of stagnation&quot; from the 1960s to the 1980s. The actions of the Soviet government caused the death of millions of citizens in the famine of 1930–1933 and the Great Purge. The attack by Nazi Germany and the ensuing war, together with the Holocaust, again claimed millions of lives. Millions of Russian civilians and prisoners of war were killed or starved to death during Nazi Germany&#x27;s genocidal policies called the Hunger Plan and the Generalplan Ost, including one million civilian casualties during the Siege of Leningrad. After the victory of the Soviet Union and the Western Allies, the Soviet Union became a superpower opposing Western countries during the Cold War.

By the mid-1980s, with Soviet economic and political weaknesses becoming acute, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev embarked on major reforms; these culminated in the dissolution of the Soviet Union, leaving Russia again alone and marking the beginning of the post-Soviet Russian period. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic renamed itself the Russian Federation and became the successor state to the Soviet Union.

== Geographic distribution ==

Ethnic Russians historically migrated within the areas of the former Russian Empire and Soviet Union, though they were sometimes encouraged to re-settle in borderland areas by the Tsarist and later Soviet government. Sometimes ethnic Russian communities, such as the Lipovans who settled in the Danube delta or the Doukhobors in Canada, emigrated as religious dissidents fleeing the central authority.

There are also small Russian communities in the Balkans — including Lipovans in the Danube delta — Central European nations such as Germany and Poland, as well as Russians settled in China, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and Australia. These communities identify themselves to varying degrees as Russians, citizens of these countries, or both.

Significant numbers of Russians emigrated to Canada, Australia and the United States. Brighton Beach, Brooklyn and South Beach, Staten Island in New York City are examples of large communities of recent Russian and Russian-Jewish immigrants. Other examples are Sunny Isles Beach, a northern suburb of Miami, and West Hollywood of the Los Angeles area.

After the Russian Revolution in 1917, many Russians who were identified with the White army moved to China — most of them settling in Harbin and Shanghai. By the 1930s, Harbin had 100,000 Russians. Many of these Russians moved back to the Soviet Union after World War II. Today, a large group in northern China still speak Russian as a second language. Russians (&quot;eluosizu&quot;) are one of the 56 ethnic groups officially recognized by the People&#x27;s Republic of China (as &quot;the Russ&quot;); there are approximately 15,600 Russian Chinese living mostly in northern Xinjiang, and also in Inner Mongolia and Heilongjiang.

According to the 2021 Russian census, the number of ethnic Russians in the Russian Federation decreased by nearly 5.43 million, from roughly 111 million people in 2010 to approximately 105.5 million in 2021.

==Ethnographic groups==

Among Russians, a number of ethnographic groups stand out, such as: the Northern Russians, the Southern Russians, the Cossacks, the Goryuns, the Kamchadals, the Polekhs, the Pomors, the Russian Chinese, the Siberians (&quot;Siberiaks&quot;), Starozhily, some groupings of Old Believers (Kamenschiks, Lipovans, Semeiskie), and others.

The main ones are the Northern and Southern Russian groups. At the same time, the proposal of the ethnographer Dmitry Zelenin in his major work of 1927 &quot;Russian (East Slavic) Ethnography&quot; to consider them as separate East Slavic peoples did not find support in scientific circles.

Russia&#x27;s Arctic coastline had been explored and settled by Pomors, Russian settlers from Novgorod.

Cossacks inhabited sparsely populated areas in the Don, Terek, and Ural river basins, and played an important role in the historical and cultural development of parts of Russia.

==Genetics==


In accordance with the 2008 research results of Russian and Estonian geneticists, two groups of Russians are distinguished: the northern and southern populations.

Central and Southern Russians, to which the majority of Russian populations belong, according to Y chromosome R1a, are included in the general &quot;East European&quot; gene cluster with the rest East and West Slavs (Poles, Czechs and Slovaks), as well as the non-Slavic Hungarians and Aromanians. Genetically, East Slavs are quite similar to West Slavs; such genetic similarity is somewhat unusual for genetics with such a wide settlement of the Slavs, especially Russians. The high unity of the autosomal markers of the East Slavic populations and their significant differences from the neighboring Finnic, Turkic and Caucasian peoples were revealed.

Northern Russians, according to mtDNA, Y chromosome and autosomal marker CCR5de132, are included in the &quot;North European&quot; gene cluster (the Poles, the Balts, Germanic and Baltic Finnic peoples).

Consequently, the already existing biologo-genetic studies have made all hypotheses about the mixing of the Russians with non-Slavic ethnic groups or their &quot;non-Slavism&quot; obsolete or pseudoscientific. At the same time, the long-standing identification of the Northern Russian and Southern Russian ethnographic groups by ethnologists was confirmed. The previous conclusions of physical anthropologists, historians and linguists (see, in particular, the works of the academician Valentin Yanin) about the proximity of the ancient Novgorod Slavs and their language not to the East, but to west Baltic Slavs. As can be seen from genetic resources, the contemporary Northern Russians also are genetically close of all Slavic peoples only to the Poles and similar to the Balts. However, this does not mean the northern Russians origin from the Balts or the Poles, more likely, that all the peoples of the Nordic gene pool are descendants of Paleo-European population, which has remained around Baltic Sea.

== Assimilation and immigration ==

Russians have sometimes found it useful to emphasize their self-perceived ability to assimilate other people to the Russian ethnicity - and as a historic great power with imperial expansionist tendencies the Russian state has sometimes encouraged Russian-centred monoculturalism. Steppe peoples, Tatars, Baltic Germans, Lithuanians and native Siberians in Rus&#x27;, Muscovy or the Russian Empire could in theory become &quot;Russians&quot; () simply by accepting Russian Orthodoxy as their faith.
The attitude of ready inclusivity is summed up in the popular phrase (sometimes attributed to Emperor Alexander III of Russia) - Хочешь быть русским - будь им! ().

==Language==

Russian is the official and the predominantly spoken language in Russia. It is the most-spoken native language in Europe, the most geographically widespread language of Eurasia, as well as the world&#x27;s most widely spoken Slavic language. Russian is the third-most used language on the Internet after English and Spanish, and is one of two official languages aboard the International Space Station, as well as one of the six official languages of the United Nations.

==Culture==

=== Literature ===

Russian literature is considered to be among the world&#x27;s most influential and developed. It can be traced to the Middle Ages, when epics and chronicles in Old East Slavic were composed. By the Age of Enlightenment, literature had grown in importance, with works from Mikhail Lomonosov, Denis Fonvizin, Gavrila Derzhavin, and Nikolay Karamzin. From the early 1830s, during the Golden Age of Russian Poetry, literature underwent an astounding golden age in poetry, prose and drama. Romanticism permitted a flowering of poetic talent: Vasily Zhukovsky and later his protégé Alexander Pushkin came to the fore. Following Pushkin&#x27;s footsteps, a new generation of poets were born, including Mikhail Lermontov, Nikolay Nekrasov, Aleksey Konstantinovich Tolstoy, Fyodor Tyutchev and Afanasy Fet.

The first great Russian novelist was Nikolai Gogol. Then came Ivan Turgenev, who mastered both short stories and novels. Fyodor Dostoevsky and Leo Tolstoy soon became internationally renowned. Ivan Goncharov is remembered mainly for his novel Oblomov. Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin wrote prose satire, while Nikolai Leskov is best remembered for his shorter fiction. In the second half of the century Anton Chekhov excelled in short stories and became a leading dramatist. Other important 19th-century developments included the fabulist Ivan Krylov, non-fiction writers such as the critic Vissarion Belinsky, and playwrights such as Aleksandr Griboyedov and Aleksandr Ostrovsky. The beginning of the 20th century ranks as the Silver Age of Russian Poetry. This era had poets such as Alexander Blok, Anna Akhmatova, Boris Pasternak, Konstantin Balmont, Marina Tsvetaeva, Vladimir Mayakovsky, and Osip Mandelstam. It also produced some first-rate novelists and short-story writers, such as Aleksandr Kuprin, Nobel Prize winner Ivan Bunin, Leonid Andreyev, Yevgeny Zamyatin, Dmitry Merezhkovsky and Andrei Bely.

After the Russian Revolution of 1917, Russian literature split into Soviet and white émigré parts. In the 1930s, Socialist realism became the predominant trend in Russia. Its leading figure was Maxim Gorky, who laid the foundations of this style. Mikhail Bulgakov was one of the leading writers of the Soviet era. Nikolay Ostrovsky&#x27;s novel How the Steel Was Tempered has been among the most successful works of Russian literature. Influential émigré writers include Vladimir Nabokov. Some writers dared to oppose Soviet ideology, such as Nobel Prize-winning novelist Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, who wrote about life in the Gulag camps.

=== Philosophy ===

Russian philosophy has been greatly influential. Alexander Herzen is known as one of the fathers of agrarian populism. Mikhail Bakunin is referred to as the father of anarchism. Peter Kropotkin was the most important theorist of anarcho-communism. Mikhail Bakhtin&#x27;s writings have significantly inspired scholars. Helena Blavatsky gained international following as the leading theoretician of Theosophy, and co-founded the Theosophical Society. Vladimir Lenin, a major revolutionary, developed a variant of communism known as Leninism. Leon Trotsky, on the other hand, founded Trotskyism. Alexander Zinoviev was a prominent philosopher in the second half of the 20th century.

=== Science ===

Mikhail Lomonosov proposed the conservation of mass in chemical reactions, discovered the atmosphere of Venus, and founded modern geology. Since the times of Nikolay Lobachevsky, who pioneered the non-Euclidean geometry, and a prominent tutor Pafnuty Chebyshev, Russian mathematicians became among the world&#x27;s most influential. Dmitry Mendeleev invented the Periodic table, the main framework of modern chemistry. Sofya Kovalevskaya was a pioneer among women in mathematics in the 19th century. Grigori Perelman was offered the first ever Clay Millennium Prize Problems Award for his final proof of the Poincaré conjecture in 2002, as well as the Fields Medal in 2006, both of which he declined.

Alexander Popov was among the inventors of radio, while Nikolai Basov and Alexander Prokhorov were co-inventors of laser and maser. Zhores Alferov contributed significantly to the creation of modern heterostructure physics and electronics. Oleg Losev made crucial contributions in the field of semiconductor junctions, and discovered light-emitting diodes. Vladimir Vernadsky is considered one of the founders of geochemistry, biogeochemistry, and radiogeology. Élie Metchnikoff is known for his groundbreaking research in immunology. Ivan Pavlov is known chiefly for his work in classical conditioning. Lev Landau made fundamental contributions to many areas of theoretical physics.

Nikolai Vavilov was best known for having identified the centers of origin of cultivated plants. Many famous Russian scientists and inventors were émigrés. Igor Sikorsky was an aviation pioneer. Vladimir Zworykin was the inventor of the iconoscope and kinescope television systems. Theodosius Dobzhansky was the central figure in the field of evolutionary biology for his work in shaping the modern synthesis. George Gamow was one of the foremost advocates of the Big Bang theory.
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky is called the father of theoretical astronautics, whose works had inspired leading Soviet rocket engineers, such as Valentin Glushko, and many others.

In 1961, the first human trip into space was successfully made by Yuri Gagarin. In 1963, Valentina Tereshkova became the first and youngest woman in space, having flown a solo mission on Vostok 6. In 1965, Alexei Leonov became the first human to conduct a spacewalk, exiting the space capsule during Voskhod 2.

=== Music ===
Until the 18th century, music in Russia consisted mainly of church music and folk songs and dances. In the 19th century, it was defined by the tension between classical composer Mikhail Glinka along with other members of The Mighty Handful, and the Russian Musical Society led by composers Anton and Nikolay Rubinstein. The later tradition of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, one of the greatest composers of the Romantic era, was continued into the 20th century by Sergei Rachmaninoff, one of the last great champions of the Romantic style of European classical music. World-renowned composers of the 20th century include Alexander Scriabin, Alexander Glazunov, Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich, Georgy Sviridov and Alfred Schnittke.

Soviet and Russian conservatories have turned out generations of world-renowned soloists. Among the best known are violinists David Oistrakh and Gidon Kremer, cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, pianists Vladimir Horowitz, Sviatoslav Richter, and Emil Gilels, and vocalist Galina Vishnevskaya.

During the Soviet times, popular music also produced a number of renowned figures, such as the two balladeers—Vladimir Vysotsky and Bulat Okudzhava, and performers such as Alla Pugacheva. Jazz, even with sanctions from Soviet authorities, flourished and evolved into one of the country&#x27;s most popular musical forms. The Ganelin Trio have been described by critics as the greatest ensemble of free-jazz in continental Europe. By the 1980s, rock music became popular across Russia, and produced bands such as Aria, Aquarium, DDT, and Kino. Pop music in Russia has continued to flourish since the 1960s, with globally famous acts such as t.A.T.u. In the recent times, Little Big, a rave band, has gained popularity in Russia and across Europe.

=== Cinema ===
Russian and later Soviet cinema was a hotbed of invention, resulting in world-renowned films such as &quot;The Battleship Potemkin&quot;. Soviet-era filmmakers, most notably Sergei Eisenstein and Andrei Tarkovsky, would go on to become among of the world&#x27;s most innovative and influential directors. Eisenstein was a student of Lev Kuleshov, who developed the groundbreaking Soviet montage theory of film editing at the world&#x27;s first film school, the All-Union Institute of Cinematography. Dziga Vertov&#x27;s &quot;Kino-Eye&quot; theory had a huge impact on the development of documentary filmmaking and cinema realism. Many Soviet socialist realism films were artistically successful, including &quot;Chapaev&quot;, &quot;The Cranes Are Flying&quot;, and &quot;Ballad of a Soldier&quot;.

The 1960s and 1970s saw a greater variety of artistic styles in Soviet cinema. The comedies of Eldar Ryazanov and Leonid Gaidai of that time were immensely popular, with many of the catchphrases still in use today. In 1961–68 Sergey Bondarchuk directed an Oscar-winning film adaptation of Leo Tolstoy&#x27;s epic &quot;War and Peace&quot;, which was the most expensive film made in the Soviet Union. In 1969, Vladimir Motyl&#x27;s &quot;White Sun of the Desert&quot; was released, a very popular film in a genre of ostern; the film is traditionally watched by cosmonauts before any trip into space. In 2002, &quot;Russian Ark&quot; was the first feature film ever to be shot in a single take. Today, the Russian cinema industry continues to expand.

=== Architecture ===
The history of Russian architecture begins with early woodcraft buildings of ancient Slavs, and the architecture of Kievan Rus&#x27;. Following the Christianization of Kievan Rus&#x27;, for several centuries it was influenced predominantly by the Byzantine Empire. Aristotle Fioravanti and other Italian architects brought Renaissance trends into Russia. The 16th century saw the development of the unique tent-like churches; and the onion dome design, which is a distinctive feature of Russian architecture. In the 17th century, the &quot;fiery style&quot; of ornamentation flourished in Moscow and Yaroslavl, gradually paving the way for the Naryshkin baroque of the 1690s. After the reforms of Peter the Great, Russia&#x27;s architecture became influenced by Western European styles. The 18th-century taste for Rococo architecture led to the splendid works of Bartolomeo Rastrelli and his followers. During the reign of Catherine the Great, Saint Petersburg was transformed into an outdoor museum of Neoclassical architecture. During Alexander I&#x27;s rule, Empire style became the &quot;de facto&quot; architectural style, and Nicholas I opened the gate of Eclecticism to Russia. The second half of the 19th-century was dominated by the Neo-Byzantine and Russian Revival style. In early 20th-century, Russian neoclassical revival became a trend. Prevalent styles of the late 20th-century were the Art Nouveau, Constructivism, and Socialist Classicism.

=== Religion ===


Russia&#x27;s largest religion is Christianity—It has the world&#x27;s largest Orthodox population. According to differing sociological surveys on religious adherence, between 41% to over 80% of the total population of Russia adhere to the Russian Orthodox Church.

Non-religious Russians may associate themselves with the Orthodox faith for cultural reasons. Some Russian people are Old Believers: a relatively small schismatic group of the Russian Orthodoxy that rejected the liturgical reforms introduced in the 17th century. Other schisms from Orthodoxy include Doukhobors which in the 18th century rejected secular government, the Russian Orthodox priests, icons, all church ritual, the Bible as the supreme source of divine revelation and the divinity of Jesus, and later emigrated into Canada. An even earlier sect were Molokans which formed in 1550 and rejected Czar&#x27;s divine right to rule, icons, the Trinity as outlined by the Nicene Creed, Orthodox fasts, military service, and practices including water baptism.

Other world religions have negligible representation among ethnic Russians. The largest of these groups are Islam with over 100,000 followers from national minorities, and Baptists with over 85,000 Russian adherents. Others are mostly Pentecostals, Evangelicals, Seventh-day Adventists, Lutherans and Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses.

Since the fall of the Soviet Union various new religious movements have sprung up and gathered a following among ethnic Russians. The most prominent of these are Rodnovery, the revival of the Slavic native religion also common to other Slavic nations.

=== Sports ===

Football is the most popular sport in Russia. The Soviet Union national football team became the first European champions by winning Euro 1960, and reached the finals of Euro 1988. In 1956 and 1988, the Soviet Union won gold at the Olympic football tournament. Russian clubs CSKA Moscow and Zenit Saint Petersburg won the UEFA Cup in 2005 and 2008. The Russian national football team reached the semi-finals of Euro 2008. Russia was the host nation for the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup, and the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Ice hockey is very popular in Russia. The Soviet Union men&#x27;s national ice hockey team dominated the sport internationally throughout its existence, and the modern-day Russia men&#x27;s national ice hockey team is among the most successful teams in the sport. Bandy is Russia&#x27;s national sport, and it has historically been the highest-achieving country in the sport. The Russian national basketball team won the EuroBasket 2007, and the Russian basketball club PBC CSKA Moscow is among the most successful European basketball teams. The annual Formula One Russian Grand Prix is held at the Sochi Autodrom in the Sochi Olympic Park.

Russia is the leading nation in rhythmic gymnastics; and Russian synchronized swimming is considered to be the world&#x27;s best. Figure skating is another popular sport in Russia, especially pair skating and ice dancing. Russia has produced a number of famous tennis players, such as Maria Sharapova and Daniil Medvedev. Chess is also a widely popular pastime in the nation, with many of the world&#x27;s top chess players being Russian for decades. The 1980 Summer Olympic Games were held in Moscow, and the 2014 Winter Olympics and the 2014 Winter Paralympics were hosted in Sochi.

==See also==

* All-Russian nation
* European ethnic groups
* List of Russian artists
* List of Slavic studies journals

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* (pdf)
* 
* 

==External links==
* 4.1. Population by nationality 
* &quot;People and Cultures: Russians&quot; book published by Russian Academy of Sciences
* Pre-Revolutionary photos of women in Russian folk dress</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="0" end="8" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="20" end="31" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="32" end="44" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="55" end="69" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="77" end="90" title="mother tongue" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="94" end="101" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="119" end="134" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="171" end="192" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="209" end="220" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="265" end="271" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="276" end="291" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="European nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="352" end="357" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="359" end="370" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="372" end="382" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q173302" start="395" end="404" title="Estonians" label="Estonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="406" end="414" title="Latvians" label="Latvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="416" end="427" title="Lithuanians" label="Lithuanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="433" end="438" title="Finns" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="522" end="538" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q123411956" start="594" end="644" title="Names of Rus&amp;#x27;, Russia and Ruthenia" label="people of Rus&amp;#x27; and the territory of Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="792" end="803" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="808" end="818" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="929" end="947" title="post-Soviet states" label="post-Soviet states"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400579" start="956" end="963" title="Russians in Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976251" start="965" end="975" title="Russians in Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400602" start="977" end="984" title="Russians in Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q311762" start="986" end="993" title="Russians in Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453511" start="1003" end="1016" title="Russians in the Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968578" start="1026" end="1042" title="Russian diaspora" label="Russian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140588" start="1190" end="1203" title="Russian Americans" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q315877" start="1205" end="1212" title="Russians in Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382298" start="1214" end="1220" title="Russian Brazilians" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400590" start="1226" end="1232" title="Russian Canadians" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1262" end="1269" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="1682" end="1696" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q914114" start="1833" end="1849" title="Rus&amp;#x27; people" label="Rus&amp;#x27; people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="1862" end="1867" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1921" end="1931" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="1992" end="2003" title="East Slavic peoples" label="East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="2032" end="2048" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463021" start="2078" end="2096" title="all-Russian nation" label="all-Russian nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="2120" end="2139" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818263" start="2197" end="2209" title="Great Russia" label="Great Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048315" start="2224" end="2237" title="Little Russia" label="Little Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="2251" end="2260" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q465341" start="2273" end="2286" title="White Ruthenia" label="White Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="2299" end="2309" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2355" end="2369" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q159837" start="2496" end="2509" title="List of ancient Slavic peoples" label="Slavic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117504" start="2596" end="2609" title="Pripet Marshes" label="Pinsk Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="2630" end="2637" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="2703" end="2709" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="2749" end="2753" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q15757" start="2773" end="2779" title="Suzdal" label="Suzdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162677" start="2784" end="2789" title="Murom" label="Murom"/>
<link wikidata="Q200797" start="2807" end="2814" title="Polotsk" label="Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="2822" end="2830" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q193342" start="2835" end="2841" title="Rostov, Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367703" start="2958" end="2972" title="Finnic peoples" label="Finnic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144528" start="2988" end="2993" title="Meryans" label="Merya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439159" start="2999" end="3007" title="Muromians" label="Muromian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308743" start="3018" end="3027" title="Meshchera" label="Meshchera"/>
<link wikidata="Q192551" start="3436" end="3453" title="Primary Chronicle" label="Primary Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="3495" end="3500" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="3548" end="3556" title="South Slavs" label="southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="3558" end="3565" title="West Slavs" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="3710" end="3720" title="Varangians" label="Varangians"/>
<link wikidata="Q216794" start="3722" end="3736" title="Staraya Ladoga" label="Staraya Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="3741" end="3749" title="Veliky Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="3816" end="3827" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367703" start="3847" end="3852" title="Finnic peoples" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131983" start="3873" end="3877" title="Oleg the Wise" label="Oleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="3885" end="3889" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="3946" end="3956" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q573211" start="3988" end="4008" title="Christianization of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="adopted Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4018" end="4034" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="4043" end="4059" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="4215" end="4221" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330381" start="4297" end="4325" title="Collector of Russian lands" label="unification of Russian lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="4512" end="4529" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsardom of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="4536" end="4543" title="Ivan the Terrible" label="Ivan IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="4608" end="4623" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4649" end="4663" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="4869" end="4899" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4907" end="4920" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="4935" end="4946" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="5004" end="5025" title="French invasion of Russia" label="victory over Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="5102" end="5114" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="5115" end="5124" title="Emancipation reform of 1861" label="abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498278" start="5125" end="5140" title="Serfdom in Russia" label="Russian serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221926" start="5267" end="5282" title="Stolypin reform" label="Stolypin reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583213" start="5302" end="5322" title="Russian Constitution of 1906" label="constitution of 1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649453" start="5332" end="5342" title="State Duma (Russian Empire)" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="5461" end="5476" title="Tsarist autocracy" label="autocratic rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942912" start="5548" end="5561" title="Russia in World War I" label="war-weariness"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="5629" end="5657" title="Russian Revolution" label="revolution in Russia in 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="5663" end="5688" title="February Revolution" label="overthrow of the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="5801" end="5817" title="October Revolution" label="seizure of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="5825" end="5834" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="5835" end="5845" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="5877" end="5886" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="New Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="5924" end="5938" title="Soviet Ukraine" label="Soviet Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="5940" end="5954" title="Soviet Belarus" label="Soviet Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q545205" start="5964" end="5983" title="Transcaucasian SFSR" label="Transcaucasian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443926" start="5995" end="6029" title="Treaty on the Creation of the USSR" label="Treaty on the Creation of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="6176" end="6203" title="history of the Soviet Union" label="history of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="6307" end="6330" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (Russia–Central Powers)" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q45745" start="6611" end="6624" title="New Economic Policy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="6682" end="6713" title="Stalinism" label="command economy and repressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="6721" end="6734" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416215" start="6746" end="6775" title="Era of Stagnation" label="&amp;quot;era of stagnation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497254" start="6890" end="6909" title="Soviet famine of 1930–1933" label="famine of 1930–1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="6918" end="6929" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="6935" end="6941" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6945" end="6957" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6974" end="6977" title="World War II" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="6993" end="7006" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4374773" start="7022" end="7039" title="World War II casualties of the Soviet Union" label="millions of lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715064" start="7075" end="7091" title="German atrocities committed against Soviet prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q546403" start="7181" end="7192" title="Hunger Plan" label="Hunger Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156115" start="7201" end="7216" title="Generalplan Ost" label="Generalplan Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="7271" end="7289" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="Siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7316" end="7328" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="7337" end="7351" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="7379" end="7389" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="7428" end="7436" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="7533" end="7550" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="7602" end="7633" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293292" start="7695" end="7706" title="History of Russia (1991–present)" label="post-Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="7727" end="7771" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="7791" end="7809" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7825" end="7860" title="Succession of states#Soviet Union and the Russian Federation" label="successor state to the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="7963" end="7977" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7982" end="7994" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="8161" end="8169" title="Lipovans" label="Lipovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184429" start="8189" end="8201" title="Danube delta" label="Danube delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="8209" end="8218" title="Doukhobor" label="Doukhobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8223" end="8229" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="8345" end="8352" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="8365" end="8373" title="Lipovans" label="Lipovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8429" end="8436" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="8441" end="8447" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8480" end="8485" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="8487" end="8492" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="8494" end="8505" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="8507" end="8513" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="8515" end="8521" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="8523" end="8532" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8537" end="8546" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8702" end="8708" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8710" end="8719" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8728" end="8741" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q915813" start="8743" end="8767" title="Brighton Beach, Brooklyn" label="Brighton Beach, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566271" start="8772" end="8798" title="South Beach, Staten Island" label="South Beach, Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8802" end="8815" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="8872" end="8886" title="Russian Jews" label="Russian-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151584" start="8918" end="8935" title="Sunny Isles Beach" label="Sunny Isles Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="8958" end="8963" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="8969" end="8983" title="West Hollywood" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="8991" end="9002" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="9020" end="9038" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851355" start="9091" end="9101" title="White army" label="White army"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9111" end="9116" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="9144" end="9150" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="9155" end="9163" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9268" end="9280" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365234" start="9363" end="9394" title="Ethnic Russians in China" label="Russians (&amp;quot;eluosizu&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q476256" start="9410" end="9426" title="Nationalities of China" label="56 ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9456" end="9487" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="9588" end="9596" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="9610" end="9624" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="9629" end="9641" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q57573219" start="9661" end="9680" title="2021 Russian census" label="2021 Russian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="9719" end="9737" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704243" start="9906" end="9924" title="ethnographic group" label="ethnographic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379372" start="9950" end="9967" title="Northern Russian dialects" label="Northern Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388676" start="9973" end="9990" title="Southern Russian dialects" label="Southern Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="9996" end="10004" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635611" start="10010" end="10017" title="Goryuns" label="Goryuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322825" start="10023" end="10033" title="Kamchadals" label="Kamchadals"/>
<link wikidata="Q382794" start="10039" end="10046" title="Polekhs" label="Polekhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q844570" start="10052" end="10058" title="Pomors" label="Pomors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365234" start="10064" end="10079" title="Russians in China" label="Russian Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418370" start="10085" end="10094" title="Siberians" label="Siberians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993559" start="10120" end="10130" title="Starozhily" label="Starozhily"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="10150" end="10163" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920545" start="10165" end="10175" title="Kamenschik" label="Kamenschik"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="10178" end="10186" title="Lipovans" label="Lipovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025606" start="10188" end="10197" title="Semeiskie" label="Semeiskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q982835" start="10324" end="10338" title="Dmitry Konstantinovich Zelenin" label="Dmitry Zelenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q844570" start="10569" end="10575" title="Pomors" label="Pomors"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="10599" end="10607" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="10610" end="10618" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="10661" end="10664" title="Don (river)" label="Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q82776" start="10666" end="10671" title="Terek (river)" label="Terek"/>
<link wikidata="Q80240" start="10677" end="10681" title="Ural (river)" label="Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="11065" end="11077" title="Y chromosome" label="Y chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501261" start="11137" end="11149" title="gene cluster" label="gene cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="11164" end="11168" title="East Slavs" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="11173" end="11183" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="11239" end="11249" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="11254" end="11264" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="11465" end="11474" title="autosome" label="autosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379372" start="11622" end="11639" title="Northern Russian dialects" label="Northern Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="11654" end="11659" title="Mitochondrial DNA" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="11771" end="11776" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="11782" end="11787" title="Balts" label="Balts"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="11789" end="11797" title="Germanic-speaking Europe" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745748" start="11802" end="11823" title="Baltic Finnic peoples" label="Baltic Finnic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980377" start="12313" end="12327" title="Valentin Yanin" label="Valentin Yanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659009" start="12364" end="12378" title="Novgorod Slavs" label="Novgorod Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="12427" end="12439" title="Lechites" label="Baltic Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q51969195" start="12461" end="12478" title="genetic resources" label="genetic resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q129385" start="12771" end="12785" title="Comb Ceramic culture" label="Paleo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="12824" end="12834" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="12958" end="12968" title="cultural assimilation" label="assimilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="12982" end="13006" title="Russification" label="to the Russian ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="13229" end="13238" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324731" start="13240" end="13247" title="Muscovy (disambiguation)" label="Muscovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="13255" end="13269" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="13337" end="13354" title="Russian Orthodoxy" label="Russian Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="13473" end="13496" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="13550" end="13557" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="13565" end="13573" title="official language" label="official"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="13775" end="13790" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="13839" end="13847" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13854" end="13861" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="13866" end="13873" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="13923" end="13950" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511187" start="13978" end="14018" title="official languages of the United Nations" label="official languages of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q179161" start="14054" end="14072" title="Russian literature" label="Russian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="14172" end="14183" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35228" start="14214" end="14229" title="Old East Slavic" label="Old East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="14252" end="14272" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q58720" start="14326" end="14343" title="Mikhail Lomonosov" label="Mikhail Lomonosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q315885" start="14345" end="14359" title="Denis Fonvizin" label="Denis Fonvizin"/>
<link wikidata="Q270275" start="14361" end="14378" title="Gavrila Derzhavin" label="Gavrila Derzhavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191598" start="14384" end="14400" title="Nikolay Karamzin" label="Nikolay Karamzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579125" start="14435" end="14463" title="Golden Age of Russian Poetry" label="Golden Age of Russian Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="14539" end="14550" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157623" start="14591" end="14607" title="Vasily Zhukovsky" label="Vasily Zhukovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="14630" end="14647" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Alexander Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46599" start="14749" end="14766" title="Mikhail Lermontov" label="Mikhail Lermontov"/>
<link wikidata="Q208003" start="14768" end="14784" title="Nikolay Nekrasov" label="Nikolay Nekrasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q212575" start="14786" end="14817" title="Aleksey Konstantinovich Tolstoy" label="Aleksey Konstantinovich Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37217" start="14819" end="14834" title="Fyodor Tyutchev" label="Fyodor Tyutchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q314212" start="14839" end="14850" title="Afanasy Fet" label="Afanasy Fet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43718" start="14890" end="14903" title="Nikolai Gogol" label="Nikolai Gogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="14915" end="14928" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="14974" end="14991" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="14996" end="15007" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189665" start="15046" end="15060" title="Ivan Goncharov" label="Ivan Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q842074" start="15096" end="15103" title="Oblomov" label="Oblomov"/>
<link wikidata="Q211785" start="15105" end="15131" title="Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin" label="Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209004" start="15158" end="15172" title="Nikolai Leskov" label="Nikolai Leskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="15251" end="15264" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q191480" start="15387" end="15398" title="Ivan Krylov" label="Ivan Krylov"/>
<link wikidata="Q192885" start="15439" end="15457" title="Vissarion Belinsky" label="Vissarion Belinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q15001" start="15483" end="15503" title="Aleksandr Griboyedov" label="Aleksandr Griboyedov"/>
<link wikidata="Q171976" start="15508" end="15527" title="Aleksandr Ostrovsky" label="Aleksandr Ostrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092371" start="15576" end="15604" title="Silver Age of Russian Poetry" label="Silver Age of Russian Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q164765" start="15633" end="15647" title="Alexander Blok" label="Alexander Blok"/>
<link wikidata="Q80440" start="15649" end="15663" title="Anna Akhmatova" label="Anna Akhmatova"/>
<link wikidata="Q41223" start="15665" end="15680" title="Boris Pasternak" label="Boris Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q314498" start="15682" end="15700" title="Konstantin Balmont" label="Konstantin Balmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q188526" start="15702" end="15718" title="Marina Tsvetaeva" label="Marina Tsvetaeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q132964" start="15720" end="15739" title="Vladimir Mayakovsky" label="Vladimir Mayakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q189950" start="15745" end="15760" title="Osip Mandelstam" label="Osip Mandelstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q271457" start="15838" end="15854" title="Aleksandr Kuprin" label="Aleksandr Kuprin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46602" start="15875" end="15885" title="Ivan Bunin" label="Ivan Bunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310866" start="15887" end="15902" title="Leonid Andreyev" label="Leonid Andreyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q204868" start="15904" end="15920" title="Yevgeny Zamyatin" label="Yevgeny Zamyatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326459" start="15922" end="15941" title="Dmitry Merezhkovsky" label="Dmitry Merezhkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q212632" start="15946" end="15957" title="Andrei Bely" label="Andrei Bely"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="16039" end="16051" title="white émigré" label="white émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="16073" end="16090" title="Socialist realism" label="Socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="16154" end="16165" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Maxim Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q835" start="16207" end="16223" title="Mikhail Bulgakov" label="Mikhail Bulgakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q271853" start="16274" end="16291" title="Nikolay Ostrovsky" label="Nikolay Ostrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q63707" start="16305" end="16331" title="How the Steel Was Tempered" label="How the Steel Was Tempered"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="16431" end="16447" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q34474" start="16532" end="16554" title="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn" label="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102336" start="16618" end="16636" title="Russian philosophy" label="Russian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201221" start="16667" end="16683" title="Alexander Herzen" label="Alexander Herzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="16718" end="16726" title="Agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="16727" end="16735" title="populism" label="populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27645" start="16737" end="16752" title="Mikhail Bakunin" label="Mikhail Bakunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="16785" end="16794" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752" start="16796" end="16811" title="Peter Kropotkin" label="Peter Kropotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="16847" end="16864" title="anarcho-communism" label="anarcho-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185375" start="16866" end="16881" title="Mikhail Bakhtin" label="Mikhail Bakhtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="16936" end="16952" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="17015" end="17024" title="Theosophy" label="Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q327625" start="17045" end="17065" title="Theosophical Society" label="Theosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="17067" end="17081" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="17148" end="17156" title="Leninism" label="Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="17158" end="17170" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="17199" end="17209" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q449538" start="17211" end="17229" title="Alexander Zinoviev" label="Alexander Zinoviev"/>
<link wikidata="Q58720" start="17316" end="17333" title="Mikhail Lomonosov" label="Mikhail Lomonosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q483948" start="17347" end="17367" title="conservation of mass" label="conservation of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="17371" end="17389" title="chemical reactions" label="chemical reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941" start="17406" end="17425" title="atmosphere of Venus" label="atmosphere of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="17446" end="17453" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q129199" start="17474" end="17493" title="Nikolay Lobachevsky" label="Nikolay Lobachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q233858" start="17513" end="17535" title="non-Euclidean geometry" label="non-Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q206012" start="17559" end="17576" title="Pafnuty Chebyshev" label="Pafnuty Chebyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q621883" start="17586" end="17600" title="List of Russian mathematicians" label="mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9106" start="17649" end="17665" title="Dmitry Mendeleev" label="Dmitry Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="17679" end="17693" title="Periodic table" label="Periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="17724" end="17733" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184535" start="17735" end="17753" title="Sofya Kovalevskaya" label="Sofya Kovalevskaya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17774" end="17794" title="Timeline of women in mathematics#19th Century" label="women in mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q117346" start="17816" end="17832" title="Grigori Perelman" label="Grigori Perelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q727000" start="17865" end="17890" title="Millennium Prize Problems" label="Millennium Prize Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q203586" start="17924" end="17943" title="Poincaré conjecture" label="Poincaré conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q191799" start="18018" end="18033" title="Alexander Stepanovich Popov" label="Alexander Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516738" start="18048" end="18066" title="invention of radio" label="inventors of radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q83557" start="18074" end="18087" title="Nikolai Basov" label="Nikolai Basov"/>
<link wikidata="Q83552" start="18092" end="18111" title="Alexander Prokhorov" label="Alexander Prokhorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="18133" end="18138" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="18143" end="18148" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q183279" start="18150" end="18164" title="Zhores Alferov" label="Zhores Alferov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616270" start="18210" end="18256" title="Heterojunction" label="modern heterostructure physics and electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q641551" start="18258" end="18268" title="Oleg Losev" label="Oleg Losev"/>
<link wikidata="Q176300" start="18312" end="18334" title="semiconductor junction" label="semiconductor junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="18352" end="18372" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q316371" start="18375" end="18393" title="Vladimir Vernadsky" label="Vladimir Vernadsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="18431" end="18443" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q864379" start="18445" end="18460" title="biogeochemistry" label="biogeochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="18466" end="18478" title="Radiometric dating" label="radiogeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q172254" start="18480" end="18496" title="Élie Metchnikoff" label="Élie Metchnikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="18541" end="18551" title="immunology" label="immunology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="18553" end="18564" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Ivan Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="18598" end="18620" title="classical conditioning" label="classical conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q133267" start="18622" end="18632" title="Lev Landau" label="Lev Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="18681" end="18700" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214926" start="18703" end="18718" title="Nikolai Vavilov" label="Nikolai Vavilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502751" start="18760" end="18767" title="Vavilov center" label="centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="18781" end="18791" title="Horticulture" label="cultivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="18850" end="18857" title="émigrés" label="émigrés"/>
<link wikidata="Q212446" start="18859" end="18872" title="Igor Sikorsky" label="Igor Sikorsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606460" start="18880" end="18896" title="List of aviation pioneers" label="aviation pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q296545" start="18898" end="18915" title="Vladimir Zworykin" label="Vladimir Zworykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570706" start="18940" end="18950" title="iconoscope" label="iconoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630352" start="18955" end="18964" title="kinescope" label="kinescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q246731" start="18985" end="19006" title="Theodosius Dobzhansky" label="Theodosius Dobzhansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="19046" end="19066" title="evolutionary biology" label="evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q337897" start="19095" end="19111" title="modern synthesis (20th century)" label="modern synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q59478" start="19113" end="19125" title="George Gamow" label="George Gamow"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="19167" end="19175" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41239" start="19184" end="19206" title="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky" label="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q22719" start="19243" end="19255" title="astronautics" label="astronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q342397" start="19323" end="19339" title="Valentin Glushko" label="Valentin Glushko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="19425" end="19437" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="19448" end="19468" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018052" start="19499" end="19513" title="women in space" label="woman in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q269668" start="19546" end="19554" title="Vostok 6" label="Vostok 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q154269" start="19565" end="19578" title="Alexei Leonov" label="Alexei Leonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="19615" end="19624" title="spacewalk" label="spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q957055" start="19638" end="19651" title="space capsule" label="space capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q722791" start="19659" end="19668" title="Voskhod 2" label="Voskhod 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q181885" start="19863" end="19877" title="Mikhail Glinka" label="Mikhail Glinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q190390" start="19906" end="19924" title="The Mighty Handful" label="The Mighty Handful"/>
<link wikidata="Q275357" start="19934" end="19957" title="Russian Musical Society" label="Russian Musical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q87567" start="19975" end="19980" title="Anton Rubinstein" label="Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q311791" start="19985" end="20003" title="Nikolay Rubinstein" label="Nikolay Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="20028" end="20052" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="20091" end="20103" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="20144" end="20163" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q185647" start="20301" end="20319" title="Alexander Scriabin" label="Alexander Scriabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25872" start="20321" end="20339" title="Alexander Glazunov" label="Alexander Glazunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="20341" end="20356" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="20358" end="20374" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Sergei Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="20376" end="20395" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q467738" start="20397" end="20412" title="Georgy Sviridov" label="Georgy Sviridov"/>
<link wikidata="Q158078" start="20417" end="20433" title="Alfred Schnittke" label="Alfred Schnittke"/>
<link wikidata="Q47120" start="20562" end="20576" title="David Oistrakh" label="David Oistrakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q159915" start="20581" end="20593" title="Gidon Kremer" label="Gidon Kremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152043" start="20603" end="20624" title="Mstislav Rostropovich" label="Mstislav Rostropovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q192506" start="20635" end="20652" title="Vladimir Horowitz" label="Vladimir Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q124890" start="20654" end="20672" title="Sviatoslav Richter" label="Sviatoslav Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q319732" start="20678" end="20689" title="Emil Gilels" label="Emil Gilels"/>
<link wikidata="Q230916" start="20704" end="20723" title="Galina Vishnevskaya" label="Galina Vishnevskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="20751" end="20764" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056436" start="20825" end="20835" title="Bard (Soviet Union)" label="balladeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q512" start="20836" end="20853" title="Vladimir Vysotsky" label="Vladimir Vysotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q239652" start="20858" end="20873" title="Bulat Okudzhava" label="Bulat Okudzhava"/>
<link wikidata="Q80510" start="20898" end="20912" title="Alla Pugacheva" label="Alla Pugacheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="20914" end="20918" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038724" start="21051" end="21063" title="Vyacheslav Ganelin" label="Ganelin Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="21136" end="21154" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624785" start="21170" end="21180" title="Rock music in Russia" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q785828" start="21238" end="21242" title="Aria (band)" label="Aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q119590" start="21244" end="21252" title="Aquarium (band)" label="Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q949424" start="21254" end="21257" title="DDT (band)" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q650555" start="21263" end="21267" title="Kino (band)" label="Kino"/>
<link wikidata="Q378495" start="21269" end="21278" title="Russian pop" label="Pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q161723" start="21366" end="21374" title="t.A.T.u." label="t.A.T.u."/>
<link wikidata="Q24261863" start="21396" end="21406" title="Little Big (band)" label="Little Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="21410" end="21414" title="rave music" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940844" start="21506" end="21519" title="Soviet cinema" label="Soviet cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q152350" start="21595" end="21618" title="The Battleship Potemkin" label="The Battleship Potemkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003" start="21662" end="21679" title="Sergei Eisenstein" label="Sergei Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q853" start="21684" end="21700" title="Andrei Tarkovsky" label="Andrei Tarkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q55199" start="21821" end="21833" title="Lev Kuleshov" label="Lev Kuleshov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321104" start="21868" end="21889" title="Soviet montage theory" label="Soviet montage theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q380093" start="21932" end="21943" title="film school" label="film school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130457" start="21949" end="21986" title="Gerasimov Institute of Cinematography" label="All-Union Institute of Cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q55193" start="21988" end="22000" title="Dziga Vertov" label="Dziga Vertov"/>
<link wikidata="Q110917298" start="22014" end="22022" title="Kino-Eye" label="Kino-Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q153593" start="22201" end="22208" title="Chapaev (film)" label="Chapaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q714524" start="22222" end="22243" title="The Cranes Are Flying" label="The Cranes Are Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305092" start="22261" end="22280" title="Ballad of a Soldier" label="Ballad of a Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q381944" start="22384" end="22398" title="Eldar Ryazanov" label="Eldar Ryazanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q312480" start="22403" end="22416" title="Leonid Gaidai" label="Leonid Gaidai"/>
<link wikidata="Q55190" start="22515" end="22532" title="Sergey Bondarchuk" label="Sergey Bondarchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="22545" end="22550" title="Academy Award" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q845176" start="22559" end="22574" title="War and Peace (film series)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161531" start="22608" end="22621" title="War and Peace" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476255" start="22639" end="22662" title="the most expensive film" label="the most expensive film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927433" start="22698" end="22712" title="Vladimir Motyl" label="Vladimir Motyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306068" start="22726" end="22749" title="White Sun of the Desert" label="White Sun of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q26268098" start="22804" end="22810" title="ostern" label="ostern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="22849" end="22859" title="cosmonauts" label="cosmonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q59721" start="22903" end="22914" title="Russian Ark" label="Russian Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q65197983" start="23075" end="23095" title="Russian architecture" label="Russian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787140" start="23160" end="23192" title="architecture of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="architecture of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q573211" start="23208" end="23244" title="Christianization of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Christianization of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="23307" end="23323" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q548256" start="23325" end="23345" title="Aristotle Fioravanti" label="Aristotle Fioravanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="23383" end="23394" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q149276" start="23466" end="23482" title="tent-like church" label="tent-like church"/>
<link wikidata="Q244621" start="23494" end="23504" title="onion dome" label="onion dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423" start="23660" end="23669" title="Yaroslavl" label="Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q616753" start="23704" end="23721" title="Naryshkin baroque" label="Naryshkin baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="23874" end="23880" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q299687" start="23923" end="23943" title="Bartolomeo Rastrelli" label="Bartolomeo Rastrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="24063" end="24088" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="24097" end="24108" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q191105" start="24122" end="24134" title="Empire style" label="Empire style"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="24192" end="24202" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q192068" start="24222" end="24233" title="Eclecticism" label="Eclecticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106225044" start="24302" end="24315" title="Neo-Byzantine architecture in the Russian Empire" label="Neo-Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026876" start="24320" end="24335" title="Russian Revival" label="Russian Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382246" start="24366" end="24394" title="Russian neoclassical revival" label="Russian neoclassical revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q56299977" start="24462" end="24473" title="Art Nouveau architecture in Russia" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q207103" start="24475" end="24489" title="Constructivism (art)" label="Constructivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134824" start="24495" end="24515" title="Stalinist architecture" label="Socialist Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958075" start="24571" end="24583" title="Christianity in Russia" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002390" start="24608" end="24635" title="Eastern Orthodoxy by country" label="largest Orthodox population"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="24777" end="24800" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="24921" end="24934" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="24955" end="24965" title="Schism (religion)" label="schismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="25103" end="25112" title="Doukhobor" label="Doukhobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q303985" start="25364" end="25371" title="Molokan" label="Molokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="25419" end="25439" title="Divine right of kings" label="divine right to rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="25452" end="25459" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="25479" end="25491" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25502" end="25507" title="Fasting#Eastern Orthodoxy" label="fasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="25551" end="25564" title="Baptism" label="water baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="25675" end="25680" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="25739" end="25747" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="25802" end="25814" title="Pentecostals" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="25816" end="25828" title="Evangelicals" label="Evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="25830" end="25852" title="Seventh-day Adventists" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="25854" end="25863" title="Lutherans" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="25868" end="25892" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="25917" end="25929" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258217" start="26057" end="26066" title="Slavic Neopaganism" label="Rodnovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="26131" end="26145" title="Slavs" label="Slavic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="26164" end="26172" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q189275" start="26214" end="26249" title="Soviet Union national football team" label="Soviet Union national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q172831" start="26297" end="26306" title="Euro 1960" label="Euro 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="26334" end="26343" title="Euro 1988" label="Euro 1988"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26396" end="26423" title="Football at the Summer Olympics#Results" label="Olympic football tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q176371" start="26439" end="26450" title="PFC CSKA Moscow" label="CSKA Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q29108" start="26455" end="26477" title="Zenit Saint Petersburg" label="Zenit Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="26486" end="26494" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q726080" start="26517" end="26547" title="Russian national football team" label="Russian national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q241864" start="26575" end="26584" title="Euro 2008" label="Euro 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q589997" start="26621" end="26649" title="2017 FIFA Confederations Cup" label="2017 FIFA Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="26659" end="26678" title="2018 FIFA World Cup" label="2018 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q830063" start="26681" end="26691" title="Ice hockey in Russia" label="Ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330035" start="26723" end="26771" title="Soviet Union men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Soviet Union men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q845895" start="26853" end="26895" title="Russia men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Russia men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="26945" end="26950" title="Bandy" label="Bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q391402" start="27061" end="27093" title="Russian national basketball team" label="Russian national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q390319" start="27102" end="27117" title="EuroBasket 2007" label="EuroBasket 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q457376" start="27151" end="27166" title="PBC CSKA Moscow" label="PBC CSKA Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="27234" end="27245" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173271" start="27246" end="27264" title="Russian Grand Prix" label="Russian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q174004" start="27280" end="27294" title="Sochi Autodrom" label="Sochi Autodrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147493" start="27302" end="27320" title="Sochi Olympic Park" label="Sochi Olympic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q61465" start="27355" end="27374" title="rhythmic gymnastics" label="rhythmic gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180692" start="27388" end="27409" title="synchronized swimming" label="synchronized swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="27453" end="27467" title="Figure skating" label="Figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682809" start="27515" end="27527" title="pair skating" label="pair skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q926191" start="27532" end="27543" title="ice dancing" label="ice dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="27584" end="27590" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11666" start="27608" end="27623" title="Maria Sharapova" label="Maria Sharapova"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622022" start="27628" end="27643" title="Daniil Medvedev" label="Daniil Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="27645" end="27650" title="Chess" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="27778" end="27803" title="1980 Summer Olympic Games" label="1980 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="27833" end="27853" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045816" start="27862" end="27885" title="2014 Winter Paralympics" label="2014 Winter Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463021" start="27925" end="27943" title="All-Russian nation" label="All-Russian nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="27946" end="27968" title="European ethnic groups" label="European ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q906119" start="27971" end="27994" title="List of Russian artists" label="List of Russian artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q113214028" start="27997" end="28028" title="List of Slavic studies journals" label="List of Slavic studies journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="28210" end="28237" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59511" wikidata="Q7888118" url="?curid=59511" title="Legislatures of the United Kingdom">
<text>The legislatures of the United Kingdom are derived from a number of different sources. The Parliament of the United Kingdom is the supreme legislative body for the United Kingdom and the British overseas territories with Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland each having their own devolved legislatures. Each of the three major jurisdictions of the United Kingdom (England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland) has its own laws and legal system.

==United Kingdom legislature==
The Parliament of the United Kingdom can enact primary legislation for the whole of the United Kingdom. In addition, the General Synod of the Church of England and the Privy Council can do so in certain limited cases.
===Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland===

The Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the UK Parliament, the British Parliament, the Westminster Parliament or &quot;Westminster&quot;, is the supreme legislative body for the United Kingdom and for English Law. It alone possesses legislative supremacy and thereby ultimate power over all other political bodies in the UK and its territories. Its head is the Sovereign of the United Kingdom, currently King Charles III. Its seat is the Palace of Westminster in Westminster, London.

The United Kingdom Legislation may take the form of Acts, passed directly by Parliament, or Statutory Instruments, made under the authority of an Act of Parliament by either a government minister or by the King-in-Council. The latter are generally subject either to parliamentary approval (affirmative procedure) or parliamentary disallowance (negative procedure). The majority of Acts considered in the UK are defined as public general acts, or &#x27;Acts of Parliament&#x27; as they will have progressed and gained approval as a Bill through both House of Commons and House of Lords, and have gained Royal Assent from the Monarch.

Local and Personal Acts of Parliament are presented to Parliament as a result of sponsored petitions. These are processed through committees to enable relevant or affected parties to challenge or change the proposed Act. Prerogative instruments, made by the Sovereign under the royal prerogative are another source of UK-wide legislation. The UK Parliament is responsible for all matters relating to defence and all foreign affairs and relations with international organisations, particularly the United Nations, the Commonwealth and the European Union.

With there being no devolved legislature in England the UK Parliament is the supreme body for its governance, legislation, public bodies and local government.

====House of Commons====

The House of Commons is the lower house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It is an elected chamber consisting of 650 members, known as Members of Parliament (MPs). They are elected using the first past the post system, in single-member constituencies. From the 2024 general election 543 will be elected from England, 57 from Scotland, 32 from Wales and 18 from Northern Ireland.

The House of Commons is now considered to be the supreme chamber of Parliament.

====House of Lords====

The House of Lords is the upper house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It is an unelected chamber with all members to the House of Lords being appointed. As of August 2018, there are 793 members known as &quot;Peers&quot;. The House of Lords no longer has the same powers as the House of Commons under the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, especially when it comes to blocking general legislation and the passing of financial legislation.

==Devolved legislatures==
===Scottish Parliament===


The Scottish Parliament is the national, unicameral legislature of Scotland, located in the Holyrood area of the capital, Edinburgh. The Parliament, informally referred to as &quot;Holyrood&quot;, is a democratically elected body comprising 129 members known as Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs). Of these 73 MSPs are elected using First past the post in single member constituencies and a further 56 MSPs are elected using the D&#x27;Hondt method, a form of party-list proportional representation in eight additional member regions with each region electing 7 MSPs.

The Scottish Parliament was convened by the Scotland Act 1998, which sets out its powers as a devolved legislature. The Act delineates the legislative competence of the Parliamentthe areas in which it can make lawsby explicitly specifying powers that are &quot;reserved&quot; to the Parliament of the United Kingdom: all matters that are not explicitly reserved are automatically the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament. The British Parliament retains the ability to amend the terms of reference of the Scottish Parliament, and can extend or reduce the areas in which it can make laws. The first meeting of the new Parliament took place on 12 May 1999.

The Scottish Statutory Instruments made by the Scottish Government are another source of legislation. As with Statutory Instruments made by the British government, these are generally subject to either approval or disallowance by the Scottish Parliament

=== Senedd ===


The Senedd (Welsh Parliament; ) has the power to make legislation in Wales. The parliament was created by the Government of Wales Act 1998, which followed a referendum in 1997. It is a democratically elected body with 60 members known as Members of the Senedd (MSs). Of these 40 MSs are elected using First past the post in single member constituencies and a further 20 MSs are elected using the D&#x27;Hondt method, a form of party-list proportional representation in five additional member regions with each region electing 4 MSs.

The Senedd had no powers to initiate primary legislation until limited law-making powers were gained through the Government of Wales Act 2006. Its primary law-making powers were enhanced following a Yes vote in the referendum on 3 March 2011, making it possible for it to legislate in the 20 areas that are devolved without having to consult the UK Parliament, nor the Secretary of State for Wales. The Senedd may delegate authority to enact legislation through Welsh Statutory Instruments. Under the Wales Act 2017 the Senedd came into line with Scotland and Northern Ireland and moved to a reserved powers model.

===Northern Ireland Assembly===


The Northern Ireland Assembly is the devolved legislature of Northern Ireland which is a democratically elected body comprising 90 members known as Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs). The 90 MLAs are elected using the single transferable vote across the 18 Westminster Parliamentary constituencies with each constituency electing 5 MLAs. It was established in 1998 as part of the Good Friday Agreement which was approved by the public in referendums which were held in both Northern Ireland and in the Republic of Ireland.

It has power to legislate in a wide range of areas that are not explicitly reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and to appoint the Northern Ireland Executive. It sits at Parliament Buildings at Stormont in Belfast. Legislation of the Assembly empowers the Northern Ireland Executive to issue Statutory Rules in a variety of areas.

The Assembly was dissolved on 26 January 2017 owing to a breakdown of trust which brought down both the Assembly and Executive. In January 2020, Arlene Foster resumed her post as First Minister.

==European Union (1973–2020) ==
The United Kingdom became a member state of the European Union (EU) when it joined what was originally known as the European Communities on 1 January 1973. By virtue of the European Communities Act 1972, EU law applied in the UK, in effect becoming another source of UK legislation. The UK left the EU on 31 January 2020, though EU law were still applicable in the UK until the end of the implementation period on 31 December 2020.

===The European Parliament===

The European Parliament (EP) is the directly elected parliamentary institution of the European Union. Together with the Council of the European Union (the council) and the European Commission, it exercises the legislative function of the EU. The Parliament is composed of 751 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs), who represent the second-largest democratic electorate in the world (after the Parliament of India) and the largest trans-national democratic electorate in the world (375 million eligible voters in 2009).

The United Kingdom between 1979 and 2020 used to elect members to the European Parliament, of these a number were elected using the D&#x27;Hondt method, a form of party-list proportional representation in 11 former regional constituencies in England, Scotland and Wales while in Northern Ireland 3 MEPs were elected using the single transferable vote in a single national constituency. With the exit of the United Kingdom from the EU all legislation that provided for the holding of elections to the European Parliament as well as the position of Member of the European Parliament (MEP) within the UK was repealed by the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018.

==The historical legislatures==
* Parliament of England (13th century to 1707)
* Parliament of Scotland (13th century to 1707)
* Parliament of Ireland (13th century to 1800)
* Parliament of Great Britain (1707–1800)
* Parliament of Northern Ireland (1921–1972)

==See also==
*United Kingdom constitutional law
*List of legislation in the United Kingdom
*Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to the European Communities and the European Union

==References==
== External links ==
* UK legislation by The National Archives/His Majesty&#x27;s Stationery Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7888118" start="4" end="38" title="Legislatures of the United Kingdom" label="legislatures of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="91" end="123" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="139" end="155" title="Legislature" label="legislative body"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="164" end="178" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="187" end="215" title="British overseas territories" label="British overseas territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982983" start="327" end="339" title="jurisdiction (area)" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="364" end="381" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="383" end="391" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="396" end="412" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="426" end="430" title="laws" label="laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q858700" start="435" end="447" title="legal system" label="legal system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="528" end="583" title="Primary and secondary legislation#United Kingdom" label="primary legislation for the whole of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532228" start="602" end="640" title="General Synod of the Church of England" label="General Synod of the Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="649" end="662" title="Privy Council (United Kingdom)" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="1064" end="1085" title="Parliamentary sovereignty" label="legislative supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="1192" end="1223" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="Sovereign of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="1235" end="1251" title="King Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="1269" end="1290" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="1294" end="1305" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1307" end="1313" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677783" start="1368" end="1371" title="Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom" label="Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795484" start="1408" end="1428" title="Statutory Instrument" label="Statutory Instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="1492" end="1511" title="Minister (government)" label="government minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1522" end="1537" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="King-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664265" start="1950" end="1987" title="Local and personal Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom" label="Local and Personal Acts of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240693" start="2171" end="2193" title="Prerogative instrument" label="Prerogative instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="2228" end="2245" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2447" end="2461" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2467" end="2479" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2488" end="2502" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2549" end="2556" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="2833" end="2854" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="2889" end="2908" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="first past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538978" start="2934" end="2948" title="United Kingdom Parliamentary constituencies" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="2959" end="2980" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3006" end="3013" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3023" end="3031" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="3041" end="3046" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="3059" end="3075" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414408" start="3497" end="3526" title="Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949" label="Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="3686" end="3705" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="3723" end="3733" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3749" end="3757" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625364" start="3774" end="3782" title="Holyrood, Edinburgh" label="Holyrood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3804" end="3813" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="3944" end="3978" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Members of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="4022" end="4041" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="First past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q337866" start="4118" end="4137" title="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method" label="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="4302" end="4319" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="4352" end="4360" title="devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="4468" end="4472" title="Scots law" label="laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315283" start="4519" end="4527" title="reserved and excepted matters" label="reserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="4541" end="4573" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437991" start="4922" end="4951" title="Scottish Statutory Instrument" label="Scottish Statutory Instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="4965" end="4984" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="5194" end="5200" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540463" start="5300" end="5328" title="Government of Wales Act 1998" label="Government of Wales Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689863" start="5347" end="5357" title="1997 Welsh devolution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406079" start="5428" end="5449" title="Members of the Senedd" label="Members of the Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="5491" end="5510" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="First past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q337866" start="5586" end="5605" title="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method" label="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method"/>
<link wikidata="Q128693670" start="5761" end="5780" title="primary legislation" label="primary legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398140" start="5837" end="5865" title="Government of Wales Act 2006" label="Government of Wales Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982023" start="5939" end="5949" title="2011 Welsh devolution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676706" start="5996" end="6005" title="Act of the Senedd" label="legislate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="6070" end="6083" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="UK Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846384" start="6093" end="6121" title="Secretary of State for Wales" label="Secretary of State for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130483" start="6225" end="6239" title="Wales Act 2017" label="Wales Act 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="6411" end="6419" title="devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="6435" end="6451" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272410" start="6522" end="6557" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly (Northern Ireland)" label="Members of the Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="6600" end="6624" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631994" start="6639" end="6679" title="List of parliamentary constituencies in Northern Ireland" label="Westminster Parliamentary constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="6762" end="6783" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058504" start="6820" end="6903" title="1998 Northern Ireland Good Friday Agreement referendum" label="referendums which were held in both Northern Ireland and in the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315283" start="6981" end="6989" title="reserved and excepted matters" label="reserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="7050" end="7076" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175922" start="7089" end="7109" title="Parliament Buildings (Northern Ireland)" label="Parliament Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620254" start="7113" end="7121" title="Stormont, Belfast" label="Stormont"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="7125" end="7132" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604693" start="7211" end="7226" title="Statutory Rules of Northern Ireland" label="Statutory Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792148" start="7396" end="7409" title="Arlene Foster" label="Arlene Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7527" end="7541" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="7595" end="7615" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949103" start="7652" end="7681" title="European Communities Act 1972 (UK)" label="European Communities Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="7683" end="7689" title="EU law" label="EU law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="7762" end="7780" title="Brexit" label="The UK left the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476704" start="7868" end="7889" title="Brexit transition period" label="implementation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="7979" end="7995" title="direct election" label="directly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="8010" end="8043" title="Institutions of the European Union" label="institution of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="8063" end="8092" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="8115" end="8134" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="8219" end="8253" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="Members of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="8341" end="8360" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q189760" start="8450" end="8456" title="Voting" label="voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q337866" start="8600" end="8619" title="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method" label="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="8710" end="8717" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="8719" end="8727" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="8732" end="8737" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="8747" end="8763" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="8794" end="8818" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="8968" end="8987" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582790" start="9089" end="9125" title="European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018" label="European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="9162" end="9183" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="9209" end="9231" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="9257" end="9278" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="9304" end="9331" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300937" start="9346" end="9376" title="Parliament of Northern Ireland" label="Parliament of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767862" start="9404" end="9437" title="United Kingdom constitutional law" label="United Kingdom constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560513" start="9439" end="9480" title="List of legislation in the United Kingdom" label="List of legislation in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025322" start="9482" end="9582" title="Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to the European Communities and the European Union" label="Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to the European Communities and the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q392703" start="9640" end="9661" title="The National Archives (United Kingdom)" label="The National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607738" start="9662" end="9698" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Stationery Office" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Stationery Office"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59512" wikidata="Q127885" url="?curid=59512" title="Serbs">
<text>The Serbs (, ) are a South Slavic ethnic group native to Southeastern Europe who share a common Serbian ancestry, culture, history, and language. They primarily live in Serbia, Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro as well as in North Macedonia, Slovenia, Germany and Austria. They also constitute a significant diaspora with several communities across Europe, the Americas and Oceania. 

The Serbs share many cultural traits with the rest of the peoples of Southeast Europe. They are predominantly Eastern Orthodox Christians by religion. The Serbian language (a standardized version of Serbo-Croatian) is official in Serbia, co-official in Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and is spoken by the plurality in Montenegro.

==Ethnology==

The identity of Serbs is rooted in Eastern Orthodoxy and traditions. In the 19th century, the Serbian national identity was manifested, with awareness of history and tradition, medieval heritage, cultural unity, despite living under different empires. Three elements, together with the legacy of the Nemanjić dynasty, were crucial in forging identity and preservation during foreign domination: the Serbian Orthodox Church, the Serbian language, and the Kosovo Myth. When the Principality of Serbia gained independence from the Ottoman Empire, Orthodoxy became crucial in defining the national identity, instead of language which was shared by other South Slavs (Croats and Bosniaks). The tradition of &quot;slava&quot;, the family saint feast day, is an important ethnic marker of Serb identity, and is usually regarded their most significant and most solemn feast day.

The origin of the ethnonym is unclear. The most prominent theory considers it of Proto-Slavic origin. Hanna Popowska-Taborska argued native Slavic provenance of the ethnonym, claiming that the theory advances a conclusion that the ethnonym has a meaning of a family kinship or alliance, which was also argued by a number of other scholars.

==Genetic origins==

According to a triple analysis – autosomal, mitochondrial and paternal — of available data from large-scale studies on Balto-Slavs and their proximal populations, the whole genome SNP data situates Serbs with Montenegrins in between two Balkan clusters. Y-DNA results show that haplogroups I2a and R1a together stand for the majority of the makeup, with more than 50 percent. 

According to several recent studies Serbia&#x27;s people are among the tallest in the world, with an average male height of .

==History==
===Arrival of the Slavs===

Early Slavs, especially Sclaveni and Antae, including the White Serbs, invaded and settled Southeastern Europe in the 6th and 7th century. Up until the late 560s, their activity was raiding, crossing from the Danube, though with limited Slavic settlement mainly through Byzantine &quot;foederati&quot; colonies. The Danube and Sava frontier was overwhelmed by large-scale Slavic settlement in the late 6th and early 7th century. What is today central Serbia was an important geo-strategical province, through which the &quot;Via Militaris&quot; crossed. This area was frequently intruded by barbarians in the 5th and 6th centuries. The numerous Slavs mixed with and assimilated the descendants of the indigenous population (Illyrians, Thracians, Dacians, Romans, Celts). White Serbs from White Serbia came to an area near Thessaloniki and then they settled area between Dinaric Alps and Adriatic coast. The region of &quot;Rascia&quot; (Raška) was the center of Serb settlement and Serb tribes also occupied parts of modern-day Herzegovina and Montenegro. Prior to their arrival to the Balkans, early Slavs were predominantly involved in agriculture, which is why they settled in areas which were cultivated even during Roman times.

===Middle Ages===
The first Serb states, Serbia (780–960) and Duklja (825–1120), were formed chiefly under the Vlastimirović and Vojislavljević dynasties respectively. The other Serb-inhabited lands, or principalities, that were mentioned included the &quot;countries&quot; of Paganija, Zahumlje, Travunija. With the decline of the Serbian state of Duklja in the late 11th century, Raška separated from it and replaced it as the most powerful Serbian state. Prince Stefan Nemanja (r. 1169–96) conquered the neighbouring territories of Kosovo, Duklja and Zachlumia. The Nemanjić dynasty ruled over Serbia until the 14th century. Nemanja&#x27;s older son, Stefan Nemanjić, became Serbia&#x27;s first recognized king, while his younger son, Rastko, founded the Serbian Orthodox Church in the year 1219, and became known as Saint Sava after his death. Parts of modern-day Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and central Serbia would come under the control of Nemanjić.

Over the next 140 years, Serbia expanded its borders, from numerous smaller principalities, reaching to a unified Serbian Empire. Its cultural model remained Byzantine, despite political ambitions directed against the empire. The medieval power and influence of Serbia culminated in the reign of Stefan Dušan, who ruled the state from 1331 until his death in 1355. Ruling as Emperor from 1346, his territory included Macedonia, northern Greece, Montenegro, and almost all of modern Albania. When Dušan died, his son Stephen Uroš V became Emperor.

With Turkish invaders beginning their conquest of the Balkans in the 1350s, a major conflict ensued between them and the Serbs, the first major battle was the Battle of Maritsa (1371), in which the Serbs were defeated. With the death of two important Serb leaders in the battle, and with the death of Stephen Uroš that same year, the Serbian Empire broke up into several small Serbian domains. These states were ruled by feudal lords, with Zeta controlled by the Balšić family, Raška, Kosovo and northern Macedonia held by the Branković family and Lazar Hrebeljanović holding today&#x27;s Central Serbia and a portion of Kosovo. Hrebeljanović was subsequently accepted as the titular leader of the Serbs because he was married to a member of the Nemanjić dynasty. In 1389, the Serbs faced the Ottomans at the Battle of Kosovo on the plain of Kosovo Polje, near the town of Priština. Both Lazar and Sultan Murad I were killed in the fighting. The battle most likely ended in a stalemate, and afterwards Serbia enjoyed a short period of prosperity under despot Stefan Lazarević and resisted falling to the Turks until 1459.

===Early modern period===

The Serbs had taken an active part in the wars fought in the Balkans against the Ottoman Empire, and also organized uprisings; because of this, they suffered persecution and their territories were devastated – major migrations from Serbia into Habsburg territory ensued. After allied Christian forces had captured Buda from the Ottoman Empire in 1686 during the Great Turkish War, Serbs from Pannonian Plain (present-day Hungary, Slavonia region in present-day Croatia, Bačka and Banat regions in present-day Serbia) joined the troops of the Habsburg monarchy as separate units known as Serbian Militia. Serbs, as volunteers, massively joined the Austrian side.
Many Serbs were recruited during the devshirme system, a form of slavery in the Ottoman Empire, in which boys from Balkan Christian families were forcibly converted to Islam and trained for infantry units of the Ottoman army known as the Janissaries. A number of Serbs who converted to Islam occupied high-ranking positions within the Ottoman Empire, such as Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha and Minister of War field marshal Omar Pasha Latas.

In 1688, the Habsburg army took Belgrade and entered the territory of present-day Central Serbia. Louis William, Margrave of Baden-Baden called Serbian Patriarch Arsenije III Čarnojević to raise arms against the Turks; the Patriarch accepted and returned to the liberated Peć. As Serbia fell under Habsburg control, Leopold I granted Arsenije nobility and the title of duke. In early November, Arsenije III met with Habsburg commander-in-chief, General Enea Silvio Piccolomini in Prizren; after this talk he sent a note to all Serb bishops to come to him and collaborate only with Habsburg forces.

A Great Migration of the Serbs (1690) to Habsburg lands was undertaken by Patriarch Arsenije III. The large community of Serbs concentrated in Banat, southern Hungary and the Military Frontier included merchants and craftsmen in the cities, but mainly refugees that were peasants. Smaller groups of Serbs also migrated to the Russian Empire, where they occupied high positions in the military circles.

The Serbian Revolution for independence from the Ottoman Empire lasted eleven years, from 1804 until 1815. The revolution comprised two separate uprisings which gained autonomy from the Ottoman Empire that eventually evolved towards full independence (1835–1867). During the First Serbian Uprising, led by Duke Karađorđe Petrović, Serbia was independent for almost a decade before the Ottoman army was able to reoccupy the country. Shortly after this, the Second Serbian Uprising began. Led by Miloš Obrenović, it ended in 1815 with a compromise between Serbian revolutionaries and Ottoman authorities. Likewise, Serbia was one of the first nations in the Balkans to abolish feudalism. Serbs are among the first ethnic groups in Europe to form a nation and a clear sense of national identity.

===Modern period===

In the early 1830s, Serbia gained autonomy and its borders were recognized, with Miloš Obrenović being recognized as its ruler. Serbia is the fourth modern-day European country, after France, Austria and the Netherlands, to have a codified legal system, as of 1844. The last Ottoman troops withdrew from Serbia in 1867, although Serbia&#x27;s and Montenegro&#x27;s independence was not recognized internationally until the Congress of Berlin in 1878.

Serbia fought in the Balkan Wars of 1912–13, which forced the Ottomans out of the Balkans and doubled the territory and population of the Kingdom of Serbia. In 1914, a young Bosnian Serb student named Gavrilo Princip assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, which directly contributed to the outbreak of World War I. In the fighting that ensued, Serbia was invaded by Austria-Hungary. Despite being outnumbered, the Serbs defeated the Austro-Hungarians at the Battle of Cer, which marked the first Allied victory over the Central Powers in the war. Further victories at the battles of Kolubara and the Drina meant that Serbia remained unconquered as the war entered its second year. However, an invasion by the forces of Germany, Austria-Hungary and Bulgaria overwhelmed the Serbs in the winter of 1915, and a subsequent withdrawal by the Serbian Army through Albania took the lives of more than 240,000 Serbs. Serb forces spent the remaining years of the war fighting on the Salonika front in Greece, before liberating Serbia from Austro-Hungarian occupation in November 1918. Serbia suffered the biggest casualty rate in World War I.

Following the victory in WWI, Serbs subsequently formed the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes with other South Slavic peoples. The country was later renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, and was led from 1921 to 1934 by King Alexander I of the Serbian Karađorđević dynasty. During World War II, Yugoslavia was invaded by the Axis powers in April 1941. The country was subsequently divided into many pieces, with Serbia being directly occupied by the Germans. Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (NDH) were targeted for extermination as part of genocide by the Croatian ultra-nationalist, fascist Ustaše. The Ustaše view of national and racial identity, as well as the theory of Serbs as an inferior race, was under the influence of Croatian nationalists and intellectuals from the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century. Jasenovac camp was notorious for the barbaric practices which occurred in it. Sisak and Jastrebarsko concentration camp were specially formed for children. Serbs in the NDH suffered among the highest casualty rates in Europe during the World War II, while the NDH was one of the most lethal regimes in the 20th century. Diana Budisavljević, a humanitarian of Austrian descent, carried out rescue operations from Ustaše camps and saved more than 15,000 children, mostly Serbs.
More than half a million Serbs were killed in the territory of Yugoslavia during World War II. Serbs in occupied Yugoslavia subsequently formed a resistance movement known as the Yugoslav Army in the Homeland, or the Chetniks. The Chetniks had the official support of the Allies until 1943, when Allied support shifted to the Communist Yugoslav Partisans, a multi-ethnic force, formed in 1941, which also had a large majority of Serbs in its ranks in the first two years of war. Over the entirety of the war, the ethnic composition of the Partisans was 53 percent Serb. During the entire course of the WWII in Yugoslavia, 64.1% of all Bosnian Partisans were Serbs. Later, after the fall of Italy in September 1943, other ethnic groups joined Partisans in larger numbers.

At the end of the war, the Partisans, led by Josip Broz Tito, emerged victorious. Yugoslavia subsequently became a Communist state. Tito died in 1980, and his death saw Yugoslavia plunge into economic turmoil. Yugoslavia disintegrated in the early 1990s, and a series of wars resulted in the creation of five new states. The heaviest fighting occurred in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose Serb populations rebelled and declared independence. The war in Croatia ended in August 1995, with a Croatian military offensive known as Operation Storm put a stop to the Croatian Serb rebellion and causing as many as 200,000 Serbs to flee the country. The Bosnian War ended that same year, with the Dayton Agreement dividing the country along ethnic lines. In 1998–99, a conflict in Kosovo between the Yugoslav Army and Albanians seeking independence erupted into full-out war, resulting in a 78-day-long NATO bombing campaign which effectively drove Yugoslav security forces from Kosovo. Subsequently, more than 200,000 Serbs and other non-Albanians fled the province. On 5 October 2000, Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosević was overthrown in a bloodless revolt after he refused to admit defeat in the 2000 Yugoslav general election.

==Demographics==
Modern demographic distribution of ethnic Serbs throughout homeland and native regions, as well as in Serbian ethnic diaspora, represents an outcome of several historical and demographic processes, shaped both by economic migrations and forced displacements during the recent Yugoslav Wars (1991–1999).

=== Balkans ===
According to most recent census conducted in Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro, there are nearly 7 million Serbs living in their native homelands, within the geographical borders of former Yugoslavia. In Serbia itself, around 5.5 million people identify themselves as ethnic Serbs, and constitute about 83% of the population. More than a million live in Bosnia and Herzegovina (predominantly in the Republika Srpska), where they are one of the three constituent ethnic groups. Serbs in Croatia, Montenegro and North Macedonia also have recognized collective rights, and number some 186,000, 178,000 and 39,000 people, respectively, while another estimated 96,000 live in the disputed area of Kosovo. Smaller minorities exist in Slovenia, some 36,000 people, respectively.

Outside of the former Yugoslavia, but within their historical and migratory areal, Serbs are officially recognized as national minority in Albania, Romania (18,000), Hungary (7,000), as well as in the Czech Republic and Slovakia.

===Diaspora===
There are over 2 million Serbs in diaspora throughout the world; some sources put that figure as high as 4 million. There is a large diaspora in Western Europe, particularly in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, France, Italy, Sweden and United Kingdom. Outside Europe, there are significant Serb communities in the United States, Canada, Australia, South America and Southern Africa. The existence of a large diaspora is mainly a consequence of either economic or political (coercion or expulsions) reasons. 

There were several waves of Serb emigration. The first wave took place since the end of the 19th century and lasted until World War II and was caused by economic reasons; particularly large numbers of Serbs (mainly from peripheral ethnic areas such as Herzegovina, Montenegro, Dalmatia, and Lika) emigrated to the United States. The second wave of emigration took place after the end of World War II. At this time, members of royalist Chetniks and other political opponents of communist regime fled the country mainly going overseas (United States and Australia) and, to a lesser degree, United Kingdom. The third wave of Serb emigration, by far the largest, consisted of economic emigration beginning in the 1960s when several Western European countries signed bilateral agreements with Yugoslavia, allowing the recruitment of industrial workers to those countries; this lasted until the end of the 1980s. The major destinations for migrants were West Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, and to a lesser extent France and Sweden. That generation of diaspora is collectively known as &quot;gastarbajteri&quot;, after German &quot;gastarbeiter&quot; (&quot;guest-worker&quot;), since most of the emigrants headed for German-speaking countries. These migrations left some parts of Serbia sparsely populated. Later emigration took place during the 1990s, and was caused by both political and economic reasons. The Yugoslav wars caused many Serbs from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to leave their countries in the first half of the 1990s. The economic sanctions imposed on Serbia caused an economic collapse with an estimated 300,000 people leaving Serbia during that period, 20% of which had a higher education.

==Language==

Serbs speak Serbian, a member of the South Slavic group of languages, specifically the Southwestern group. Standard Serbian is a standardized variety of Serbo-Croatian, and therefore mutually intelligible with Standard Croatian, Standard Montenegrin, and Standard Bosnian (see Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian), which are all based on the Shtokavian dialect.
Serbian is an official language in Serbia and Bosnia-Herzegovina and is a recognized minority language in Montenegro (although spoken by a plurality of population), Croatia, North Macedonia, Romania, Hungary, Czech Republic and Slovakia. Older forms of literary Serbian are Church Slavonic of the Serbian recension, which is still used for ecclesiastical purposes, and Slavonic-Serbian—a mixture of Serbian, Church Slavonic and Russian used from the mid-18th century to the first decades of the 19th century.

Serbian has active digraphia, using both Cyrillic and Latin alphabets. Serbian Cyrillic was devised in 1814 by Serbian linguist Vuk Karadžić, who created the alphabet on phonemic principles. Serbian Latin was created by Ljudevit Gaj and published in 1830. His alphabet mapped completely on Serbian Cyrillic which had been standardized by Vuk Karadžić a few years before.

Loanwords in the Serbian language besides common internationalisms are mostly from Greek, German and Italian, while words of Hungarian origin are present mostly in the north.

The Ottoman conquest began a linguistical contact between Ottoman Turkish and South Slavic; Ottoman Turkish influence grew stronger after the 15th century. Besides Turkish loanwords, also many Arabic (such as &quot;alat&quot;, &quot;tool&quot;, &quot;sat&quot;, &quot;hour, clock&quot;) and Persian (&quot;čarape&quot;, &quot;socks&quot;, &quot;šećer&quot;, &quot;sugar&quot;) words entered via Turkish, called &quot;Orientalisms&quot; (&quot;orijentalizmi&quot;). Also, many Greek words entered via Turkish. Words for hitherto unknown sciences, businesses, industries, technologies and professions were brought by the Ottoman Empire. Christian villagers brought urban vocabulary from their travels to Islamic culture cities. Many Turkish loanwords are no longer considered loanwords.

There is considerable usage of French words as well, especially in military related terms. One Serbian word that is used in many of the world&#x27;s languages is &quot;vampire&quot; (&quot;vampir&quot;).

==Culture==
Literature, icon painting, music, dance and medieval architecture are the artistic forms for which Serbia is best known. Traditional Serbian visual art (specifically frescoes, and to some extent icons), as well as ecclesiastical architecture, are highly reflective of Byzantine traditions, with some Mediterranean and Western influence.

Many Serbian monuments and works of art have been lost forever due to various wars, thievery and peacetime marginalizations.

In modern times (since the 19th century) Serbs also have a noteworthy classical music and works of philosophy. Notable philosophers include Svetozar Marković, Branislav Petronijević, Ksenija Atanasijević, Radomir Konstantinović, Nikola Milošević, Mihailo Marković, Justin Popović and Mihailo Đurić.

=== Art, music, theatre, and cinema ===


During the 12th and 13th centuries, many icons, wall paintings and manuscript miniatures came into existence, as many Serbian Orthodox monasteries and churches such as Hilandar, Žiča, Studenica, Sopoćani, Mileševa, Gračanica and Visoki Dečani were built. The architecture of some of these monasteries is world-famous. Prominent architectural styles in the Middle Ages were Raška architectural school, Morava architectural school and Serbo-Byzantin architectural style. During the same period UNESCO protected Stećak monumental medieval tombstones were built. The Independence of Serbia in the 19th century was soon followed with Serbo-Byzantine Revival in architecture.

Baroque and rococo trends in Serbian art emerged in the 18th century and are mostly represented in icon painting and portraits. Most of the Baroque authors were from the territory of Austrian Empire, such as Nikola Nešković, Teodor Kračun, Teodor Ilić Češljar, Zaharije Orfelin and Jakov Orfelin. Serbian painting showed the influence of Biedermeier and Neoclassicism as seen in works by Konstantin Danil and Pavel Đurković. Many painters followed the artistic trends set in the 19th century Romanticism, notably Đura Jakšić, Stevan Todorović, Katarina Ivanović and Novak Radonić. Since the mid-1800s, Serbia has produced a number of famous painters who are representative of general European artistic trends. One of the most prominent of these was Paja Jovanović, who painted massive canvases on historical themes such as the &quot;Migration of the Serbs&quot; (1896). Painter Uroš Predić was also prominent in the field of Serbian art, painting the &quot;Kosovo Maiden&quot; and &quot;Happy Brothers&quot;. While Jovanović and Predić were both realist painters, artist Nadežda Petrović was an impressionist and fauvist and Sava Šumanović was an accomplished Cubist. Painters Petar Lubarda, Vladimir Veličković and Ljubomir Popović were famous for their surrealism. Marina Abramović is a world-renowned performance artist, writer, and art filmmaker.

Traditional Serbian music includes various kinds of bagpipes, flutes, horns, trumpets, lutes, psalteries, drums and cymbals. The kolo is the traditional collective folk dance, which has a number of varieties throughout the regions. The first Serbian composers started working in the 14th and 15th century, like Kir Stefan the Serb. Composer and musicologist Stevan Stojanović Mokranjac is considered one of the most important founders of modern Serbian music. Other noted classical composers include Kornelije Stanković, Stanislav Binički, Petar Konjović, Miloje Milojević, Stevan Hristić, Josif Marinković, Luigi von Kunits, Ljubica Marić and Vasilije Mokranjac. Well-known musicians include Zdravko Čolić, Arsen Dedić, Predrag Gojković-Cune, Toma Zdravković, Milan Mladenović, Radomir Mihailović Točak, Bora Đorđević, Momčilo Bajagić Bajaga, Đorđe Balašević, Ceca and others.

Serbia has produced many talented filmmakers, the most famous of whom are Slavko Vorkapić, Dušan Makavejev, Živojin Pavlović, Slobodan Šijan, Goran Marković, Goran Paskaljević, Emir Kusturica, Želimir Žilnik, Srđan Dragojević, Srdan Golubović and Mila Turajlić. Žilnik and Stefan Arsenijević won the Golden Bear award at Berlinale, while Mila Turajlić won the main award at IDFA. Kusturica became world-renowned after winning the Palme d&#x27;Or twice at the Cannes Film Festival, numerous other prizes, and is a UNICEF National Ambassador for Serbia. Several Americans of Serb origin have been featured prominently in Hollywood. The most notable of these are Academy Award winners Karl Malden, Steve Tesich, Peter Bogdanovich, Tony-winning theatre director Darko Tresnjak, Emmy-winning director Marina Zenovich and actors Iván Petrovich, Brad Dexter, Lolita Davidovich, Milla Jovovich and Stana Katic.

===Literature===

Most literature written by early Serbs was about religious themes. The founders of the Serbian Orthodox Church wrote various gospels, psalters, menologies, hagiographies, along with essays and sermons. At the end of the 12th century, two of the most important pieces of Serbian medieval literature were created– the Miroslav Gospels and the Vukan Gospels, which combined handwritten Biblical texts with painted initials and small pictures. The Crnojević printing house was the first printing house in Southeastern Europe and is considered an important part of Serbian cultural history.

Notable Baroque-influenced authors were Andrija Zmajević, Gavril Stefanović Venclović, Jovan Rajić, Zaharije Orfelin and others. Dositej Obradović was the most prominent figure of the Age of Enlightenment, while the most notable Classicist writer was Jovan Sterija Popović, although his works also contained elements of Romanticism. Modern Serbian literature began with Vuk Karadžić&#x27;s collections of folk songs in the 19th century, and the writings of Njegoš and Branko Radičević. The first prominent representative of Serbian literature in the 20th century was Jovan Skerlić, who wrote in pre–World War I Belgrade and helped introduce Serbian writers to literary modernism. The most important Serbian writer in the inter-war period was Miloš Crnjanski.

The first Serb authors who appeared after World War II were Mihailo Lalić and Dobrica Ćosić. Other notable post-war Yugoslav authors such as Ivo Andrić and Meša Selimović were assimilated to Serbian culture, and both identified as Serbs. Andrić went on to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1961. Danilo Kiš, another popular Serbian writer, was known for writing &quot;A Tomb for Boris Davidovich&quot;, as well as several acclaimed novels. Amongst contemporary Serbian writers, Milorad Pavić stands out as being the most critically acclaimed, with his novels &quot;Dictionary of the Khazars&quot;, &quot;Landscape Painted with Tea&quot; and &quot;The Inner Side of the Wind&quot; bringing him international recognition. Highly revered in Europe and in South America, Pavić is considered one of the most intriguing writers from the beginning of the 21st century. Charles Simic is a notable contemporary Serbian-American poet, former United States Poet Laureate and a Pulitzer Prize winner. Contemporary writer Zoran Živković authored more than 20 prose books and is best-known for his SF works which have been published in 23 countries.

===Education and science===


Many Serbs have contributed to the field of science and technology. There are more Serbian scientists and scholars working abroad than in the Balkans. At least 7000 Serbs who have a PhD are working abroad. Medical specialists from Serbia have performed a number of operations which have been described as pioneer works.

Serbian American mechanical and electrical engineer Nikola Tesla is regarded as one of the most important inventors in history. He is renowned for his contributions to the discipline of electricity and magnetism in the late 19th and early 20th century. Seven Serbian American engineers and scientists known as &quot;Serbo 7&quot; took part in construction of the Apollo spaceship. Physicist and physical chemist Mihajlo Pupin is best known for his landmark theory of modern electrical filters as well as for his numerous patents, while Milutin Milanković is best known for his theory of long-term climate change caused by changes in the position of the Earth in comparison to the Sun, now known as Milankovitch cycles. Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic is a Serbian American biomedical engineer focusing on engineering human tissues for regenerative medicine, stem cell research and modeling of disease. She is one of the most highly cited scientists of all times.

Notable Serb mathematicians include Mihailo Petrović, Jovan Karamata and Đuro Kurepa. Mihailo Petrović is known for having contributed significantly to differential equations and phenomenology, as well as inventing one of the first prototypes of an analog computer. Roger Joseph Boscovich was a Ragusan physicist, astronomer, mathematician and polymath of paternal Serbian origin (although there are competing claims for Bošković&#x27;s nationality) who produced a precursor of atomic theory and made many contributions to astronomy and also discovered the absence of atmosphere on the Moon. Jovan Cvijić founded modern geography in Serbia and made pioneering research on the geography of the Balkan Peninsula, Dinaric race and karst. Josif Pančić made contributions to botany and discovered a number of new floral species including the Serbian spruce. Biologist and physiologist Ivan Đaja performed research in the role of the adrenal glands in thermoregulation, as well as pioneering work in hypothermia.
Valtazar Bogišić is considered to be a pioneer in the sociology of law and sociological jurisprudence.

===Names===

There are several different layers of Serbian names. Serbian given names largely originate from Slavic roots:
e.g., Vuk, Bojan, Goran, Zoran, Dragan, Milan, Miroslav, Vladimir, Slobodan, Dušan, Milica, Nevena, Vesna, Radmila. Other names are of Christian origin, originating from the Bible (Hebrew, through Greek), such as Lazar, Mihailo, Ivan, Jovan, Ilija, Marija, Ana, Ivana. Along similar lines of non-Slavic Christian names are Greek ones such as: Stefan, Nikola, Aleksandar, Filip, Đorđe, Andrej, Jelena, Katarina, Vasilije, Todor, while those of Latin origin include: Marko, Antonije, Srđan, Marina, Petar, Pavle, Natalija, Igor (through Russian).

Most Serbian surnames are paternal, maternal, occupational or derived from personal traits. It is estimated that over two thirds of all Serbian surnames have the suffix &quot;-ić&quot; (-ић) (), a Slavic diminutive, originally functioning to create patronymics. Thus the surname Petrović means the &quot;son of Petar&quot; (from a male progenitor, the root is extended with possessive &quot;-ov&quot; or &quot;-ev&quot;). Due to limited use of international typewriters and unicode computer encoding, the suffix may be simplified to &quot;-ic&quot;, historically transcribed with a phonetic ending, &quot;-ich&quot; or &quot;-itch&quot; in foreign languages. Other common surname suffixes found among Serbian surnames are &quot;-ov&quot;, &quot;-ev&quot;, &quot;-in&quot; and &quot;-ski&quot; (without &quot;-ić&quot;) which is the Slavic possessive case suffix, thus Nikola&#x27;s son becomes Nikolin, Petar&#x27;s son Petrov, and Jovan&#x27;s son Jovanov. Other, less common suffices are &quot;-alj/olj/elj&quot;, &quot;-ija&quot;, &quot;-ica&quot;, &quot;-ar/ac/an&quot;. The ten most common surnames in Serbia, in order, are Jovanović, Petrović, Nikolić, Marković, Đorđević, Stojanović, Ilić, Stanković, Pavlović and Milošević.

===Religion===

Serbs are predominantly Orthodox Christians. The autocephaly of the Serbian Orthodox Church, was established in 1219, as an Archbishopric, and raised to the Patriarchate in 1346. It is led by the Serbian Patriarch, and consists of three archbishoprics, six metropolitanates and thirty-one eparchies, having around 10 million adherents. Followers of the church form the largest religious group in Serbia and Montenegro, and the second-largest in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. The church has an archbishopric in North Macedonia and dioceses in Western Europe, North America, South America and Australia.

The identity of ethnic Serbs was historically largely based on Orthodox Christianity and on the Serbian Church in particular. The conversion of the South Slavs from paganism to Christianity took place before the Great Schism of 1054. During the time of the Great Schism, Serbian rulers including Mihailo Vojislavljević and Stefan Nemanja were Roman Catholics, with the former being a vassal of the Papal States. In 1217, the Serbian ruler Stefan Nemanja II was crowned by Pope Honorius III of the Roman Catholic Church. However in 1219, Nemanja II was crowned once again by the newly independent Serbian Orthodox Church. This shift solidified the Christian Orthodox religion in Serbia.

With the arrival of the Ottoman Empire, some Serbs converted to Islam. This was particularly, but not wholly, the case in Bosnia. Since the second half of the 19th century, a small number of Serbs converted to Protestantism, while historically some Serbs were Roman Catholics (especially in Bay of Kotor and Dalmatia; e.g. Serb-Catholic movement in Dubrovnik). In a personal correspondence with author and critic dr. Milan Šević in 1932, Marko Murat complained that Orthodox Serbs are not acknowledging the Roman Catholic Serb community on the basis of their faith. The remainder of Serbs remain predominantly Serbian Orthodox Christians.

===Symbols===


Among the most notable national and ethnic symbols are the flag of Serbia and the coat of arms of Serbia. The flag consists of a red-blue-white tricolour, rooted in Pan-Slavism, and has been used since the 19th century. Apart from being the national flag, it is also used officially in Republika Srpska (by Bosnian Serbs) and as the official ethnic Flag of Serbs of Croatia. The coat of arms, which includes both the Serbian eagle and Serbian cross, has also been officially used since the 19th century, its elements dating back to the Middle Ages, showing Byzantine and Christian heritage. These symbols are used by various Serb organisations, political parties and institutions. The Three-finger salute, also called the &quot;Serb salute&quot;, is a popular expression for ethnic Serbs and Serbia, originally expressing Serbian Orthodoxy and today simply being a symbol for ethnic Serbs and the Serbian nation, made by extending the thumb, index, and middle fingers of one or both hands.

===Traditions and customs===

Traditional clothing varies due to diverse geography and climate of the territory inhabited by the Serbs. The traditional footwear, &quot;opanci&quot;, is worn throughout the Balkans. The most common folk costume of Serbia is that of Šumadija, a region in central Serbia, which includes the national hat, the Šajkača. Older villagers still wear their traditional costumes. The traditional dance is the circle dance, called &quot;kolo&quot;. Zmijanje embroidery is a specific technique of embroidery practised by the women of villages in area Zmijanje on mountain Manjača and as such is a part of the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. Pirot carpet is a variety of flat tapestry woven rug traditionally produced in Pirot, a town in southeastern Serbia.

&quot;Slava&quot; is the family&#x27;s annual ceremony and veneration of their patron saint, a social event in which the family is together at the house of the patriarch. The tradition is an important ethnic marker of Serb identity. Serbs usually regard the Slava as their most significant and most solemn feast day.
Serbs have their own customs regarding Christmas, which includes the sacral tree, the &quot;badnjak&quot;, a young oak. On Orthodox Easter, Serbs have the tradition of Slavic Egg decorating. Čuvari Hristovog groba is a religious/cultural practice of guarding a representation of Christ&#x27;s grave on Good Friday in the Church of St. Nicholas by the Serbian Orthodox inhabitants in the town of Vrlika.

===Cuisine===
Serbian cuisine is largely heterogeneous, with heavy Oriental, Central European and Mediterranean influences. Despite this, it has evolved and achieved its own culinary identity. Food is very important in Serbian social life, particularly during religious holidays such as Christmas, Easter and feast days, i.e., &quot;slava&quot;. Staples of the Serbian diet include bread, meat, fruits, vegetables, and dairy products. Traditionally, three meals are consumed per day. Breakfast generally consists of eggs, meat and bread. Lunch is considered the main meal, and is normally eaten in the afternoon. Traditionally, Domestic or turkish coffee is prepared after a meal, and is served in small cups. Bread is the basis of all Serbian meals, and it plays an important role in Serbian cuisine and can be found in religious rituals. A traditional Serbian welcome is to offer bread and salt to guests, and also &quot;slatko&quot; (fruit preserve). Meat is widely consumed, as is fish. Serbian specialties include &quot;kajmak&quot; (a dairy product similar to clotted cream), &quot;proja&quot; (cornbread), &quot;kačamak&quot; (corn-flour porridge), and &quot;gibanica&quot; (cheese and kajmak pie). Ćevapčići, caseless grilled and seasoned sausages made of minced meat, is the national dish of Serbia.

Šljivovica (Slivovitz) is the national drink of Serbia in domestic production for centuries, and plum is the national fruit. The international name &quot;Slivovitz&quot; is derived from Serbian. Plum and its products are of great importance to Serbs and part of numerous customs. A Serbian meal usually starts or ends with plum products and Šljivovica is served as an aperitif. A saying goes that the best place to build a house is where a plum tree grows best. Traditionally, Šljivovica (commonly referred to as &quot;rakija&quot;) is connected to Serbian culture as a drink used at all important rites of passage (birth, baptism, military service, marriage, death, etc.), and in the Serbian Orthodox patron saint celebration (&quot;slava&quot;). It is used in numerous folk remedies, and is given certain degree of respect above all other alcoholic drinks. The fertile region of Šumadija in central Serbia is particularly known for its plums and Šljivovica. Serbia is the largest exporter of Slivovitz in the world, and second largest plum producer in the world. Winemaking tradition in modern-day Serbia dates back to the Roman times in the 3rd century, while Serbs have been involved in winemaking since the 8th century.

===Sport===


Serbs are known for their sporting achievements, and have produced a number of talented athletes.

The Hungarian citizen Momčilo Tapavica was the first Slav and Serb to win an Olympic medal, in the 1896 Summer Olympics.

Over the years Serbia has been home to many internationally successful football players such as Dragan Džajić (officially recognized as &quot;the best Serbian footballer of all times&quot; by Football Association of Serbia; 1968 Ballon d&#x27;Or third place), Rajko Mitić, Dragoslav Šekularac and more recent likes of Dragan Stojković, Dejan Stanković, Nemanja Vidić (two-time Premier League Player of the Season and member of FIFPro World XI), Branislav Ivanović (Serbia&#x27;s most capped player) and Nemanja Matić. Radomir Antić is a notable football coach, best known for his work with the national team, Real Madrid C.F. and FC Barcelona. Serbia has developed a reputation as one of the world&#x27;s biggest exporters of expat footballers.
A total of 22 Serbian players have played in the NBA in the last two decades, including three-time NBA All-Star Predrag &quot;Peja&quot; Stojaković, as well as NBA All-Star and both FIBA and NBA Hall of Fame inductee Vlade Divac. The most notable is Nikola Jokić, the 2020–21–2022 NBA Most Valuable Player Award winner and 2023 NBA finals MVP recipient. Serbian players that made a great impact in Europe include four members of the FIBA Hall of Fame from the 1960s and 1970s – Dragan Kićanović, Dražen Dalipagić, Radivoj Korać, and Zoran Slavnić – as well as recent stars such as Dejan Bodiroga (2002 All-Europe Player of the Year), Aleksandar Đorđević (1994 and 1995 Mr. Europa), Miloš Teodosić (2009–10 Euroleague MVP), Nemanja Bjelica (2014–15 Euroleague MVP), and Vasilije Micić (2020–21 Euroleague MVP). The &quot;Serbian coaching school&quot; produced many of the most successful European coaches of all times, such as Željko Obradović (a record nine Euroleague titles), Božidar Maljković (four Euroleague titles), Aleksandar Nikolić (three Euroleague titles), Dušan Ivković (two Euroleague titles), and Svetislav Pešić (one Euroleague title).

One of the most notable Serbian athletes is tennis player Novak Djokovic. He has won an all-time record 24 Grand Slam men&#x27;s singles titles, and has been year-end World No. 1 on a record eight occasions. Djokovic is regarded by many to be the greatest men&#x27;s tennis player of all time.

Other notable tennis players include Ana Ivanovic (champion of 2008 French Open) and Jelena Janković, who were both ranked No. 1 in the WTA rankings, while Nenad Zimonjić and Slobodan Živojinović were ranked No. 1 in doubles.

Notable water polo players are Vladimir Vujasinović, Aleksandar Šapić, Vanja Udovičić, Andrija Prlainović and Filip Filipović.

Other noted Serbian athletes, including Olympic and world champions and medalists, are: swimmer Milorad Čavić, volleyball player Nikola Grbić, handball player Svetlana Kitić, long-jumper Ivana Španović, shooter Jasna Šekarić, sprint canoer Marko Tomićević, judoka Nemanja Majdov and taekwondoist Milica Mandić.

A number of sportspeople of Serb origin represented other nations, such as tennis players Daniel Nestor, Jelena Dokic, Milos Raonic and Kristina Mladenovic, NHL player Milan Lucic, basketball players NBA All-star Pete Maravich, Nikola Vučević, Goran Dragić, Luka Dončić, wrestler Jim Trifunov, sprint canoer Natasa Dusev-Janics, soccer player Miodrag Belodedici, artistic gymnast Lavinia Miloșovici, racquetball player Rhonda Rajsich and racing driver Bill Vukovich.

==Historiography==
==See also==

* List of Serbs

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

===Primary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
===Secondary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Byzantine Illiricum - The Slavs Settlement (History of Balkan, part 1, Official chanel)
* Byzantine Dalmatian – The Arrival of Serbs (History of Balkan, part 1, Official chanel)
* Project Rastko – Serbian cultural and historical research society </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="4" end="9" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="21" end="33" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="34" end="46" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="57" end="76" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="104" end="112" title="Cultural heritage" label="ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599752" start="114" end="121" title="Culture of Serbia" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q223195" start="123" end="130" title="History of Serbia" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="136" end="144" title="Serbian language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="169" end="175" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="177" end="183" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="185" end="207" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="209" end="216" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="218" end="228" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="243" end="258" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="260" end="268" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="270" end="277" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="282" end="289" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="326" end="334" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="367" end="373" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="379" end="387" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="392" end="399" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="472" end="488" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="513" end="540" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="558" end="565" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="602" end="616" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="788" end="805" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944361" start="847" end="872" title="Serbian national identity" label="Serbian national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q746782" start="1053" end="1069" title="Nemanjić dynasty" label="Nemanjić dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="1152" end="1175" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="1181" end="1197" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267597" start="1207" end="1218" title="Kosovo Myth" label="Kosovo Myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q684030" start="1229" end="1251" title="Principality of Serbia" label="Principality of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944361" start="1334" end="1355" title="National identity of Serbia" label="the national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="1403" end="1414" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="1416" end="1422" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="1427" end="1435" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474942" start="1461" end="1466" title="slava (tradition)" label="slava"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="1613" end="1622" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="1643" end="1651" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="1706" end="1718" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286031" start="1727" end="1750" title="Hanna Popowska-Taborska" label="Hanna Popowska-Taborska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="1765" end="1771" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="2020" end="2029" title="autosome" label="autosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="2031" end="2044" title="mitochondrial" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="2049" end="2057" title="Y-DNA" label="paternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q147356" start="2106" end="2117" title="Balto-Slavs" label="Balto-Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q501128" start="2167" end="2170" title="Single nucleotide polymorphism" label="SNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512235" start="2277" end="2280" title="Haplogroup I2a" label="I2a"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="2285" end="2288" title="Haplogroup R1a" label="R1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q476112" start="2474" end="2485" title="human height" label="male height"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="2532" end="2543" title="Early Slavs" label="Early Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257426" start="2556" end="2564" title="Sclaveni" label="Sclaveni"/>
<link wikidata="Q571813" start="2569" end="2574" title="Antae" label="Antae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393785" start="2590" end="2601" title="White Serbs" label="White Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="2623" end="2642" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q129224" start="2818" end="2827" title="foederati" label="foederati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="2848" end="2854" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="2859" end="2863" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q190773" start="2975" end="2989" title="central Serbia" label="central Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231059" start="3057" end="3070" title="Via Militaris" label="Via Militaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230522" start="3123" end="3133" title="Barbarians in the Byzantine Empire" label="barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991084" start="3320" end="3332" title="White Serbia" label="White Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711138" start="3341" end="3366" title="Servia, Greece" label="an area near Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q599110" start="3469" end="3474" title="Raška (region)" label="Raška"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="3560" end="3571" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="3576" end="3586" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107370" start="3807" end="3813" title="Principality of Serbia (early medieval)" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252942" start="3828" end="3834" title="Duklja" label="Duklja"/>
<link wikidata="Q931486" start="3877" end="3890" title="Vlastimirović dynasty" label="Vlastimirović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283839" start="3895" end="3909" title="Vojislavljević dynasty" label="Vojislavljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965811" start="4043" end="4051" title="Paganija" label="Paganija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="4053" end="4061" title="Zahumlje" label="Zahumlje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311805" start="4063" end="4072" title="Travunija" label="Travunija"/>
<link wikidata="Q298612" start="4231" end="4245" title="Stefan Nemanja" label="Stefan Nemanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="4301" end="4307" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252942" start="4309" end="4315" title="Duklja" label="Duklja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="4320" end="4329" title="Zachlumia" label="Zachlumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746782" start="4335" end="4351" title="Nemanjić dynasty" label="Nemanjić dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q24445" start="4420" end="4435" title="Stefan the First-Crowned" label="Stefan Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="4524" end="4547" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q138465" start="4586" end="4596" title="Saint Sava" label="Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="4646" end="4668" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406298" start="4846" end="4860" title="Serbian Empire" label="Serbian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207303" start="5028" end="5040" title="Stephen Uroš IV Dušan of Serbia" label="Stefan Dušan"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="5149" end="5158" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="5214" end="5221" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q279693" start="5248" end="5262" title="Stephen Uroš V of Serbia" label="Stephen Uroš V"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="5285" end="5292" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q939570" start="5439" end="5456" title="Battle of Maritsa" label="Battle of Maritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406298" start="5614" end="5628" title="Serbian Empire" label="Serbian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q805920" start="5743" end="5756" title="Balšić noble family" label="Balšić family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="5765" end="5771" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q849021" start="5807" end="5823" title="Branković family" label="Branković family"/>
<link wikidata="Q310197" start="5828" end="5847" title="Lazar Hrebeljanović" label="Lazar Hrebeljanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q190773" start="5869" end="5883" title="Central Serbia" label="Central Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179288" start="6089" end="6105" title="Battle of Kosovo" label="Battle of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786124" start="6122" end="6134" title="Kosovo Polje" label="Kosovo Polje"/>
<link wikidata="Q25270" start="6153" end="6161" title="Priština" label="Priština"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="6178" end="6184" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96261" start="6185" end="6192" title="Murad I" label="Murad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q336531" start="6339" end="6355" title="Stefan Lazarević" label="Stefan Lazarević"/>
<link wikidata="Q697654" start="6731" end="6748" title="Battle of Buda (1686)" label="had captured Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="6792" end="6809" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="6822" end="6837" title="Pannonian Plain" label="Pannonian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="6851" end="6858" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="6860" end="6868" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="6891" end="6898" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210300" start="6900" end="6905" title="Bačka" label="Bačka"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="6910" end="6915" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="6939" end="6945" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502736" start="7017" end="7032" title="Serbian Militia" label="Serbian Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815841" start="7129" end="7138" title="devshirme" label="devshirme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045287" start="7157" end="7186" title="slavery in the Ottoman Empire" label="slavery in the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378806" start="7238" end="7256" title="Forced conversion" label="forcibly converted"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7260" end="7265" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="7304" end="7316" title="Military of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="7330" end="7341" title="Janissaries" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7427" end="7441" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142289" start="7451" end="7463" title="List of Ottoman Grand Viziers" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q298419" start="7464" end="7484" title="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha" label="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090884" start="7489" end="7504" title="Ministry of War (Ottoman Empire)" label="Minister of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="7505" end="7518" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q560045" start="7519" end="7535" title="Omar Pasha Latas" label="Omar Pasha Latas"/>
<link wikidata="Q699902" start="7547" end="7578" title="Siege of Belgrade (1688)" label="the Habsburg army took Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q190773" start="7620" end="7634" title="Central Serbia" label="Central Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58755" start="7636" end="7674" title="Louis William, Margrave of Baden-Baden" label="Louis William, Margrave of Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280568" start="7700" end="7723" title="Arsenije III Čarnojević" label="Arsenije III Čarnojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564082" start="7983" end="8014" title="General Enea Silvio Piccolomini" label="General Enea Silvio Piccolomini"/>
<link wikidata="Q200061" start="8018" end="8025" title="Prizren" label="Prizren"/>
<link wikidata="Q470265" start="8139" end="8174" title="Great Migration of the Serbs (1690)" label="Great Migration of the Serbs (1690)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="8463" end="8477" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092429" start="8544" end="8562" title="Serbian Revolution" label="Serbian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q368689" start="8815" end="8837" title="First Serbian Uprising" label="First Serbian Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q315172" start="8851" end="8869" title="Karađorđe Petrović" label="Karađorđe Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q243585" start="8996" end="9019" title="Second Serbian Uprising" label="Second Serbian Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q297557" start="9034" end="9049" title="Miloš Obrenović" label="Miloš Obrenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="9215" end="9224" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="9286" end="9292" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q297557" start="9436" end="9451" title="Miloš Obrenović I, Prince of Serbia" label="Miloš Obrenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="9778" end="9796" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="9828" end="9839" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="9945" end="9962" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="9981" end="9993" title="Bosnian Serb" label="Bosnian Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q80492" start="10008" end="10023" title="Gavrilo Princip" label="Gavrilo Princip"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="10024" end="10036" title="Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="10037" end="10072" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10120" end="10131" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="10184" end="10199" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q697748" start="10276" end="10289" title="Battle of Cer" label="Battle of Cer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="10314" end="10320" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="10338" end="10352" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q682699" start="10401" end="10409" title="Battle of Kolubara" label="Kolubara"/>
<link wikidata="Q692089" start="10418" end="10423" title="Battle of the Drina" label="Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="10537" end="10544" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="10546" end="10561" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="10566" end="10574" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209256" start="10655" end="10667" title="Serbian Army" label="Serbian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262377" start="10792" end="10806" title="Salonika front" label="Salonika front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006958" start="10848" end="10875" title="Austro-Hungarian occupation of Serbia" label="Austro-Hungarian occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378456" start="10910" end="10950" title="World War I casualties" label="the biggest casualty rate in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="11013" end="11050" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="11062" end="11082" title="South Slavic peoples" label="South Slavic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="11118" end="11139" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="11179" end="11190" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q220641" start="11206" end="11226" title="Karađorđević dynasty" label="Karađorđević dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11235" end="11247" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="11279" end="11290" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="11426" end="11454" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="11504" end="11512" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="11556" end="11562" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="11650" end="11663" title="racism" label="inferior race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265120" start="11692" end="11713" title="Croatian nationalism" label="Croatian nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="11796" end="11810" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719420" start="11874" end="11879" title="Sisak children&amp;#x27;s concentration camp" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276289" start="11884" end="11915" title="Jastrebarsko children&amp;#x27;s camp" label="Jastrebarsko concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031317" start="11931" end="11950" title="Children in the Holocaust" label="formed for children"/>
<link wikidata="Q112443" start="12116" end="12135" title="Diana Budisavljević" label="Diana Budisavljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="12451" end="12480" title="Chetniks" label="Yugoslav Army in the Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="12544" end="12550" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="12608" end="12626" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="13089" end="13104" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="13213" end="13223" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="13265" end="13278" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="disintegrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="13305" end="13319" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="series of wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="13399" end="13406" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="13408" end="13430" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="13495" end="13498" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q769377" start="13576" end="13591" title="Operation Storm" label="Operation Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="13610" end="13623" title="Croatian Serb" label="Croatian Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="13696" end="13707" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="13739" end="13755" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="13811" end="13819" title="Kosovo War" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="13945" end="13966" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="NATO bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q889950" start="14138" end="14147" title="President of Serbia and Montenegro" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="14148" end="14166" title="Slobodan Milosević" label="Slobodan Milosević"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722557" start="14244" end="14274" title="Yugoslavian general election, 2000" label="2000 Yugoslav general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087637" start="14396" end="14419" title="Serbs in diaspora" label="Serbian ethnic diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="14507" end="14526" title="economic migrations" label="economic migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="14531" end="14551" title="forced displacements" label="forced displacements"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="14570" end="14583" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="14800" end="14810" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="14965" end="14987" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="15010" end="15026" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788249" start="15061" end="15086" title="Nations of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="constituent ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="15097" end="15104" title="Serbs in Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564992" start="15106" end="15116" title="Serbs of Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262389" start="15121" end="15136" title="Serbs of North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631779" start="15303" end="15309" title="Serbs of Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564956" start="15339" end="15347" title="Serbs in Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261805" start="15523" end="15530" title="Serbs in Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064264" start="15532" end="15539" title="Serbs in Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q899284" start="15550" end="15557" title="Serbs in Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="15585" end="15599" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313849" start="15604" end="15612" title="Serbs of Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="15664" end="15672" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q566785" start="15807" end="15814" title="Serbs in Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272094" start="15816" end="15823" title="Serbs in Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q969110" start="15825" end="15836" title="Immigration from the former Yugoslavia to Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452995" start="15838" end="15844" title="Serbs in France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452997" start="15846" end="15851" title="Serbs in Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654842" start="15853" end="15859" title="Swedish Serbs" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416722" start="15864" end="15878" title="Serbs in the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261777" start="15942" end="15955" title="Serbian American" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026394" start="15957" end="15963" title="Serbian Canadians" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026395" start="15965" end="15974" title="Serbian Australian" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="15976" end="15989" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="15994" end="16009" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="16102" end="16110" title="coercion" label="coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16259" end="16271" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="16389" end="16400" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="16402" end="16412" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="16414" end="16422" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="16428" end="16432" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16524" end="16536" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="16572" end="16580" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="16671" end="16684" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="16689" end="16698" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="16725" end="16739" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="17085" end="17097" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="17099" end="17106" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="17112" end="17123" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="17148" end="17154" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="17159" end="17165" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q644903" start="17266" end="17278" title="gastarbeiter" label="gastarbeiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="17547" end="17560" title="Yugoslav wars" label="Yugoslav wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563556" start="17680" end="17698" title="Sanctions against Yugoslavia" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="17877" end="17884" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="17902" end="17914" title="Slavic languages" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18007" end="18014" title="Variety (linguistics)#Standard varieties" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="18018" end="18032" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="18048" end="18069" title="mutually intelligible" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="18084" end="18092" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="18103" end="18114" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="18129" end="18136" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q221190" start="18142" end="18207" title="Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian" label="Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="18237" end="18255" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="18531" end="18546" title="Church Slavonic" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639124" start="18626" end="18642" title="Slavonic-Serbian" label="Slavonic-Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="18665" end="18680" title="Church Slavonic" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="18685" end="18692" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133837" start="18786" end="18795" title="digraphia" label="digraphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="18808" end="18816" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="18821" end="18826" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="18838" end="18854" title="Serbian Cyrillic" label="Serbian Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202815" start="18895" end="18907" title="Vuk Karadžić" label="Vuk Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q352617" start="18987" end="18999" title="Ljudevit Gaj" label="Ljudevit Gaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q202815" start="19105" end="19117" title="Vuk Karadžić" label="Vuk Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="19222" end="19227" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="19264" end="19273" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100920" start="19319" end="19335" title="Ottoman conquest of Serbia" label="Ottoman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="20269" end="20276" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="20318" end="20328" title="Literature of Serbia" label="Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="20330" end="20334" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624159" start="20451" end="20469" title="Art of Serbia" label="Serbian visual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="20484" end="20490" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="20513" end="20517" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="20852" end="20867" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q376036" start="20922" end="20939" title="Svetozar Marković" label="Svetozar Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957412" start="20941" end="20963" title="Branislav Petronijević" label="Branislav Petronijević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255843" start="20965" end="20985" title="Ksenija Atanasijević" label="Ksenija Atanasijević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266885" start="20987" end="21009" title="Radomir Konstantinović" label="Radomir Konstantinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7035598" start="21011" end="21027" title="Nikola Milošević (politician)" label="Nikola Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286714" start="21029" end="21045" title="Mihailo Marković" label="Mihailo Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283722" start="21047" end="21061" title="Justin Popović" label="Justin Popović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313065" start="21066" end="21079" title="Mihailo Đurić" label="Mihailo Đurić"/>
<link wikidata="Q849914" start="21292" end="21300" title="Hilandar" label="Hilandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283823" start="21302" end="21306" title="Žiča" label="Žiča"/>
<link wikidata="Q143042" start="21308" end="21317" title="Studenica monastery" label="Studenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142337" start="21319" end="21327" title="Sopoćani" label="Sopoćani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266152" start="21329" end="21337" title="Mileševa Monastery" label="Mileševa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137661" start="21339" end="21348" title="Gračanica monastery" label="Gračanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q849517" start="21353" end="21366" title="Visoki Dečani" label="Visoki Dečani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756718" start="21497" end="21523" title="Raška architectural school" label="Raška architectural school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938594" start="21525" end="21552" title="Morava architectural school" label="Morava architectural school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810654" start="21557" end="21591" title="Serbo-Byzantine architecture" label="Serbo-Byzantin architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="21616" end="21622" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q63724" start="21633" end="21639" title="Stećak" label="Stećak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501300" start="21753" end="21776" title="Serbo-Byzantine Revival" label="Serbo-Byzantine Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="21795" end="21802" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="21807" end="21813" title="rococo" label="rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="21978" end="21993" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341574" start="22003" end="22018" title="Nikola Nešković" label="Nikola Nešković"/>
<link wikidata="Q753000" start="22020" end="22033" title="Teodor Kračun" label="Teodor Kračun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518224" start="22035" end="22054" title="Teodor Ilić Češljar" label="Teodor Ilić Češljar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983199" start="22056" end="22072" title="Zaharije Orfelin" label="Zaharije Orfelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747562" start="22077" end="22090" title="Jakov Orfelin" label="Jakov Orfelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154432" start="22133" end="22144" title="Biedermeier" label="Biedermeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="22149" end="22162" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q648562" start="22183" end="22199" title="Konstantin Danil" label="Konstantin Danil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155809" start="22204" end="22218" title="Pavel Đurković" label="Pavel Đurković"/>
<link wikidata="Q342124" start="22308" end="22319" title="Đura Jakšić" label="Đura Jakšić"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019504" start="22321" end="22337" title="Stevan Todorović" label="Stevan Todorović"/>
<link wikidata="Q752085" start="22339" end="22356" title="Katarina Ivanović" label="Katarina Ivanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q737586" start="22361" end="22374" title="Novak Radonić" label="Novak Radonić"/>
<link wikidata="Q260892" start="22544" end="22558" title="Paja Jovanović" label="Paja Jovanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q21083263" start="22628" end="22650" title="Migration of the Serbs (painting)" label="Migration of the Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q225840" start="22673" end="22684" title="Uroš Predić" label="Uroš Predić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160229" start="22752" end="22765" title="Kosovo Maiden" label="Kosovo Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q24174938" start="22782" end="22796" title="Happy Brothers" label="Happy Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="22841" end="22848" title="Realism (arts)" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q264453" start="22866" end="22882" title="Nadežda Petrović" label="Nadežda Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="22890" end="22903" title="Impressionism" label="impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="22908" end="22915" title="Fauvism" label="fauvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q726025" start="22920" end="22934" title="Sava Šumanović" label="Sava Šumanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="22955" end="22961" title="Cubist" label="Cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260743" start="22972" end="22985" title="Petar Lubarda" label="Petar Lubarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978366" start="22987" end="23006" title="Vladimir Veličković" label="Vladimir Veličković"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335230" start="23011" end="23027" title="Ljubomir Popović" label="Ljubomir Popović"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="23050" end="23060" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="23062" end="23078" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="23099" end="23114" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="23131" end="23139" title="art film" label="art film"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="23199" end="23207" title="bagpipes" label="bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="23209" end="23215" title="flutes" label="flutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q163759" start="23217" end="23222" title="French horn" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="23224" end="23232" title="trumpets" label="trumpets"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="23234" end="23239" title="lutes" label="lutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044408" start="23241" end="23251" title="psalteries" label="psalteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="23253" end="23258" title="drums" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="23263" end="23270" title="cymbals" label="cymbals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076115" start="23276" end="23280" title="kolo (dance)" label="kolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338044" start="23458" end="23477" title="Kir Stefan the Serb" label="Kir Stefan the Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="23492" end="23504" title="musicology" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q719121" start="23505" end="23532" title="Stevan Stojanović Mokranjac" label="Stevan Stojanović Mokranjac"/>
<link wikidata="Q751811" start="23647" end="23666" title="Kornelije Stanković" label="Kornelije Stanković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292444" start="23668" end="23685" title="Stanislav Binički" label="Stanislav Binički"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289465" start="23687" end="23701" title="Petar Konjović" label="Petar Konjović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564798" start="23703" end="23719" title="Miloje Milojević" label="Miloje Milojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284260" start="23721" end="23735" title="Stevan Hristić" label="Stevan Hristić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117614" start="23737" end="23753" title="Josif Marinković" label="Josif Marinković"/>
<link wikidata="Q698861" start="23755" end="23771" title="Luigi von Kunits" label="Luigi von Kunits"/>
<link wikidata="Q292018" start="23773" end="23786" title="Ljubica Marić" label="Ljubica Marić"/>
<link wikidata="Q144486" start="23791" end="23809" title="Vasilije Mokranjac" label="Vasilije Mokranjac"/>
<link wikidata="Q169179" start="23840" end="23853" title="Zdravko Čolić" label="Zdravko Čolić"/>
<link wikidata="Q594956" start="23855" end="23866" title="Arsen Dedić" label="Arsen Dedić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565325" start="23868" end="23889" title="Predrag Gojković-Cune" label="Predrag Gojković-Cune"/>
<link wikidata="Q337673" start="23891" end="23906" title="Toma Zdravković" label="Toma Zdravković"/>
<link wikidata="Q104259" start="23908" end="23924" title="Milan Mladenović" label="Milan Mladenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q571916" start="23926" end="23950" title="Radomir Mihailović" label="Radomir Mihailović Točak"/>
<link wikidata="Q834689" start="23952" end="23965" title="Bora Đorđević" label="Bora Đorđević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280870" start="23967" end="23989" title="Momčilo Bajagić Bajaga" label="Momčilo Bajagić Bajaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q342045" start="23991" end="24006" title="Đorđe Balašević" label="Đorđe Balašević"/>
<link wikidata="Q237385" start="24008" end="24012" title="Ceca (singer)" label="Ceca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270602" start="24100" end="24115" title="Slavko Vorkapić" label="Slavko Vorkapić"/>
<link wikidata="Q357316" start="24117" end="24132" title="Dušan Makavejev" label="Dušan Makavejev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282300" start="24134" end="24150" title="Živojin Pavlović" label="Živojin Pavlović"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429502" start="24152" end="24166" title="Slobodan Šijan" label="Slobodan Šijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378699" start="24168" end="24182" title="Goran Marković" label="Goran Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284560" start="24184" end="24201" title="Goran Paskaljević" label="Goran Paskaljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q94882" start="24203" end="24217" title="Emir Kusturica" label="Emir Kusturica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264297" start="24219" end="24233" title="Želimir Žilnik" label="Želimir Žilnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q385312" start="24235" end="24251" title="Srđan Dragojević" label="Srđan Dragojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495210" start="24253" end="24268" title="Srdan Golubović" label="Srdan Golubović"/>
<link wikidata="Q52581413" start="24273" end="24286" title="Mila Turajlić" label="Mila Turajlić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335956" start="24299" end="24317" title="Stefan Arsenijević" label="Stefan Arsenijević"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="24326" end="24337" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="24347" end="24356" title="Berlinale" label="Berlinale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666506" start="24400" end="24404" title="International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam" label="IDFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="24456" end="24471" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="24485" end="24505" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="24539" end="24545" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="24645" end="24654" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q94992" start="24708" end="24719" title="Karl Malden" label="Karl Malden"/>
<link wikidata="Q709583" start="24721" end="24733" title="Steve Tesich" label="Steve Tesich"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="24735" end="24752" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="24754" end="24758" title="Tony Award" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q26215041" start="24784" end="24798" title="Darko Tresnjak" label="Darko Tresnjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="24800" end="24804" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19268774" start="24822" end="24837" title="Marina Zenovich" label="Marina Zenovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549265" start="24849" end="24863" title="Iván Petrovich" label="Iván Petrovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q713672" start="24865" end="24876" title="Brad Dexter" label="Brad Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q242472" start="24878" end="24895" title="Lolita Davidovich" label="Lolita Davidovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q170576" start="24897" end="24911" title="Milla Jovovich" label="Milla Jovovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q229223" start="24916" end="24927" title="Stana Katic" label="Stana Katic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="25035" end="25058" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="25073" end="25079" title="gospel" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q956165" start="25082" end="25090" title="psalters" label="psalters"/>
<link wikidata="Q46127" start="25092" end="25102" title="menologies" label="menologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="25104" end="25117" title="hagiographies" label="hagiographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41469" start="25264" end="25280" title="Miroslav Gospels" label="Miroslav Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645037" start="25289" end="25302" title="Vukan Gospels" label="Vukan Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511005" start="25392" end="25416" title="Crnojević printing house" label="Crnojević printing house"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="25543" end="25550" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192540" start="25575" end="25591" title="Andrija Zmajević" label="Andrija Zmajević"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528390" start="25593" end="25620" title="Gavril Stefanović Venclović" label="Gavril Stefanović Venclović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667903" start="25622" end="25633" title="Jovan Rajić" label="Jovan Rajić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983199" start="25635" end="25651" title="Zaharije Orfelin" label="Zaharije Orfelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q347659" start="25664" end="25681" title="Dositej Obradović" label="Dositej Obradović"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="25719" end="25739" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287180" start="25786" end="25807" title="Jovan Sterija Popović" label="Jovan Sterija Popović"/>
<link wikidata="Q202815" start="25905" end="25917" title="Vuk Karadžić" label="Vuk Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="25940" end="25949" title="folk song" label="folk song"/>
<link wikidata="Q362081" start="25992" end="25998" title="Petar II Petrović-Njegoš" label="Njegoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q540772" start="26003" end="26019" title="Branko Radičević" label="Branko Radičević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278008" start="26102" end="26115" title="Jovan Skerlić" label="Jovan Skerlić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="26146" end="26154" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="26256" end="26272" title="inter-war period" label="inter-war period"/>
<link wikidata="Q31215" start="26277" end="26292" title="Miloš Crnjanski" label="Miloš Crnjanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q713533" start="26355" end="26368" title="Mihailo Lalić" label="Mihailo Lalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q369612" start="26373" end="26386" title="Dobrica Ćosić" label="Dobrica Ćosić"/>
<link wikidata="Q47561" start="26436" end="26446" title="Ivo Andrić" label="Ivo Andrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q315677" start="26451" end="26465" title="Meša Selimović" label="Meša Selimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="26559" end="26584" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q310562" start="26594" end="26604" title="Danilo Kiš" label="Danilo Kiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660193" start="26666" end="26693" title="A Tomb for Boris Davidovich" label="A Tomb for Boris Davidovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q157204" start="26776" end="26789" title="Milorad Pavić (writer)" label="Milorad Pavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995458" start="26863" end="26888" title="Dictionary of the Khazars" label="Dictionary of the Khazars"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="27050" end="27063" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q722555" start="27160" end="27173" title="Charles Simic" label="Charles Simic"/>
<link wikidata="Q981258" start="27230" end="27257" title="United States Poet Laureate" label="United States Poet Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117891" start="27264" end="27285" title="Pulitzer Prize for Poetry" label="Pulitzer Prize winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285689" start="27307" end="27321" title="Zoran Živković (writer)" label="Zoran Živković"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="27382" end="27384" title="Science fiction" label="SF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261777" start="27786" end="27802" title="Serbian American" label="Serbian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q9036" start="27838" end="27850" title="Nikola Tesla" label="Nikola Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q430728" start="28149" end="28165" title="Apollo (spacecraft)" label="Apollo spaceship"/>
<link wikidata="Q196287" start="28198" end="28211" title="Mihajlo Pupin" label="Mihajlo Pupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q89054" start="28322" end="28340" title="Milutin Milanković" label="Milutin Milanković"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="28383" end="28397" title="climate change (general concept)" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q211446" start="28484" end="28503" title="Milankovitch cycles" label="Milankovitch cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q54394" start="28505" end="28529" title="Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic" label="Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061415" start="28614" end="28635" title="regenerative medicine" label="regenerative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="28637" end="28646" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932828" start="28779" end="28795" title="Mihailo Petrović" label="Mihailo Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q691012" start="28797" end="28811" title="Jovan Karamata" label="Jovan Karamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288394" start="28816" end="28827" title="Đuro Kurepa" label="Đuro Kurepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q310757" start="29009" end="29031" title="Roger Joseph Boscovich" label="Roger Joseph Boscovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q210553" start="29221" end="29234" title="atomic theory" label="atomic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="29266" end="29275" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115507" start="29300" end="29321" title="Atmosphere of the Moon" label="absence of atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="29329" end="29333" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q463896" start="29335" end="29347" title="Jovan Cvijić" label="Jovan Cvijić"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="29436" end="29452" title="Balkan Peninsula" label="Balkan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633232" start="29454" end="29466" title="Dinaric race" label="Dinaric race"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="29471" end="29476" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q543250" start="29478" end="29490" title="Josif Pančić" label="Josif Pančić"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="29513" end="29519" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q147824" start="29580" end="29594" title="Serbian spruce" label="Serbian spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12752112" start="29623" end="29632" title="Ivan Đaja" label="Ivan Đaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="29671" end="29685" title="adrenal glands" label="adrenal glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="29689" end="29705" title="thermoregulation" label="thermoregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="29737" end="29748" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887827" start="29750" end="29766" title="Valtazar Bogišić" label="Valtazar Bogišić"/>
<link wikidata="Q847034" start="29804" end="29820" title="sociology of law" label="sociology of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q157692" start="29963" end="29975" title="Slavic names" label="Slavic roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q831629" start="29983" end="29986" title="Vuk (name)" label="Vuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688508" start="29988" end="29993" title="Bojan" label="Bojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537844" start="29995" end="30000" title="Goran (Slavic name)" label="Goran"/>
<link wikidata="Q220484" start="30002" end="30007" title="Zoran" label="Zoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q19826115" start="30009" end="30015" title="Dragan" label="Dragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076681" start="30017" end="30022" title="Milan (given name)" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948510" start="30024" end="30032" title="Miroslav (given name)" label="Miroslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253934" start="30034" end="30042" title="Vladimir (name)" label="Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294349" start="30044" end="30052" title="Slobodan" label="Slobodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q168280" start="30054" end="30059" title="Dušan" label="Dušan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659032" start="30061" end="30067" title="Milica" label="Milica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12756083" start="30069" end="30075" title="Nevena" label="Nevena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520457" start="30077" end="30082" title="Vesna (name)" label="Vesna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567080" start="30084" end="30091" title="Radmila" label="Radmila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="30112" end="30121" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="30151" end="30156" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="30158" end="30164" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="30174" end="30179" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335404" start="30190" end="30195" title="Lazar (name)" label="Lazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20000710" start="30197" end="30204" title="Mihailo" label="Mihailo"/>
<link wikidata="Q830350" start="30206" end="30210" title="Ivan (name)" label="Ivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561187" start="30212" end="30217" title="Jovan (given name)" label="Jovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106203588" start="30219" end="30224" title="Ilija (given name)" label="Ilija"/>
<link wikidata="Q18603722" start="30226" end="30232" title="Marija" label="Marija"/>
<link wikidata="Q482671" start="30234" end="30237" title="Ana (given name)" label="Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q831245" start="30239" end="30244" title="Ivana" label="Ivana"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="30300" end="30305" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927128" start="30320" end="30326" title="Stefan (given name)" label="Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501913" start="30328" end="30334" title="Nikola" label="Nikola"/>
<link wikidata="Q923" start="30336" end="30346" title="Aleksandar" label="Aleksandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q998338" start="30348" end="30353" title="Filip" label="Filip"/>
<link wikidata="Q342004" start="30355" end="30360" title="Đorđe" label="Đorđe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19688258" start="30362" end="30368" title="Andrej" label="Andrej"/>
<link wikidata="Q99768021" start="30370" end="30376" title="Jelena (disambiguation)" label="Jelena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16277703" start="30378" end="30386" title="Katarina (given name)" label="Katarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582383" start="30388" end="30396" title="Vasilije" label="Vasilije"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812827" start="30398" end="30403" title="Todor" label="Todor"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="30420" end="30425" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17520952" start="30442" end="30447" title="Marko (given name)" label="Marko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857102" start="30449" end="30457" title="Antonije" label="Antonije"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633287" start="30459" end="30464" title="Srđan" label="Srđan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120708" start="30466" end="30472" title="Marina (given name)" label="Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q349171" start="30474" end="30479" title="Petar" label="Petar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064754" start="30481" end="30486" title="Pavle" label="Pavle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296301" start="30488" end="30496" title="Natalia (given name)" label="Natalija"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214577" start="30498" end="30502" title="Igor (given name)" label="Igor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24574365" start="30698" end="30701" title="-ić" label="-ić"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="30727" end="30737" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q110874" start="30772" end="30783" title="Patronymic" label="patronymics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21506911" start="30802" end="30810" title="Petrović" label="Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="31362" end="31377" title="genitive case" label="possessive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q21491434" start="31652" end="31661" title="Jovanović" label="Jovanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q21506911" start="31663" end="31671" title="Petrović" label="Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q21492666" start="31673" end="31680" title="Nikolić" label="Nikolić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12795954" start="31682" end="31690" title="Marković" label="Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q342090" start="31692" end="31700" title="Đorđević" label="Đorđević"/>
<link wikidata="Q21475376" start="31702" end="31712" title="Stojanović" label="Stojanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q21508774" start="31714" end="31718" title="Ilić" label="Ilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488938" start="31720" end="31729" title="Stanković" label="Stanković"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064858" start="31731" end="31739" title="Pavlović" label="Pavlović"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="31744" end="31753" title="Milošević" label="Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="31796" end="31815" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q191903" start="31821" end="31832" title="autocephaly" label="autocephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="31840" end="31863" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623761" start="31929" end="31941" title="Serbian Patriarchate of Peć" label="Patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278525" start="31968" end="31985" title="List of heads of the Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570230" start="32050" end="32070" title="List of eparchies of the Serbian Orthodox Church" label="thirty-one eparchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="32217" end="32239" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="32244" end="32251" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="32288" end="32303" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="32593" end="32613" title="Great Schism of 1054" label="Great Schism of 1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q971449" start="32677" end="32699" title="Mihailo I of Duklja" label="Mihailo Vojislavljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q298612" start="32704" end="32718" title="Stefan Nemanja" label="Stefan Nemanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="32779" end="32791" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q24445" start="32820" end="32837" title="Stefan the First-Crowned" label="Stefan Nemanja II"/>
<link wikidata="Q160182" start="32853" end="32870" title="Pope Honorius III" label="Pope Honorius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="33092" end="33106" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="33132" end="33137" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735662" start="33190" end="33196" title="Ottoman Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207468" start="33359" end="33371" title="Bay of Kotor" label="Bay of Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="33376" end="33384" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934055" start="33391" end="33426" title="Serb-Catholic movement in Dubrovnik" label="Serb-Catholic movement in Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771204" start="33506" end="33517" title="Marko Murat" label="Marko Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q163832" start="33783" end="33797" title="flag of Serbia" label="flag of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199860" start="33806" end="33828" title="coat of arms of Serbia" label="coat of arms of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919464" start="33868" end="33877" title="tricolour (flag)" label="tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="33889" end="33900" title="Pan-Slavism" label="Pan-Slavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="34010" end="34026" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444807" start="34073" end="34097" title="Flag of Serbs of Croatia" label="Flag of Serbs of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452903" start="34141" end="34154" title="Serbian eagle" label="Serbian eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345056" start="34159" end="34172" title="Serbian cross" label="Serbian cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235753" start="34409" end="34428" title="Three-finger salute (Serbian)" label="Three-finger salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="34546" end="34563" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241457" start="34883" end="34889" title="opanak" label="opanci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452918" start="34945" end="34967" title="Serbian national costume" label="folk costume of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q261430" start="34979" end="34987" title="Šumadija" label="Šumadija"/>
<link wikidata="Q390942" start="35054" end="35061" title="Šajkača" label="Šajkača"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080806" start="35147" end="35159" title="circle dance" label="circle dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076115" start="35174" end="35178" title="kolo (dance)" label="kolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864345" start="35186" end="35205" title="Zmijanje embroidery" label="Zmijanje embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626503" start="35308" end="35315" title="Manjača" label="Manjača"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="35345" end="35419" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192384" start="35421" end="35433" title="Pirot carpet" label="Pirot carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q309343" start="35500" end="35505" title="Pirot" label="Pirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474942" start="35545" end="35550" title="Slava (tradition)" label="Slava"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="35845" end="35854" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252562" start="35867" end="35904" title="Serbian Christmas traditions" label="their own customs regarding Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878771" start="35948" end="35955" title="Badnjak (Serbian)" label="badnjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="35971" end="35974" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="35988" end="35994" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233785" start="36024" end="36045" title="Egg decorating in Slavic culture" label="Slavic Egg decorating"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150299" start="36047" end="36069" title="Čuvari Hristovog groba" label="Čuvari Hristovog groba"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="36135" end="36141" title="Jesus" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="36158" end="36169" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401945" start="36177" end="36199" title="Church of St. Nicholas, Vrlika" label="Church of St. Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="36207" end="36223" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q396545" start="36251" end="36257" title="Vrlika" label="Vrlika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199030" start="36274" end="36289" title="Serbian cuisine" label="Serbian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="36547" end="36556" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="36558" end="36564" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43022" start="36888" end="36914" title="Turkish coffee" label="Domestic or turkish coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q945218" start="37142" end="37156" title="bread and salt" label="bread and salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q428392" start="37183" end="37189" title="slatko" label="slatko"/>
<link wikidata="Q478654" start="37285" end="37291" title="kajmak" label="kajmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373885" start="37326" end="37339" title="clotted cream" label="clotted cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248936" start="37348" end="37353" title="proja" label="proja"/>
<link wikidata="Q15635457" start="37379" end="37386" title="kačamak" label="kačamak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522820" start="37426" end="37434" title="gibanica" label="gibanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q945096" start="37466" end="37475" title="Ćevapčići" label="Ćevapčići"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391582" start="37544" end="37557" title="national dish" label="national dish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37570" end="37580" title="Slivovitz#Serbia, Bosnia, Croatia and Slovenia" label="Šljivovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="37667" end="37671" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q96755250" start="37938" end="37946" title="aperitif" label="aperitif"/>
<link wikidata="Q931946" start="38089" end="38095" title="rakija" label="rakija"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="38255" end="38271" title="Serbian Orthodox" label="Serbian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q261430" start="38451" end="38459" title="Šumadija" label="Šumadija"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="38913" end="38922" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q371615" start="38931" end="38947" title="Momčilo Tapavica" label="Momčilo Tapavica"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="38962" end="38966" title="Slavs" label="Slav"/>
<link wikidata="Q636830" start="38986" end="38999" title="Olympic medal" label="Olympic medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080" start="39008" end="39028" title="1896 Summer Olympics" label="1896 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q297357" start="39127" end="39140" title="Dragan Džajić" label="Dragan Džajić"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="39260" end="39276" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q470683" start="39291" end="39302" title="Rajko Mitić" label="Rajko Mitić"/>
<link wikidata="Q470366" start="39304" end="39323" title="Dragoslav Šekularac" label="Dragoslav Šekularac"/>
<link wikidata="Q257548" start="39349" end="39365" title="Dragan Stojković" label="Dragan Stojković"/>
<link wikidata="Q192640" start="39367" end="39382" title="Dejan Stanković" label="Dejan Stanković"/>
<link wikidata="Q163564" start="39384" end="39397" title="Nemanja Vidić" label="Nemanja Vidić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188692" start="39408" end="39443" title="Premier League Player of the Season" label="Premier League Player of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449063" start="39458" end="39473" title="FIFPro World XI" label="FIFPro World XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q181921" start="39476" end="39494" title="Branislav Ivanović" label="Branislav Ivanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q297603" start="39534" end="39547" title="Nemanja Matić" label="Nemanja Matić"/>
<link wikidata="Q349585" start="39549" end="39562" title="Radomir Antić" label="Radomir Antić"/>
<link wikidata="Q182740" start="39621" end="39638" title="Serbia national football team" label="the national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="39640" end="39656" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid C.F."/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="39661" end="39673" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="39825" end="39828" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740530" start="39875" end="39887" title="List of NBA All-Stars" label="NBA All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q277780" start="39888" end="39923" title="Peja Stojaković" label="Predrag &amp;quot;Peja&amp;quot; Stojaković"/>
<link wikidata="Q586458" start="39958" end="39962" title="FIBA Hall of Fame" label="FIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="39967" end="39983" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="NBA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q94846" start="39993" end="40004" title="Vlade Divac" label="Vlade Divac"/>
<link wikidata="Q17281073" start="40026" end="40038" title="Nikola Jokić" label="Nikola Jokić"/>
<link wikidata="Q96083208" start="40044" end="40051" title="2020–21 NBA season" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q106495853" start="40052" end="40056" title="2021–22 NBA season" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q222047" start="40057" end="40087" title="NBA Most Valuable Player Award" label="NBA Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q739499" start="40104" end="40118" title="NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award" label="NBA finals MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q928526" start="40254" end="40270" title="Dragan Kićanović" label="Dragan Kićanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q470639" start="40272" end="40288" title="Dražen Dalipagić" label="Dražen Dalipagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q613234" start="40290" end="40303" title="Radivoj Korać" label="Radivoj Korać"/>
<link wikidata="Q965738" start="40309" end="40322" title="Zoran Slavnić" label="Zoran Slavnić"/>
<link wikidata="Q313622" start="40357" end="40371" title="Dejan Bodiroga" label="Dejan Bodiroga"/>
<link wikidata="Q380033" start="40410" end="40429" title="Aleksandar Đorđević" label="Aleksandar Đorđević"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735547" start="40445" end="40455" title="Mr. Europa" label="Mr. Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q314430" start="40458" end="40472" title="Miloš Teodosić" label="Miloš Teodosić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734778" start="40482" end="40496" title="Euroleague MVP" label="Euroleague MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q512310" start="40499" end="40514" title="Nemanja Bjelica" label="Nemanja Bjelica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13641280" start="40545" end="40559" title="Vasilije Micić" label="Vasilije Micić"/>
<link wikidata="Q393705" start="40702" end="40718" title="Željko Obradović" label="Željko Obradović"/>
<link wikidata="Q629248" start="40754" end="40771" title="Božidar Maljković" label="Božidar Maljković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282797" start="40798" end="40816" title="Aleksandar Nikolić" label="Aleksandar Nikolić"/>
<link wikidata="Q372500" start="40844" end="40857" title="Dušan Ivković" label="Dušan Ivković"/>
<link wikidata="Q186156" start="40887" end="40902" title="Svetislav Pešić" label="Svetislav Pešić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="40986" end="41000" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426439" start="41035" end="41071" title="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions" label="Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q30758" start="41260" end="41272" title="Ana Ivanovic" label="Ana Ivanovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q277655" start="41286" end="41302" title="2008 French Open" label="2008 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q15269" start="41308" end="41323" title="Jelena Janković" label="Jelena Janković"/>
<link wikidata="Q10272773" start="41359" end="41362" title="WTA rankings" label="WTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q310419" start="41379" end="41393" title="Nenad Zimonjić" label="Nenad Zimonjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q429301" start="41398" end="41418" title="Slobodan Živojinović" label="Slobodan Živojinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190943" start="41458" end="41476" title="Serbia men&amp;#x27;s national water polo team" label="water polo players"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732575" start="41481" end="41501" title="Vladimir Vujasinović" label="Vladimir Vujasinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q960994" start="41503" end="41519" title="Aleksandar Šapić" label="Aleksandar Šapić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292388" start="41521" end="41535" title="Vanja Udovičić" label="Vanja Udovičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287637" start="41537" end="41555" title="Andrija Prlainović" label="Andrija Prlainović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274732" start="41560" end="41575" title="Filip Filipović (water polo)" label="Filip Filipović"/>
<link wikidata="Q298271" start="41674" end="41687" title="Milorad Čavić" label="Milorad Čavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q715898" start="41707" end="41719" title="Nikola Grbić" label="Nikola Grbić"/>
<link wikidata="Q452714" start="41737" end="41751" title="Svetlana Kitić" label="Svetlana Kitić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675662" start="41765" end="41779" title="Ivana Španović" label="Ivana Španović"/>
<link wikidata="Q261602" start="41789" end="41802" title="Jasna Šekarić" label="Jasna Šekarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141850" start="41804" end="41817" title="Canoe sprint" label="sprint canoer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771264" start="41818" end="41833" title="Marko Tomićević" label="Marko Tomićević"/>
<link wikidata="Q38275373" start="41842" end="41856" title="Nemanja Majdov" label="Nemanja Majdov"/>
<link wikidata="Q263914" start="41874" end="41887" title="Milica Mandić" label="Milica Mandić"/>
<link wikidata="Q298542" start="41980" end="41993" title="Daniel Nestor" label="Daniel Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q283958" start="41995" end="42007" title="Jelena Dokic" label="Jelena Dokic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312343" start="42009" end="42021" title="Milos Raonic" label="Milos Raonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q242959" start="42026" end="42045" title="Kristina Mladenovic" label="Kristina Mladenovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="42047" end="42050" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q722592" start="42058" end="42069" title="Milan Lucic" label="Milan Lucic"/>
<link wikidata="Q316183" start="42103" end="42116" title="Pete Maravich" label="Pete Maravich"/>
<link wikidata="Q659886" start="42118" end="42132" title="Nikola Vučević" label="Nikola Vučević"/>
<link wikidata="Q369532" start="42134" end="42146" title="Goran Dragić" label="Goran Dragić"/>
<link wikidata="Q19844712" start="42148" end="42159" title="Luka Dončić" label="Luka Dončić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681205" start="42170" end="42182" title="Jim Trifunov" label="Jim Trifunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q242766" start="42198" end="42217" title="Natasa Dusev-Janics" label="Natasa Dusev-Janics"/>
<link wikidata="Q443750" start="42233" end="42251" title="Miodrag Belodedici" label="Miodrag Belodedici"/>
<link wikidata="Q265971" start="42270" end="42288" title="Lavinia Miloșovici" label="Lavinia Miloșovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="42290" end="42301" title="racquetball" label="racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321377" start="42309" end="42323" title="Rhonda Rajsich" label="Rhonda Rajsich"/>
<link wikidata="Q171619" start="42342" end="42355" title="Bill Vukovich" label="Bill Vukovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593682" start="42393" end="42406" title="List of Serbs" label="List of Serbs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59517" wikidata="Q14949103" url="?curid=59517" title="European Communities Act 1972 (UK)">
<text>The European Communities Act 1972 (c. 68), also known as the ECA 1972, was an act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom which made legal provision for the accession of the United Kingdom as a member state to the three European Communities (EC) the European Economic Community (EEC, the &#x27;Common Market&#x27;), European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), and the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC, which became defunct in 2002); the EEC and ECSC subsequently became the European Union. 

The Act also incorporated Community Law (later European Union Law), along with its , its treaties, regulations, directives, decisions, the Community Customs Union (later European Union Customs Union), the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), the Common Fisheries Policy (FCP) together with judgments of the European Court of Justice into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.

The Treaty of Accession was signed by the then Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath and the then President of the European Commission Franco Maria Malfatti in Brussels on 22 January 1972; the UK&#x27;s accession into the Communities was subsequently ratified via the Act to have full legal force from 1 January 1973.

Although not specifically stated within the legislation but due to the principle of Community Law (subsequently European Union Law) having primacy over the domestic national laws of the member states which was first established though the Costa v ENEL European Court of Justice ruling in 1964 as a consequence it also became binding on all legislation passed by the UK Parliament (and also upon the UK&#x27;s devolved administrations—the Northern Ireland Assembly, Scottish Parliament and the Welsh Parliament (Senedd Cymru) although none of these institutions existed at the time of the passing of the Act). It was the most significant constitutional statute to be passed by the Heath government of 1970–1974, and one of the most significant UK constitutional statutes to ever be passed by the UK Parliament.

The Act was at the time of its repeal significantly amended from its original form, incorporating the changes wrought by the Single European Act, the Maastricht Treaty, the Amsterdam Treaty, the Nice Treaty, and the Lisbon Treaty.

On 13 July 2017, the then Brexit Secretary, David Davis, introduced what became the European Union (Withdrawal) Act to Parliament, which made provision for repealing the 1972 Act on &quot;exit day&quot;, which was when enacted defined as 29 March 2019 at 11 p.m.(London time, GMT), but later postponed by EU decision first to either 22 May 2019 or 12 April 2019, later to 31 October 2019, and then again to 31 January 2020.

The Act was repealed on 31 January 2020 by the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018, although its effect was &#x27;saved&#x27; under the provisions of the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020. This provision was in effect from 31 January 2020 (when the United Kingdom formally left the European Union) until the end of the Brexit implementation period on 31 December 2020, when the &quot;saving&quot; provisions were automatically repealed.

The repeal of these last remaining provisions ended the automatic incorporation into UK law of all future EU laws (with all previous EU laws being retained and transferred into UK law under the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018), and most future judgments of the ECJ as well as the regulations of the European Union Customs Union, the European Single Market, the Common Agricultural Policy and the Common Fisheries Policy, after 48 years on the statute book (with the exception to Northern Ireland under the terms of the Northern Ireland protocol), bringing to an end decades of political debate and discussions about the constitutional significance of the Act and its effect on the principle of Parliamentary sovereignty.

==Origin and background==

When the European Communities (EC) came into being in 1958, the UK chose to remain aloof and instead join the alternative bloc, EFTA. Almost immediately the British government regretted its decision, and in 1961, along with Denmark, Ireland and Norway, the UK applied to join the three Communities. However, President Charles de Gaulle saw British membership as a Trojan Horse for US influence, and vetoed it; all four applications were suspended. The four countries resubmitted their applications in 1967, and the French veto was lifted upon Georges Pompidou succeeding de Gaulle in 1969. In 1970, accession negotiations took place between the UK Government, led by Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath, the European Communities and various European leaders. Despite disagreements over the CAP and the UK&#x27;s relationship with the Commonwealth, terms were agreed. In October 1971, after a lengthy six day Commons debate on a white paper motion on the principle of accession, MPs voted 356–244 in favour of joining the EC.

For the Treaty to take effect upon entry into the Communities on 1 January 1973, and for the UK to embrace the EEC Institutions and Community law, an Act of Parliament was required. Only three days after the signing of the Treaty, a European Communities Bill of just 12 clauses, was presented to the House of Commons by Geoffrey Rippon. The European Communities Act came into being, and Edward Heath signed the Treaty of Accession in Brussels on 22 January 1972. Denmark and Ireland also joined the Communities on the same day, 1 January 1973, as the UK; the Norwegian people had rejected membership in a referendum in 1972.

===First Reading (House of Commons)===
The European Communities Bill was introduced the House of Commons for its first reading by Geoffrey Rippon, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster on 26 January 1972.

===Second Reading (House of Commons)===
On 17 February 1972, the House of Commons voted narrowly by 309–301 in favour of the Bill at its second reading, after three days of intense debate. The Bill then passed on to Committee Stage before its third reading.

===Third Reading (House of Commons)===
During this discussion in the House of Commons, MPs pointed out that the Government had structured the European Communities Bill so that Parliament could debate the technical issues about how the treaty enactment would occur (how the UK would join the European Communities) but could not debate the treaty of accession itself and decried this sacrifice of Parliament&#x27;s sovereignty to the Government&#x27;s desire to join the European project.

On 13 July 1972, the House of Commons voted 301–284 in favour of the Bill in its third and final reading before passing on to the House of Lords. The Bill then passed to the House of Lords.

===Royal assent, Ratification, and Taking Effect===
The Act received Royal Assent on 17 October, and the UK&#x27;s instrument of ratification of the Treaty of Accession was deposited the next day with the Italian government (the traditional European Communities treaty records holder) as required by the Treaty. Since the Treaty specified its effective date as 1 January 1973 (in Article 2) and the Act specified only &quot;entry date&quot; for its actions, the Act and the Treaty took effect 1 January 1973, when the United Kingdom officially became a member state of the European Communities (subsequently the European Union) along with Denmark and Ireland.

==The Act==

The European Communities Act was the instrument whereby the UK Parliament effected the changes required by the Treaty of Accession by which the UK joined the European Union (then known as the European Communities). The Act as passed in its original form was, given its constitutional significance, surprisingly short and contained just twelve clauses.

===Community Law (EU Law)===
The Act made the historic legal provision by incorporating and binding Community Law (subsequently European Union Law) and rulings from the European Court of Justice into the domestic law of the United Kingdom along with its and its regulations and directives. In effect this legislation made &quot;Community Law (EU Law) &quot; another form of UK Law. The provisions for this was laid out in Section 2 of the Act.

It enabled, under section 2(2), UK government ministers to make regulations to transpose EU Directives (then Community law) and rulings of the European Court of Justice into UK law. The Treaty itself says the member states will conform themselves to the European Communities existing and future decisions. The Act and the Treaty of Accession have been interpreted by UK courts as granting EU law primacy over domestic UK legislation.

===European Economic Community (EEC)===

The Act legislated for the United Kingdom&#x27;s accession to the European Economic Community (EEC), which was at the time the main international organisation of the three Communities (more commonly known at the time as the Common Market) and incorporated its rules and regulations into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.

===European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC)===

The Act legislated for the United Kingdom&#x27;s accession to the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and incorporated its rules and regulations into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.

===European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC or Euratom) ===

The Act legislated for the United Kingdom&#x27;s accession to the European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC or Euratom) and incorporated its rules and regulations into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.

===The European Treaties===
The Act incorporated the following treaties into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.

*Treaty of Paris (1951)
*Treaty of Rome
*Euratom Treaty
*Merger Treaty
*Budgetary Treaty of 1970
*Treaty of Accession 1972

The following treaties were added to the act though subsequent amendments.

*Treaty of Accession 1979 (through the European Communities (Greek Accession) Act 1979)
*Treaty of Accession 1985 (through the European Communities (Spanish and Portuguese Accession) Act 1985)
*Single European Act (through the European Communities (Amendment) Act 1986)
*EEA Agreement (through the European Economic Area Act 1993)
*Maastricht Treaty (through the European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993)
*Treaty of Accession 1994 (through the European Union (Accessions) Act 1994)
*Amsterdam Treaty (through the European Communities (Amendment) Act 1998)
*Treaty of Nice (through the European Communities (Amendment) Act 2002)
*Treaty of Accession 2003 (through the European Union (Accessions) Act 2003)
*Treaty of Accession 2005 (through the European Union (Accessions) Act 2006)
*Treaty of Lisbon (through the European Union (Amendment) Act 2008)
*Treaty of Accession 2011 (through the European Union (Croatian Accession and Irish Protocol) Act 2013)

===Common Agricultural Policy===
The Act legislated for the full participation of the United Kingdom in the Common Agricultural Policy and fully incorporated the policy into UK domestic law. It established the Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce. It repealed previous pieces of UK domestic legislation to allow for this.

===Common Fisheries Policy===
The Act legislated for the full participation of the United Kingdom in the Common Fisheries Policy and fully incorporates the policy into UK domestic law.

===Customs Union===

The Act legislated for the incorporation and full participation of the United Kingdom within the European Union Customs Union (then the Community Customs Union) into domestic law, as well as the application of the European common external tariff to all goods which come into the UK from outside the European Communities. The Act repealed large sections of previous UK domestic legislation to allow for this.

== Effect and primacy of EC/EU law==
The primacy and direct effect of EU law has no formal basis in the founding treaties of the union, but was developed by the European Court of Justice (ECJ), long before UK accession, on the grounds that the purpose of the treaties would be thwarted if EU law were subordinate to national law. The view of the ECJ is that any norm of EU law takes precedence over national law, including national constitutions. Most national courts, including the United Kingdom&#x27;s, do not accept this monist perspective. The primacy of EU law in the United Kingdom during the time of its membership was derived from the European Communities Act in Section 2 (4).

The British constitution is based on Parliamentary sovereignty and has a dualist view of international law: international treaties do not become part of UK domestic law unless they are incorporated into UK law by an Act of Parliament. This means that if the Act were repealed, any EU law (unless it has been transposed into British legislation) would, in practice, become unenforceable in the United Kingdom and Gibraltar, and the powers delegated by the Act to the EU institutions would return to the Parliament of the United Kingdom. This was attempted to made clear to be the law in the United Kingdom by the Conservative–Liberal Democrat Coalition with the inclusion of the &quot;sovereignty clause&quot; in the EU Act 2011 which was passed by the UK Parliament when the UK was still an EU member state.

===&quot;Factortame&quot;===

In the House of Lords &quot;Factortame&quot; case, Lord Bridge confirmed that section 2(4) of the ECA effectively automatically inserts a virtual (implied) clause into all UK statutes, that they are to be automatically disapplied wherever they come into conflict with European law. This is seen by the legal scholar William Wade as a departure from the English constitutional doctrine of Westminster parliamentary sovereignty as it was and had been traditionally understood.

==Repeal==

The United Kingdom voted for withdrawal from the European Union in the referendum held on 23 June 2016, and afterwards there was speculation that the act would be either repealed or amended. In October 2016, Prime Minister Theresa May promised a &quot;Great Repeal Bill&quot; which would repeal the 1972 Act and import its regulations into UK law, with effect from the date of British withdrawal; the regulations could then be amended or repealed on a case-by-case basis.

The European Union (Withdrawal) Bill was introduced in the House of Commons on 13 July 2017. It was passed by Parliament on 20 June 2018, and received royal assent on 26 June 2018. The European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 provides for the repeal of the European Communities Act 1972 at the time the United Kingdom exits the EU, on 29 March 2019 at 11:00 pm. However, in a July 2018 white paper, the government announced its intention to amend the Withdrawal Act to provide for the continued effect of the ECA until the end of the &quot;transition period&quot; (31 December 2020, as of July 2018), therefore allowing EU law to continue to apply in that period. This was achieved when the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020 was passed in January 2020 which &quot;saved&quot; the effect of the ECA until the end of the implementation period which was scheduled for 31 December 2020 before it was automatically repealed.

==See also==
* Commonwealth of Nations
*Treaty of Accession 1972
*Immigration Act 1971
*European Communities Act 1972 (Ireland)
*European Communities (Amendment) Act 1986
*European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993
*European Union (Amendment) Act 2008
*European Communities Act 1972 (Repeal) Bills
*1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum
*European Union Referendum Act 2015
*2015–2016 United Kingdom renegotiation of European Union membership
*2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum
*&quot;R (Miller) v Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union&quot;
*European Union (Notification of Withdrawal) Act 2017
*Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to the European Communities and the European Union

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Image of the Act on the UK Parliament website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14949103" start="4" end="33" title="European Communities Act 1972 (UK)" label="European Communities Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949103" start="61" end="69" title="European Communities Act 1972 (UK)" label="ECA 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677783" start="78" end="81" title="Act of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="89" end="121" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824370" start="157" end="188" title="Accession of the United Kingdom to the European Communities" label="accession of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="194" end="206" title="Member state of the European Union" label="member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="220" end="240" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="250" end="277" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="316" end="348" title="European Atomic Energy Community" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="368" end="401" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="481" end="495" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="525" end="538" title="Community Law" label="Community Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122" start="588" end="596" title="Treaties of the European Union" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="598" end="608" title="Regulation (European Union)" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="611" end="620" title="Directive (European Union)" label="directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q732833" start="623" end="631" title="Decision (European Union)" label="decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="638" end="661" title="European Union Customs Union" label="Community Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="704" end="736" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="Common Agricultural Policy (CAP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q391962" start="742" end="771" title="Common Fisheries Policy" label="Common Fisheries Policy (FCP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="803" end="828" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="838" end="872" title="Law of the United Kingdom" label="domestic law of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991237" start="879" end="898" title="Treaty of Accession 1972" label="Treaty of Accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="922" end="934" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="935" end="949" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="950" end="962" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q8882" start="976" end="1012" title="President of the European Commission" label="President of the European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q469478" start="1013" end="1034" title="Franco Maria Malfatti" label="Franco Maria Malfatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1038" end="1046" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114811" start="1336" end="1343" title="Primacy of European Union law" label="primacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136320" start="1436" end="1448" title="Costa v ENEL" label="Costa v ENEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="1449" end="1474" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1563" end="1576" title="UK Parliament" label="UK Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="1635" end="1660" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="1662" end="1681" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="1690" end="1721" title="Senedd" label="Welsh Parliament (Senedd Cymru)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693589" start="1877" end="1906" title="Heath ministry" label="Heath government of 1970–1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q622649" start="2133" end="2152" title="Single European Act" label="Single European Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="2158" end="2175" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="2181" end="2197" title="Amsterdam Treaty" label="Amsterdam Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q208688" start="2203" end="2214" title="Nice Treaty" label="Nice Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="2224" end="2237" title="Lisbon Treaty" label="Lisbon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25860233" start="2266" end="2282" title="Brexit Secretary" label="Brexit Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q300023" start="2284" end="2295" title="David Davis (British politician)" label="David Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582790" start="2324" end="2355" title="European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018" label="European Union (Withdrawal) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582790" start="2712" end="2748" title="European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018" label="European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741058" start="2820" end="2866" title="European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020" label="European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476704" start="2998" end="3026" title="Brexit implementation period" label="Brexit implementation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="3202" end="3208" title="UK law" label="UK law"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="3223" end="3230" title="EU laws" label="EU laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582790" start="3311" end="3347" title="European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018" label="European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="3383" end="3386" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="ECJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474751" start="3641" end="3666" title="Northern Ireland protocol" label="Northern Ireland protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139084" start="3816" end="3841" title="Parliamentary sovereignty in the United Kingdom" label="Parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="3880" end="3900" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="3999" end="4003" title="EFTA" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="4189" end="4206" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50193" start="4235" end="4247" title="Trojan Horse" label="Trojan Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="4414" end="4430" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="4516" end="4529" title="UK Government" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4538" end="4550" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="4551" end="4565" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="4566" end="4578" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="4584" end="4604" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="4666" end="4669" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="CAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="4710" end="4722" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="4784" end="4791" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="5034" end="5047" title="Law of the European Union" label="Community law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534874" start="5222" end="5237" title="Geoffrey Rippon" label="Geoffrey Rippon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991237" start="5313" end="5332" title="Treaty of Accession 1972" label="Treaty of Accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="5336" end="5344" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5390" end="5412" title="Enlargement of the European Union#First enlargement" label="joined the Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001342" start="5482" end="5501" title="Norway–European Union relations" label="rejected membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780683" start="5507" end="5525" title="1972 Norwegian European Communities membership referendum" label="referendum in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534874" start="5658" end="5673" title="Geoffrey Rippon" label="Geoffrey Rippon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="5675" end="5711" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="6654" end="6668" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991237" start="6820" end="6839" title="Treaty of Accession 1972" label="Treaty of Accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7189" end="7203" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7283" end="7297" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="7310" end="7317" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="7322" end="7329" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7503" end="7517" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="7537" end="7557" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="7826" end="7844" title="European Union Law" label="European Union Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="7867" end="7892" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="7902" end="7936" title="Law of the United Kingdom" label="domestic law of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="7960" end="7970" title="Regulation (European Union)" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="7976" end="7985" title="Directive (European Union)" label="directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="8072" end="8078" title="UK Law" label="UK Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538001" start="8222" end="8231" title="Transposition (law)" label="transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="8232" end="8245" title="EU Directives" label="EU Directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q724496" start="9575" end="9597" title="Treaty of Paris (1951)" label="Treaty of Paris (1951)"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="9599" end="9613" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411078" start="9615" end="9629" title="Euratom Treaty" label="Euratom Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q622766" start="9631" end="9644" title="Merger Treaty" label="Merger Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985043" start="9646" end="9670" title="Budgetary treaties of the European Communities" label="Budgetary Treaty of 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991237" start="9672" end="9696" title="Treaty of Accession 1972" label="Treaty of Accession 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991236" start="9775" end="9799" title="Treaty of Accession 1979" label="Treaty of Accession 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598730" start="9813" end="9860" title="European Communities (Greek Accession) Act 1979" label="European Communities (Greek Accession) Act 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360737" start="9863" end="9887" title="Treaty of Accession 1985" label="Treaty of Accession 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598733" start="9901" end="9965" title="European Communities (Spanish and Portuguese Accession) Act 1985" label="European Communities (Spanish and Portuguese Accession) Act 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q622649" start="9968" end="9987" title="Single European Act" label="Single European Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412413" start="10001" end="10042" title="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1986" label="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="10045" end="10048" title="EEA" label="EEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324055" start="10072" end="10103" title="European Economic Area Act 1993" label="European Economic Area Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="10106" end="10123" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q30667947" start="10137" end="10178" title="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993" label="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363231" start="10181" end="10205" title="Treaty of Accession 1994" label="Treaty of Accession 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q30667987" start="10219" end="10255" title="European Union (Accessions) Act 1994" label="European Union (Accessions) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="10258" end="10274" title="Amsterdam Treaty" label="Amsterdam Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q30667975" start="10288" end="10329" title="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1998" label="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q208688" start="10332" end="10346" title="Treaty of Nice" label="Treaty of Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q30667981" start="10360" end="10401" title="European Communities (Amendment) Act 2002" label="European Communities (Amendment) Act 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q814930" start="10404" end="10428" title="Treaty of Accession 2003" label="Treaty of Accession 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q30667915" start="10442" end="10478" title="European Union (Accessions) Act 2003" label="European Union (Accessions) Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q746993" start="10481" end="10505" title="Treaty of Accession 2005" label="Treaty of Accession 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413319" start="10519" end="10555" title="European Union (Accessions) Act 2006" label="European Union (Accessions) Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="10558" end="10574" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413318" start="10588" end="10623" title="European Union (Amendment) Act 2008" label="European Union (Amendment) Act 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526639" start="10626" end="10650" title="Treaty of Accession 2011" label="Treaty of Accession 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413320" start="10664" end="10727" title="European Union (Croatian Accession and Irish Protocol) Act 2013" label="European Union (Croatian Accession and Irish Protocol) Act 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769764" start="10940" end="10983" title="Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce" label="Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="11364" end="11392" title="European Union Customs Union" label="European Union Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820592" start="11490" end="11512" title="common external tariff" label="common external tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="11837" end="11862" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063122" start="12201" end="12207" title="Monism and dualism in international law" label="monist"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="12368" end="12388" title="British constitution" label="British constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="12401" end="12426" title="Parliamentary sovereignty" label="Parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063122" start="12437" end="12444" title="Monism and dualism in international law" label="dualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="12453" end="12470" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="12580" end="12597" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="12866" end="12898" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163113" start="12976" end="13015" title="Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition agreement" label="Conservative–Liberal Democrat Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13042" end="13091" title="European Union Act 2011#Section 18: The Sovereignty Clause" label="&amp;quot;sovereignty clause&amp;quot; in the EU Act 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058404" start="13210" end="13224" title="Judicial functions of the House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864310" start="13231" end="13241" title="Factortame" label="Factortame"/>
<link wikidata="Q867281" start="13254" end="13265" title="Lord Bridge" label="Lord Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730236" start="13519" end="13531" title="William Wade (legal scholar)" label="William Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="13603" end="13628" title="parliamentary sovereignty" label="parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="13720" end="13754" title="Brexit" label="withdrawal from the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="13762" end="13793" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="referendum held on 23 June 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="13914" end="13925" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="14546" end="14557" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741058" start="14851" end="14897" title="European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020" label="European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="15109" end="15132" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991237" start="15134" end="15158" title="Treaty of Accession 1972" label="Treaty of Accession 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004994" start="15160" end="15180" title="Immigration Act 1971" label="Immigration Act 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412421" start="15182" end="15221" title="European Communities Act 1972 (Ireland)" label="European Communities Act 1972 (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412413" start="15223" end="15264" title="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1986" label="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q30667947" start="15266" end="15307" title="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993" label="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413318" start="15309" end="15344" title="European Union (Amendment) Act 2008" label="European Union (Amendment) Act 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q96418390" start="15346" end="15390" title="European Communities Act 1972 (Repeal) Bills" label="European Communities Act 1972 (Repeal) Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="15392" end="15454" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187635" start="15456" end="15490" title="European Union Referendum Act 2015" label="European Union Referendum Act 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083717" start="15492" end="15559" title="2015–2016 United Kingdom renegotiation of European Union membership" label="2015–2016 United Kingdom renegotiation of European Union membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="15561" end="15617" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225002" start="15625" end="15687" title="R (Miller) v Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union" label="R (Miller) v Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530648" start="15695" end="15747" title="European Union (Notification of Withdrawal) Act 2017" label="European Union (Notification of Withdrawal) Act 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025322" start="15749" end="15849" title="Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to the European Communities and the European Union" label="Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to the European Communities and the European Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59521" wikidata="Q2099981" url="?curid=59521" title="Preadditive category">
<text>In mathematics, specifically in category theory, a preadditive category is 
another name for an Ab-category, i.e., a category that is enriched over the category of abelian groups, Ab.
That is, an Ab-category C is a category such that
every hom-set Hom(&quot;A&quot;,&quot;B&quot;) in C has the structure of an abelian group, and composition of morphisms is bilinear, in the sense that composition of morphisms distributes over the group operation.
In formulas:
formula_1
and
formula_2
where + is the group operation.

Some authors have used the term &quot;additive category&quot; for preadditive categories, but this page reserves that term for certain special preadditive categories (see below).

== Examples ==

The most obvious example of a preadditive category is the category Ab itself. More precisely, Ab is a closed monoidal category. Note that commutativity is crucial here; it ensures that the sum of two group homomorphisms is again a homomorphism. In contrast, the category of all groups is not closed. See Medial category.

Other common examples:
* The category of (left) modules over a ring &quot;R&quot;, in particular:
** the category of vector spaces over a field &quot;K&quot;.
* The algebra of matrices over a ring, thought of as a category as described in the article Additive category.
* Any ring, thought of as a category with only one object, is a preadditive category. Here composition of morphisms is just ring multiplication and the unique hom-set is the underlying abelian group.

These will give you an idea of what to think of; for more examples, follow the links to below.

== Elementary properties ==

Because every hom-set Hom(&quot;A&quot;,&quot;B&quot;) is an abelian group, it has a zero element 0. This is the zero morphism from &quot;A&quot; to &quot;B&quot;. Because composition of morphisms is bilinear, the composition of a zero morphism and any other morphism (on either side) must be another zero morphism. If you think of composition as analogous to multiplication, then this says that multiplication by zero always results in a product of zero, which is a familiar intuition. Extending this analogy, the fact that composition is bilinear in general becomes the distributivity of multiplication over addition.

Focusing on a single object &quot;A&quot; in a preadditive category, these facts say that the endomorphism hom-set Hom(&quot;A&quot;,&quot;A&quot;) is a ring, if we define multiplication in the ring to be composition. This ring is the endomorphism ring of &quot;A&quot;. Conversely, every ring (with identity) is the endomorphism ring of some object in some preadditive category. Indeed, given a ring &quot;R&quot;, we can define a preadditive category R to have a single object &quot;A&quot;, let Hom(&quot;A&quot;,&quot;A&quot;) be &quot;R&quot;, and let composition be ring multiplication. Since &quot;R&quot; is an abelian group and multiplication in a ring is bilinear (distributive), this makes R a preadditive category. Category theorists will often think of the ring &quot;R&quot; and the category R as two different representations of the same thing, so that a particularly perverse category theorist might define a ring as a preadditive category with exactly one object (in the same way that a monoid can be viewed as a category with only one object—and forgetting the additive structure of the ring gives us a monoid).

In this way, preadditive categories can be seen as a generalisation of rings. Many concepts from ring theory, such as ideals, Jacobson radicals, and factor rings can be generalized in a straightforward manner to this setting. When attempting to write down these generalizations, one should think of the morphisms in the preadditive category as the &quot;elements&quot; of the &quot;generalized ring&quot;.

== Additive functors ==

If formula_3 and formula_4 are preadditive categories, then a functor formula_5 is additive if it too is enriched over the category formula_6. That is, formula_7 is additive if and only if, given any objects formula_8 and formula_9 of formula_3, the function formula_11 is a group homomorphism. Most functors studied between preadditive categories are additive.

For a simple example, if the rings formula_12 and formula_13 are represented by the one-object preadditive categories formula_14 and formula_15, then a ring homomorphism from formula_12 to formula_13 is represented by an additive functor from formula_14 to formula_15, and conversely.

If formula_3 and formula_4 are categories and formula_4 is preadditive, then the functor category formula_23 is also preadditive, because natural transformations can be added in a natural way.
If formula_3 is preadditive too, then the category formula_25 of additive functors and all natural transformations between them is also preadditive.

The latter example leads to a generalization of modules over rings: If formula_3 is a preadditive category, then formula_27 is called the module category over formula_3. When formula_3 is the one-object preadditive category corresponding to the ring formula_12, this reduces to the ordinary category of (left) formula_12-modules. Again, virtually all concepts from the theory of modules can be generalised to this setting.

== -linear categories ==

More generally, one can consider a category enriched over the monoidal category of modules over a commutative ring , called an -linear category. In other words, each hom-set formula_32 in has the structure of an -module, and composition of morphisms is -bilinear.

When considering functors between two -linear categories, one often restricts to those that are -linear, so those that induce -linear maps on each hom-set.

== Biproducts ==

Any finite product in a preadditive category must also be a coproduct, and conversely. In fact, finite products and coproducts in preadditive categories can be characterised by the following &quot;biproduct condition&quot;:
:The object &quot;B&quot; is a biproduct of the objects &quot;A&quot;1, ..., &quot;An&quot; if and only if there are &quot;projection morphisms&quot; &quot;p&quot;&quot;j&quot;: &quot;B&quot; → &quot;A&quot;&quot;j&quot; and &quot;injection morphisms&quot; &quot;i&quot;&quot;j&quot;: &quot;A&quot;&quot;j&quot; → &quot;B&quot;, such that (&quot;i&quot;1∘&quot;p&quot;1) + ··· + (&quot;in&quot;∘&quot;pn&quot;) is the identity morphism of &quot;B&quot;, &quot;pj&quot;∘&quot;ij&quot; is the identity morphism of Aj, and &quot;p&quot;&quot;j&quot;∘&quot;ik&quot; is the zero morphism from &quot;A&quot;&quot;k&quot; to &quot;Aj&quot; whenever &quot;j&quot; and &quot;k&quot; are distinct.

This biproduct is often written &quot;A&quot;1 ⊕ ··· ⊕ &quot;An&quot;, borrowing the notation for the direct sum. This is because the biproduct in well known preadditive categories like Ab &quot;is&quot; the direct sum. However, although infinite direct sums make sense in some categories, like Ab, infinite biproducts do &quot;not&quot; make sense (see ).

The biproduct condition in the case &quot;n&quot; = 0 simplifies drastically; &quot;B&quot; is a &quot;nullary biproduct&quot; if and only if the identity morphism of &quot;B&quot; is the zero morphism from &quot;B&quot; to itself, or equivalently if the hom-set Hom(&quot;B&quot;,&quot;B&quot;) is the trivial ring. Note that because a nullary biproduct will be both terminal (a nullary product) and initial (a nullary coproduct), it will in fact be a zero object.
Indeed, the term &quot;zero object&quot; originated in the study of preadditive categories like Ab, where the zero object is the zero group.

A preadditive category in which every biproduct exists (including a zero object) is called &quot;additive&quot;. Further facts about biproducts that are mainly useful in the context of additive categories may be found under that subject.

== Kernels and cokernels ==

Because the hom-sets in a preadditive category have zero morphisms,
the notion of kernel and cokernel
make sense. That is, if &quot;f&quot;: &quot;A&quot; → &quot;B&quot; is a
morphism in a preadditive category, then the kernel of &quot;f&quot; is the
equaliser of &quot;f&quot; and the zero morphism from &quot;A&quot; to &quot;B&quot;, while the cokernel of &quot;f&quot; is the coequaliser of &quot;f&quot; and this zero morphism. Unlike with products and coproducts, the kernel and cokernel of &quot;f&quot; are generally not equal in a preadditive category. 

When specializing to the preadditive categories of abelian groups or modules over a ring, this notion of kernel coincides with the ordinary notion of a kernel of a homomorphism, if one identifies the ordinary kernel &quot;K&quot; of &quot;f&quot;: &quot;A&quot; → &quot;B&quot; with its embedding &quot;K&quot; → &quot;A&quot;. However, in a general preadditive category there may exist morphisms without kernels and/or cokernels.

There is a convenient relationship between the kernel and cokernel and the abelian group structure on the hom-sets. Given parallel morphisms &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot;, the equaliser of &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot; is just the kernel of &quot;g&quot; − &quot;f&quot;, if either exists, and the analogous fact is true for coequalisers. The alternative term &quot;difference kernel&quot; for binary equalisers derives from this fact.

A preadditive category in which all biproducts, kernels, and cokernels exist is called &quot;pre-abelian&quot;. Further facts about kernels and cokernels in preadditive categories that are mainly useful in the context of pre-abelian categories may be found under that subject.

== Special cases ==

Most of these special cases of preadditive categories have all been mentioned above, but they&#x27;re gathered here for reference.
* A &quot;ring&quot; is a preadditive category with exactly one object.
* An &quot;additive category&quot; is a preadditive category with all finite biproducts.
* A &quot;pre-abelian category&quot; is an additive category with all kernels and cokernels.
* An &quot;abelian category&quot; is a pre-abelian category such that every monomorphism and epimorphism is normal.
The preadditive categories most commonly studied are in fact abelian categories; for example, Ab is an abelian category.

== References ==

* Nicolae Popescu; 1973; Abelian Categories with Applications to Rings and Modules; Academic Press, Inc.; out of print
* Charles Weibel; 1994; An introduction to homological algebra; Cambridge Univ. Press</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="32" end="47" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099981" start="51" end="71" title="Preadditive category" label="preadditive category"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099981" start="96" end="107" title="Preadditive category" label="Ab-category"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="117" end="125" title="category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379515" start="134" end="142" title="enriched category" label="enriched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956793" start="152" end="178" title="category of abelian groups" label="category of abelian groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099981" start="180" end="182" title="Preadditive category" label="Ab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099981" start="196" end="207" title="Preadditive category" label="Ab-category"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099981" start="208" end="209" title="Preadditive category" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="215" end="223" title="category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="240" end="247" title="hom-set" label="hom-set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099981" start="284" end="285" title="Preadditive category" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086961" start="357" end="365" title="bilinear operator" label="bilinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135347" start="816" end="840" title="closed monoidal category" label="closed monoidal category"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="852" end="865" title="commutativity" label="commutativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q868169" start="914" end="932" title="group homomorphism" label="group homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="992" end="997" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1018" end="1033" title="Medial category" label="Medial category"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="1084" end="1090" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="1099" end="1103" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051857" start="1141" end="1166" title="category of vector spaces" label="category of vector spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="1174" end="1179" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="1212" end="1220" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681343" start="1287" end="1304" title="Additive category" label="Additive category"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="1717" end="1721" title="0 (number)" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905069" start="1745" end="1758" title="zero morphism" label="zero morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187959" start="2204" end="2218" title="distributivity" label="distributivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340800" start="2347" end="2359" title="endomorphism" label="endomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="2406" end="2410" title="ring (algebra)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896709" start="2488" end="2505" title="endomorphism ring" label="endomorphism ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="2553" end="2561" title="identity element" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084766" start="3136" end="3144" title="abstract nonsense" label="perverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="3222" end="3225" title="1 (number)" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q208237" start="3257" end="3263" title="monoid" label="monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="3502" end="3507" title="ideal (ring)" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677769" start="3510" end="3526" title="Jacobson radical" label="Jacobson radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q619436" start="3533" end="3544" title="factor ring" label="factor ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="3878" end="3885" title="functor" label="functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379515" start="3921" end="3929" title="enriched functor" label="enriched"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="3990" end="4004" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="4066" end="4074" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q868169" start="4091" end="4109" title="group homomorphism" label="group homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194212" start="4331" end="4348" title="ring homomorphism" label="ring homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007878" start="4546" end="4562" title="functor category" label="functor category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442189" start="4603" end="4625" title="natural transformation" label="natural transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="4856" end="4862" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051857" start="5111" end="5136" title="category of modules" label="(left) formula_12-modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="5341" end="5348" title="module (mathematics)" label="modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="5356" end="5372" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="5424" end="5431" title="hom-set" label="hom-set"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="5702" end="5708" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q919107" start="5709" end="5716" title="product (category theory)" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q692689" start="5758" end="5767" title="coproduct" label="coproduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="6014" end="6028" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="6413" end="6430" title="identity morphism" label="identity morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q842346" start="6600" end="6608" title="Distinct (mathematics)" label="distinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582243" start="6713" end="6723" title="direct sum" label="direct sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="6849" end="6857" title="Infinity" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652969" start="7272" end="7284" title="trivial ring" label="trivial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q529752" start="7337" end="7345" title="Terminal object" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q529752" start="7370" end="7377" title="Initial object" label="initial"/>
<link wikidata="Q529752" start="7422" end="7433" title="zero object" label="zero object"/>
<link wikidata="Q568687" start="7564" end="7574" title="trivial group" label="zero group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681343" start="7674" end="7682" title="additive category" label="additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920416" start="7927" end="7933" title="kernel (category theory)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156511" start="7938" end="7946" title="cokernel" label="cokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224487" start="8097" end="8106" title="Equaliser (mathematics)" label="equaliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140810" start="8226" end="8237" title="coequaliser" label="coequaliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q574844" start="8562" end="8568" title="Kernel (algebra)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239192" start="9376" end="9387" title="pre-abelian category" label="pre-abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="9723" end="9727" title="ring (algebra)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681343" start="9796" end="9813" title="additive category" label="additive category"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239192" start="9884" end="9904" title="pre-abelian category" label="pre-abelian category"/>
<link wikidata="Q318737" start="9978" end="9994" title="abelian category" label="abelian category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945067" start="10043" end="10055" title="monomorphism" label="monomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347208" start="10060" end="10071" title="epimorphism" label="epimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173405" start="10075" end="10081" title="normal morphism" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029316" start="10225" end="10240" title="Nicolae Popescu" label="Nicolae Popescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359529" start="10344" end="10358" title="Charles Weibel" label="Charles Weibel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59524" wikidata="Q1329486" url="?curid=59524" title="Next-Generation Secure Computing Base">
<text>The Next-Generation Secure Computing Base (NGSCB; codenamed &quot;Palladium&quot; and also known as Trusted Windows) is a software architecture designed by Microsoft which claimed to provide users of the Windows operating system with better privacy, security, and system integrity. NGSCB was the result of years of research and development within Microsoft to create a secure computing solution that equaled the security of closed platforms such as set-top boxes while simultaneously preserving the backward compatibility, flexibility, and openness of the Windows operating system. Microsoft&#x27;s primary stated objective with NGSCB was to &quot;protect software from software.&quot;

Part of the Trustworthy Computing initiative when unveiled in 2002, NGSCB was to be integrated with Windows Vista, then known as &quot;Longhorn.&quot; NGSCB relied on hardware designed by the Trusted Computing Group to produce a parallel operation environment hosted by a new hypervisor (referred to as a sort of kernel in documentation) called the &quot;Nexus&quot; that existed alongside Windows and provided new applications with features such as hardware-based process isolation, data encryption based on integrity measurements, authentication of a local or remote machine or software configuration, and encrypted paths for user authentication and graphics output. NGSCB would facilitate the creation and distribution of digital rights management (DRM) policies pertaining the use of information.

NGSCB was subject to much controversy during its development, with critics contending that it would impose restrictions on users, enforce vendor lock-in, and undermine fair use rights and open-source software. It was first demonstrated by Microsoft at WinHEC 2003 before undergoing a revision in 2004 that would enable earlier applications to benefit from its functionality. Reports indicated in 2005 that Microsoft would change its plans with NGSCB so that it could ship Windows Vista by its self-imposed deadline year, 2006; instead, Microsoft would ship only part of the architecture, BitLocker, which can optionally use the Trusted Platform Module to validate the integrity of boot and system files prior to operating system startup. Development of NGSCB spanned approximately a decade before its cancellation, the lengthiest development period of a major feature intended for Windows Vista.

NGSCB differed from technologies Microsoft billed as &quot;pillars of Windows Vista&quot;—Windows Presentation Foundation, Windows Communication Foundation, and WinFS—during its development in that it was not built with the .NET Framework and did not focus on managed code software development. NGSCB has yet to fully materialize; however, aspects of it are available in features such as BitLocker of Windows Vista, Measured Boot and UEFI of Windows 8, Certificate Attestation of Windows 8.1, Device Guard of Windows 10. and Device Encryption in Windows 11 Home editions, with TPM 2.0 mandatory for installation.

==History==

===Early development===

Development of NGSCB began in 1997 after Peter Biddle conceived of new ways to protect content on personal computers. Biddle enlisted assistance from members from the Microsoft Research division and other core contributors eventually included Blair Dillaway, Brian LaMacchia, Bryan Willman, Butler Lampson, John DeTreville, John Manferdelli, Marcus Peinado, and Paul England. Adam Barr, a former Microsoft employee who worked to secure the remote boot feature during development of Windows 2000 was approached by Biddle and colleagues during his tenure with an initiative tentatively known as &quot;Trusted Windows,&quot; which aimed to protect DVD content from being copied. To this end, Lampson proposed the use of a hypervisor to execute a limited operating system dedicated to DVD playback alongside Windows 2000. Patents for a DRM operating system were later filed in 1999 by England, DeTreville and Lampson; Lampson noted that these patents were for NGSCB. Biddle and colleagues realized by 1999 that NGSCB was more applicable to privacy and security than content protection, and the project was formally given the green-light by Microsoft in October, 2001.

During WinHEC 1999, Biddle discussed intent to create a &quot;trusted&quot; architecture for Windows to leverage new hardware to promote confidence and security while preserving backward compatibility with previous software. On October 11, 1999, the Trusted Computing Platform Alliance, a consortium of various technology companies including Compaq, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Intel, and Microsoft was formed in an effort to promote personal computing confidence and security. The TCPA released detailed specifications for a trusted computing platform with focus on features such as code validation and encryption based on integrity measurements, hardware-based key storage, and machine authentication; these features required a new hardware component designed by the TCPA called the &quot;Trusted Platform Module&quot; (referred to as a &quot;Security Support Component&quot;, &quot;Security CoProcessor&quot;, or &quot;Security Support Processor&quot; in early NGSCB documentation).

At WinHEC 2000, Microsoft released a technical presentation on the topics of protection of privacy, security, and intellectual property titled &quot;Privacy, Security, and Content in Windows Platforms&quot;, which focused on turning Windows into a &quot;platform of trust&quot; for computer security, user content, and user privacy. Notable in the presentation is the contention that &quot;there is no difference between privacy protection, computer security, and content protection&quot;—&quot;assurances of trust must be universally true&quot;. Microsoft reiterated these claims at WinHEC 2001. NGSCB intended to protect all forms of content, unlike traditional rights management schemes which focus only on the protection of audio tracks or movies instead of users they have the potential to protect which made it, in Biddle&#x27;s words, &quot;egalitarian&quot;.

===As &quot;Palladium&quot;===
Microsoft held its first design review for the NGSCB in April 2002, with approximately 37 companies under a non-disclosure agreement. NGSCB was publicly unveiled under its codename &quot;Palladium&quot; in a June 2002 article by Steven Levy for &quot;Newsweek&quot; that focused on its design, feature set, and origin. Levy briefly described potential features: access control, authentication, authorization, DRM, encryption, as well as protection from junk mail and malware, with example policies being email accessible only to an intended recipient and Microsoft Word documents readable for only a week after their creation; Microsoft later release a guide clarifying these assertions as being hyperbolic; namely, that NGSCB would not intrinsically enforce content protection, or protect against junk mail or malware. Instead, it would provide a platform on which developers could build new solutions that did not exist by isolating applications and store secrets for them. Microsoft was not sure whether to &quot;expose the feature in the Control Panel or present it as a separate utility,&quot; but NGSCB would be an opt-in solution—disabled by default.

Microsoft PressPass later interviewed John Manferdelli, who restated and expanded on many of the key points discussed in the article by &quot;Newsweek&quot;. Manferdelli described it as evolutionary platform for Windows in July, articulating how &quot;&#x27;Palladium&#x27; will not require DRM, and DRM will not require &#x27;Palladium&#x27;. Microsoft sought a group program manager in August to assist in leading the development of several Microsoft technologies including NGSCB. Paul Otellini announced Intel&#x27;s support for NGSCB with a set of chipset, platform, and processor codenamed &quot;LaGrande&quot; at Intel Developer Forum 2002, which would provide an NGSCB hardware foundation and preserve backward compatibility with previous software.

===As NGSCB===
NGSCB was known as &quot;Palladium&quot; until January 24, 2003 when Microsoft announced it had been renamed as &quot;Next-Generation Secure Computing Base.&quot; Project manager Mario Juarez stated this name was chosen to avoid legal action from an unnamed company which had acquired the rights to the &quot;Palladium&quot; name, as well as to reflect Microsoft&#x27;s commitment to NGSCB in the upcoming decade. Juarez acknowledged the previous name was controversial, but denied it was changed by Microsoft to dodge criticism.

The Trusted Computing Platform Alliance was superseded by the Trusted Computing Group in April 2003. A principal goal of the new consortium was to produce a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) specification compatible with NGSCB; the previous specification, TPM 1.1 did not meet its requirements. TPM 1.2 was designed for compliance with NGSCB and introduced many features for such platforms. The first TPM 1.2 specification, Revision 62 was released in 2003.

Biddle emphasized in June 2003 that hardware vendors and software developers were vital to NGSCB. Microsoft publicly demonstrated NGSCB for the first time at WinHEC 2003, where it protected data in memory from an attacker; prevented access to—and alerted the user of—an application that had been changed; and prevented a remote administration tool from capturing an instant messaging conversation. Despite Microsoft&#x27;s desire to demonstrate NGSCB on hardware, software emulation was required for as few hardware components were available. Biddle reiterated that NGSCB was a set of evolutionary enhancements to Windows, basing this assessment on preserved backward compatibility and employed concepts in use before its development, but said the capabilities and scenarios it would enable would be revolutionary. Microsoft also revealed its multi-year roadmap for NGSCB, with the next major development milestone scheduled for the Professional Developers Conference, indicating that subsequent versions would ship concurrently with pre-release builds of Windows Vista; however, news reports suggested that NGSCB would not be integrated with Windows Vista when release, but it would instead be made available as separate software for the operating system.

Microsoft also announced details related to adoption and deployment of NGSCB at WinHEC 2003, stating that it would create a new value proposition for customers without significantly increasing the cost of computers; NGSCB adoption during the year of its introductory release was not anticipated and immediate support for servers was not expected. On the last day of the conference, Biddle said NGSCB needed to provide users with a way to differentiate between secured and unsecured windows—that a secure window should be &quot;noticeably different&quot; to help protect users from spoofing attacks; Nvidia was the earliest to announce this feature. WinHEC 2003 represented an important development milestone for NGSCB. Microsoft dedicated several hours to presentations and released many technical whitepapers, and companies including Atmel, Comodo Group, Fujitsu, and SafeNet produced preliminary hardware for the demonstration. Microsoft also demonstrated NGSCB at several U.S. campuses in California and in New York in June 2003.
NGSCB was among the topics discussed during Microsoft&#x27;s PDC 2003 with a pre-beta software development kit, known as the Developer Preview, being distributed to attendees. The Developer Preview was the first time that Microsoft made NGSCB code available to the developer community and was offered by the company as an educational opportunity for NGSCB software development. With this release, Microsoft stated that it was primarily focused on supporting business and enterprise applications and scenarios with the first version of the NGSCB scheduled to ship with Windows Vista, adding that it intended to address consumers with a subsequent version of the technology, but did not provide an estimated time of delivery for this version. At the conference, Jim Allchin said that Microsoft was continuing to work with hardware vendors so that they would be able to support the technology, and Bill Gates expected a new generation of central processing units (CPUs) to offer full support. Following PDC 2003, NGSCB was demonstrated again on prototype hardware during the annual RSA Security conference in November.

Microsoft announced at WinHEC 2004 that it would revise NSCB in response to feedback from customers and independent software vendors who did not desire to rewrite their existing programs in order to benefit from its functionality; the revision would also provide more direct support for Windows with protected environments for the operating system, its components, and applications, instead of it being an environment to itself and new applications. The NGSCB secure input feature would also undergo a significant revision based on cost assessments, hardware requirements, and usability issues of the previous implementation. There were subsequent reports that Microsoft would cease developing NGSCB; Microsoft denied these reports and reaffirmed its commitment to delivery. Additional reports published later that year suggested that Microsoft would make even additional changes based on feedback from the industry.

Microsoft&#x27;s absence of continual updates on NGSCB progress in 2005 had caused industry insiders to speculate that NGSCB had been cancelled. At the Microsoft Management Summit event, Steve Ballmer said that the company would build on the security foundation it had started with the NGSCB to create a new set of virtualization technologies for Windows, which were later Hyper-V. Reports during WinHEC 2005 indicated Microsoft scaled back its plans for NGSCB, so that it could to ship Windows Vista—which had already been beset by numerous delays and even a &quot;development reset&quot;—within a reasonable timeframe; instead of isolating components, NGSCB would offer &quot;Secure Startup&quot; (&quot;BitLocker Drive Encryption&quot;) to encrypt disk volumes and validate both pre-boot firmware and operating system components. Microsoft intended to deliver other aspects of NGSCB later. Jim Allchin stated NGSCB would &quot;marry hardware and software to gain better security&quot;, which was instrumental in the development of BitLocker.

==Architecture and technical details==
A complete Microsoft-based Trusted Computing-enabled system will consist not only of software components developed by Microsoft but also of hardware components developed by the Trusted Computing Group. The majority of features introduced by NGSCB are heavily reliant on specialized hardware and so will not operate on PCs predating 2004.

In current Trusted Computing specifications, there are two hardware components: the Trusted Platform Module (TPM), which will provide secure storage of cryptographic keys and a secure cryptographic co-processor, and a curtained memory feature in the CPU. In NGSCB, there are two software components, the Nexus, a security kernel that is part of the Operating System that provides a secure environment (Nexus mode) for trusted code to run in, and Nexus Computing Agents (NCAs), trusted modules which run in Nexus mode within NGSCB-enabled applications.

===Secure storage and attestation===
At the time of manufacture, a cryptographic key is generated and stored within the TPM. This key is never transmitted to any other component, and the TPM is designed in such a way that it is extremely difficult to retrieve the stored key by reverse engineering or any other method, even to the owner. Applications can pass data encrypted with this key to be decrypted by the TPM, but the TPM will only do so under certain strict conditions. Specifically, decrypted data will only ever be passed to authenticated, trusted applications, and will only ever be stored in curtained memory, making it inaccessible to other applications and the Operating System. Although the TPM can only store a single cryptographic key securely, secure storage of arbitrary data is by extension possible by encrypting the data such that it may only be decrypted using the securely stored key.

The TPM is also able to produce a cryptographic signature based on its hidden key. This signature may be verified by the user or by any third party, and so can therefore be used to provide remote attestation that the computer is in a secure state.

===Curtained memory===
NGSCB also relies on a curtained memory feature provided by the CPU. Data within curtained memory can only be accessed by the application to which it belongs, and not by any other application or the Operating System. The attestation features of the TPM can be used to confirm to a trusted application that it is genuinely running in curtained memory; it is therefore very difficult for anyone, including the owner, to trick a trusted application into running outside of curtained memory. This in turn makes reverse engineering of a trusted application extremely difficult.

===Applications===
NGSCB-enabled applications are to be split into two distinct parts, the NCA, a trusted module with access to a limited Application Programming Interface (API), and an untrusted portion, which has access to the full Windows API. Any code which deals with NGSCB functions must be located within the NCA.

The reason for this split is that the Windows API has developed over many years and is as a result extremely complex and difficult to audit for security bugs. To maximize security, trusted code is required to use a smaller, carefully audited API. Where security is not paramount, the full API is available.

==Uses and scenarios==

NGSCB enables new categories of applications and scenarios. Examples of uses cited by Microsoft include decentralized access control policies; digital rights management services for consumers, content providers, and enterprises; protected instant messaging conversations and online transactions; and more secure forms of machine health compliance, network authentication, and remote access. NGSCB-secured virtual private network access was one of the earliest scenarios envisaged by Microsoft. NGSCB can also strengthen software update mechanisms such as those belonging to antivirus software or Windows Update.

An early NGSCB privacy scenario conceived of by Microsoft is the &quot;wine purchase scenario,&quot; where a user can safely conduct a transaction with an online merchant without divulging personally identifiable information during the transaction. With the release of the NGSCB Developer Preview during PDC 2003, Microsoft emphasized the following enterprise applications and scenarios: document signing, secured data viewing, secured instant messaging, and secured plug-ins for emailing.

===WinHEC 2004 scenarios===
During WinHEC 2004, Microsoft revealed two features based on its revision of NGSCB, Cornerstone and Code Integrity Rooting:

* Cornerstone would protect a user&#x27;s login and authentication information by securely transmitting it to NGSCB-protected Windows components for validation, finalizing the user authentication process by releasing access to the SYSKEY if validation was successful. It was intended to protect data on laptops that had been lost or stolen to prevent hackers or thieves from accessing it even if they had performed a software-based attack or booted into an alternative operating system. 
* Code Integrity Rooting would validate boot and system files prior to the startup of Microsoft Windows. If validation of these components failed, the SYSKEY would not be released.

BitLocker is the combination of these features; &quot;Cornerstone&quot; was the codename of BitLocker, and BitLocker validates pre-boot firmware and operating system components before boot, which protects SYSKEY from unauthorized access; an unsuccessful validation prohibits access to a protected system.

==Reception==

Reaction to NGSCB after its unveiling by &quot;Newsweek&quot; was largely negative. While its security features were praised, critics contended that NGSCB could be used to impose restrictions on users; lock-out competing software vendors; and undermine fair use rights and open source software such as Linux. Microsoft&#x27;s characterization of NGSCB as a security technology was subject to criticism as its origin focused on DRM. NGSCB&#x27;s announcement occurred only a few years after Microsoft was accused of anti-competitive practices during the &quot;United States v. Microsoft Corporation&quot; antitrust case, a detail which called the company&#x27;s intentions for the technology into question—NGSCB was regarded as an effort by the company to maintain its dominance in the personal computing industry. The notion of a &quot;Trusted Windows&quot; architecture—one that implied Windows itself was untrustworthy—would also be a source of contention within the company itself.

After NGSCB&#x27;s unveiling, Microsoft drew frequent comparisons to Big Brother, an oppressive dictator of a totalitarian state in George Orwell&#x27;s dystopian novel &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;. The Electronic Privacy Information Center legislative counsel, Chris Hoofnagle, described Microsoft&#x27;s characterization of the NGSCB as &quot;Orwellian.&quot; Big Brother Awards bestowed Microsoft with an award because of NGSCB. Bill Gates addressed these comments at a homeland security conference by stating that NGSCB &quot;can make our country more secure and prevent the nightmare vision of George Orwell at the same time.&quot; Steven Levy—the author who unveiled the existence of the NGSCB—claimed in a 2004 front-page article for &quot;Newsweek&quot; that NGSCB could eventually lead to an &quot;information infrastructure that encourages censorship, surveillance, and suppression of the creative impulse where anonymity is outlawed and every penny spent is accounted for.&quot; However, Microsoft outlined a scenario enabled by NGSCB that allows a user to conduct a transaction without divulging personally identifiable information.

Ross Anderson of Cambridge University was among the most vocal critics of NGSCB and of Trusted Computing. Anderson alleged that the technologies were designed to satisfy federal agency requirements; enable content providers and other third-parties to remotely monitor or delete data in users&#x27; machines; use certificate revocation lists to ensure that only content deemed &quot;legitimate&quot; could be copied; and use unique identifiers to revoke or validate files; he compared this to the attempts by the Soviet Union to &quot;register and control all typewriters and fax machines.&quot; Anderson also claimed that the TPM could control the execution of applications on a user&#x27;s machine and, because of this, bestowed to it a derisive &quot;Fritz Chip&quot; name in reference to United States Senator Ernest &quot;Fritz&quot; Hollings, who had recently proposed DRM legislation such as the Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act for consumer electronic devices. Anderson&#x27;s report was referenced extensively in the news media and appeared in publications such as BBC News, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, and &quot;The Register&quot;. David Safford of IBM Research stated that Anderson presented several technical errors within his report, namely that the proposed capabilities did not exist within any specification and that many were beyond the scope of trusted platform design. Anderson later alleged that BitLocker was designed to facilitate DRM and to lock out competing software on an encrypted system, and, in spite of his allegation that NGSCB was designed for federal agencies, advocated for Microsoft to add a backdoor to BitLocker. Similar sentiments were expressed by Richard Stallman, founder of the GNU Project and Free Software Foundation, who alleged that Trusted Computing technologies were designed to enforce DRM and to prevent users from running unlicensed software. In 2015, Stallman stated that &quot;the TPM has proved a total failure&quot; for DRM and that &quot;there are reasons to think that it will not be feasible to use them for DRM.&quot;

After the release of Anderson&#x27;s report, Microsoft stated in an NGSCB FAQ that &quot;enhancements to Windows under the NGSCB architecture have no mechanism for filtering content, nor do they provide a mechanism for proactively searching the Internet for &#x27;illegal&#x27; content [...] Microsoft is firmly opposed to putting &#x27;policing functions&#x27; into nexus-aware PCs and does not intend to do so&quot; and that the idea was in direct opposition with the design goals set forth for NGSCB, which was &quot;built on the premise that no policy will be imposed that is not approved by the user.&quot; Concerns about the NGSCB TPM were also raised in that it would use what are essentially unique machine identifiers, which drew comparisons to the Intel Pentium III processor serial number, a unique hardware identification number of the 1990s viewed as a risk to end-user privacy. NGSCB, however, mandates that disclosure or use of the keys provided by the TPM be based solely on user discretion; in contrast, Intel&#x27;s Pentium III included a unique serial number that could potentially be revealed to any application. NGSCB, also unlike Intel&#x27;s Pentium III, would provide optional features to allow users to indirectly identify themselves to external requestors.

In response to concerns that NGSCB would take control away from users for the sake of content providers, Bill Gates stated that the latter should &quot;provide their content in easily accessible forms or else it ends up encouraging piracy.&quot; Bryan Willman, Marcus Peinado, Paul England, and Peter Biddle—four NGSCB engineers—realized early during the development of NGSCB that DRM would ultimately fail in its efforts to prevent piracy. In 2002, the group released a paper titled &quot;The Darknet and the Future of Content Distribution&quot; that outlined how content protection mechanisms are demonstrably futile. The paper&#x27;s premise circulated within Microsoft during the late 1990s and was a source of controversy within Microsoft; Biddle stated that the company almost terminated his employment as a result of the paper&#x27;s release. A 2003 report published by Harvard University researchers suggested that NGSCB and similar technologies could facilitate the secure distribution of copyrighted content across peer-to-peer networks.

Not all assessments were negative. Paul Thurrott praised NGSCB, stating that it was &quot;Microsoft&#x27;s Trustworthy Computing initiative made real&quot; and that it would &quot;form the basis of next-generation computer systems.&quot; Scott Bekker of &quot;Redmond Magazine&quot; stated that NGSCB was misunderstood because of its controversy and that it appeared to be a &quot;promising, user-controlled defense against privacy intrusions and security violations.&quot; In February 2004, In-Stat/MDR, publisher of the Microprocessor Report, bestowed NGSCB with its Best Technology award. Malcom Crompton, Australian Privacy Commissioner, stated that &quot;NGSCB has great privacy enhancing potential [...] Microsoft has recognised there is a privacy issue [...] we should all work with them, give them the benefit of the doubt and urge them to do the right thing.&quot; When Microsoft announced at WinHEC 2004 that it would be revising NGSCB so that previous applications would not have to be rewritten, Martin Reynolds of Gartner praised the company for this decision as it would create a &quot;more sophisticated&quot; version of NGSCB that would simplify development. David Wilson, writing for South China Morning Post, defended NGSCB by saying that &quot;attacking the latest Microsoft monster is an international blood sport&quot; and that &quot;even if Microsoft had a new technology capable of ending Third World hunger and First World obesity, digital seers would still lambaste it because they view Bill Gates as a grey incarnation of Satan.&quot; Microsoft noted that negative reaction to NGSCB gradually waned after events such as the USENIX Annual Technical Conference in 2003, and several Fortune 500 companies also expressed interest in it.

When reports announced in 2005 that Microsoft would scale back its plans and incorporate only BitLocker with Windows Vista, concerns pertaining digital rights management, erosion of user rights, and vendor lock-in remained. In 2008, Biddle stated that negative perception was the most significant contributing factor responsible for the cessation of NGSCB&#x27;s development.

==Vulnerability==
In a 2003 article, Dan Boneh and David Brumley indicated that projects like NGSCB may be vulnerable to timing attacks.

==See also==
* Microsoft Pluton
* Secure Boot
* Trusted Execution Technology
* Trusted Computing
* Trusted Platform Module
* Intel Management Engine

==References==
==External links==
*Microsoft&#x27;s NGSCB home page (Archived on 2006-07-05)
*Trusted Computing Group home page
*System Integrity Team blog — team blog for NGSCB technologies (Archived on 2008-10-21)
*Security WMI Providers Reference on MSDN, including BitLocker Drive Encryption and Trusted Platform Module (both components of NGSCB)
*TPM Base Services on MSDN
*Development Considerations for Nexus Computing Agents</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1329486" start="4" end="41" title="Next-Generation Secure Computing Base" label="Next-Generation Secure Computing Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329486" start="43" end="48" title="Next-Generation Secure Computing Base" label="NGSCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329486" start="100" end="115" title="Next-Generation Secure Computing Base" label="Trusted Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="122" end="143" title="software architecture" label="software architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="156" end="165" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="204" end="211" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="212" end="228" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="241" end="248" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="250" end="258" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663719" start="264" end="280" title="system integrity" label="system integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="449" end="460" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="499" end="521" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="564" end="580" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541183" start="699" end="720" title="Trustworthy Computing" label="Trustworthy Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="787" end="800" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q144250" start="879" end="902" title="Trusted Computing Group" label="Trusted Computing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077480" start="963" end="973" title="hypervisor" label="hypervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="1000" end="1006" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247279" start="1152" end="1169" title="process isolation" label="process isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="1176" end="1186" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="1220" end="1234" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="1412" end="1437" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503227" start="1627" end="1641" title="vendor lock-in" label="vendor lock-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q131562" start="1657" end="1665" title="fair use" label="fair use"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="1677" end="1697" title="open-source software" label="open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q919298" start="1741" end="1747" title="WinHEC" label="WinHEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q871861" start="2077" end="2086" title="BitLocker" label="BitLocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140366" start="2117" end="2140" title="Trusted Platform Module" label="Trusted Platform Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q239084" start="2476" end="2507" title="Windows Presentation Foundation" label="Windows Presentation Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q261595" start="2509" end="2541" title="Windows Communication Foundation" label="Windows Communication Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046390" start="2547" end="2552" title="WinFS" label="WinFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636078" start="2560" end="2575" title="Development of Windows Vista" label="its development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289" start="2610" end="2624" title=".NET Framework" label=".NET Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415400" start="2646" end="2658" title="managed code" label="managed code"/>
<link wikidata="Q859398" start="2820" end="2824" title="UEFI" label="UEFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="2828" end="2837" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569290" start="2866" end="2877" title="Windows 8.1" label="Windows 8.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="2895" end="2905" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="2932" end="2942" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140366" start="2963" end="2970" title="TPM 2.0" label="TPM 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172817" start="3079" end="3091" title="Peter Biddle" label="Peter Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144725" start="3205" end="3223" title="Microsoft Research" label="Microsoft Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964408" start="3297" end="3312" title="Brian LaMacchia" label="Brian LaMacchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q92644" start="3329" end="3343" title="Butler Lampson" label="Butler Lampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="3520" end="3532" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="3683" end="3686" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336758" start="4159" end="4170" title="green-light" label="green-light"/>
<link wikidata="Q144250" start="4453" end="4488" title="Trusted Computing Platform Alliance" label="Trusted Computing Platform Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q324603" start="4545" end="4551" title="Compaq" label="Compaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="4553" end="4568" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="4570" end="4573" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="4575" end="4580" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="5298" end="5319" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053818" start="6191" end="6215" title="non-disclosure agreement" label="non-disclosure agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q929788" start="6312" end="6323" title="Steven Levy" label="Steven Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="6334" end="6342" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512320" start="6536" end="6545" title="E-mail spam" label="junk mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="6550" end="6557" title="malware" label="malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="6587" end="6592" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="6638" end="6652" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081102" start="7125" end="7138" title="Control Panel (Windows)" label="Control Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148995" start="7725" end="7738" title="Paul Otellini" label="Paul Otellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q744862" start="7843" end="7851" title="LaGrande" label="LaGrande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345584" start="7861" end="7882" title="Intel Developer Forum" label="Intel Developer Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140366" start="8702" end="8725" title="Trusted Platform Module" label="Trusted Platform Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="9198" end="9204" title="random-access memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200186" start="9321" end="9347" title="remote administration tool" label="remote administration tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="9366" end="9383" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="9464" end="9482" title="software emulation" label="software emulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243559" start="9933" end="9967" title="Professional Developers Conference" label="Professional Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081100" start="10839" end="10855" title="spoofing attacks" label="spoofing attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="10857" end="10863" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="11093" end="11098" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985340" start="11100" end="11112" title="Comodo Group" label="Comodo Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="11114" end="11121" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q631043" start="11127" end="11134" title="SafeNet" label="SafeNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q467707" start="11377" end="11401" title="software development kit" label="software development kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040082" start="12051" end="12062" title="Jim Allchin" label="Jim Allchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="12186" end="12196" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="12226" end="12249" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061730" start="12370" end="12382" title="RSA Security" label="RSA Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661112" start="12512" end="12539" title="independent software vendor" label="independent software vendor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181162" start="13513" end="13526" title="Steve Ballmer" label="Steve Ballmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q270471" start="13641" end="13655" title="virtualization" label="virtualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11278" start="13699" end="13706" title="Hyper-V" label="Hyper-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040082" start="14219" end="14230" title="Jim Allchin" label="Jim Allchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140366" start="14834" end="14857" title="Trusted Platform Module" label="Trusted Platform Module"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14968" end="14984" title="Trusted computing#Memory curtaining" label="curtained memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="16247" end="16270" title="cryptographic signature" label="cryptographic signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="17197" end="17230" title="Application Programming Interface" label="Application Programming Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="17419" end="17430" title="Windows API" label="Windows API"/>
<link wikidata="Q188506" start="17988" end="18007" title="online banking" label="online transactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="18118" end="18141" title="virtual private network" label="virtual private network"/>
<link wikidata="Q93249" start="18287" end="18305" title="antivirus software" label="antivirus software"/>
<link wikidata="Q383295" start="18309" end="18323" title="Windows Update" label="Windows Update"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="18515" end="18550" title="personally identifiable information" label="personally identifiable information"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="18714" end="18730" title="digital signature" label="document signing"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="18762" end="18779" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="18793" end="18801" title="plug-in (computing)" label="plug-ins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050521" start="19201" end="19207" title="SYSKEY" label="SYSKEY"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="20263" end="20268" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401418" start="20476" end="20502" title="anti-competitive practices" label="anti-competitive practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345977" start="20520" end="20558" title="United States v. Microsoft Corporation" label="United States v. Microsoft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="20565" end="20574" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q751417" start="21016" end="21027" title="Big Brother (Nineteen Eighty-Four)" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="21079" end="21092" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="21122" end="21142" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383251" start="21154" end="21191" title="Electronic Privacy Information Center" label="Electronic Privacy Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728031" start="21213" end="21228" title="Chris Hoofnagle" label="Chris Hoofnagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q858637" start="21313" end="21331" title="Big Brother Awards" label="Big Brother Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q181467" start="21424" end="21441" title="homeland security" label="homeland security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167581" start="22097" end="22110" title="Ross J. Anderson" label="Ross Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="22114" end="22134" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q349044" start="22303" end="22319" title="content provider" label="content provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q196765" start="22409" end="22436" title="certificate revocation list" label="certificate revocation list"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545185" start="22521" end="22538" title="unique identifier" label="unique identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="22609" end="22621" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="22888" end="22909" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q596008" start="22910" end="22943" title="Ernest &amp;quot;Fritz&amp;quot; Hollings" label="Ernest &amp;quot;Fritz&amp;quot; Hollings"/>
<link wikidata="Q500031" start="22999" end="23054" title="Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act" label="Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="23059" end="23086" title="consumer electronic devices" label="consumer electronic devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="23145" end="23155" title="news media" label="news media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="23193" end="23201" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="23209" end="23227" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363733" start="23245" end="23257" title="The Register" label="The Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146518" start="23282" end="23294" title="IBM Research" label="IBM Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q254569" start="23750" end="23758" title="Backdoor (computing)" label="backdoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="23810" end="23826" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598" start="23843" end="23854" title="GNU Project" label="GNU Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="23859" end="23883" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189293" start="24275" end="24278" title="FAQ" label="FAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q83382" start="24959" end="24976" title="Intel Pentium III" label="Intel Pentium III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24977" end="25000" title="Pentium III#Controversy about privacy issues" label="processor serial number"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586480" start="25049" end="25054" title="1990s in technology &amp;amp; science" label="1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="26362" end="26380" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="26510" end="26522" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824576" start="27143" end="27174" title="Australian Privacy Commissioner" label="Australian Privacy Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q174198" start="27561" end="27568" title="Gartner" label="Gartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198574" start="27735" end="27759" title="South China Morning Post" label="South China Morning Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4174094" start="28184" end="28218" title="USENIX Annual Technical Conference" label="USENIX Annual Technical Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="28240" end="28251" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896470" start="28708" end="28717" title="Dan Boneh" label="Dan Boneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231847" start="28722" end="28735" title="David Brumley" label="David Brumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q52432834" start="28824" end="28840" title="Microsoft Pluton" label="Microsoft Pluton"/>
<link wikidata="Q859398" start="28843" end="28854" title="Secure Boot" label="Secure Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q744862" start="28857" end="28885" title="Trusted Execution Technology" label="Trusted Execution Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q966812" start="28888" end="28905" title="Trusted Computing" label="Trusted Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140366" start="28908" end="28931" title="Trusted Platform Module" label="Trusted Platform Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915608" start="28934" end="28957" title="Intel Management Engine" label="Intel Management Engine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59529" wikidata="Q863829" url="?curid=59529" title="Solubility equilibrium">
<text>Solubility equilibrium is a type of dynamic equilibrium that exists when a chemical compound in the solid state is in chemical equilibrium with a solution of that compound. The solid may dissolve unchanged, with dissociation, or with chemical reaction with another constituent of the solution, such as acid or alkali. Each solubility equilibrium is characterized by a temperature-dependent &quot;solubility product&quot; which functions like an equilibrium constant. Solubility equilibria are important in pharmaceutical, environmental and many other scenarios.

== Definitions ==
A solubility equilibrium exists when a chemical compound in the solid state is in chemical equilibrium with a solution containing the compound. This type of equilibrium is an example of dynamic equilibrium in that some individual molecules migrate between the solid and solution phases such that the rates of dissolution and precipitation are equal to one another. When equilibrium is established and the solid has not all dissolved, the solution is said to be saturated. The concentration of the solute in a saturated solution is known as the solubility. Units of solubility may be molar (mol dm−3) or expressed as mass per unit volume, such as μg mL−1. Solubility is temperature dependent. A solution containing a higher concentration of solute than the solubility is said to be supersaturated. A supersaturated solution may be induced to come to equilibrium by the addition of a &quot;seed&quot; which may be a tiny crystal of the solute, or a tiny solid particle, which initiates precipitation.

There are three main types of solubility equilibria.
# Simple dissolution.
# Dissolution with dissociation reaction. This is characteristic of salts. The equilibrium constant is known in this case as a solubility product.
# Dissolution with ionization reaction. This is characteristic of the dissolution of weak acids or weak bases in aqueous media of varying pH.

In each case an equilibrium constant can be specified as a quotient of activities. This equilibrium constant is dimensionless as activity is a dimensionless quantity. However, use of activities is very inconvenient, so the equilibrium constant is usually divided by the quotient of activity coefficients, to become a quotient of concentrations. See for details. Moreover, the activity of a solid is, by definition, equal to 1 so it is omitted from the defining expression.

For a chemical equilibrium
formula_1
the solubility product, &quot;K&quot;sp for the compound A&quot;p&quot;B&quot;q&quot; is defined as follows
formula_2
where [A] and [B] are the concentrations of A and B in a saturated solution. A solubility product has a similar functionality to an equilibrium constant though formally &quot;K&quot;sp has the dimension of (concentration)&quot;p&quot;+&quot;q&quot;.

==Effects of conditions==
=== Temperature effect ===
Solubility is sensitive to changes in temperature. For example, sugar is more soluble in hot water than cool water. It occurs because solubility products, like other types of equilibrium constants, are functions of temperature. In accordance with Le Chatelier&#x27;s Principle, when the dissolution process is endothermic (heat is absorbed), solubility increases with rising temperature. This effect is the basis for the process of recrystallization, which can be used to purify a chemical compound. When dissolution is exothermic (heat is released) solubility decreases with rising temperature.
Sodium sulfate shows increasing solubility with temperature below about 32.4 °C, but a decreasing solubility at higher temperature. This is because the solid phase is the decahydrate () below the transition temperature, but a different hydrate above that temperature.

The dependence on temperature of solubility for an ideal solution (achieved for low solubility substances) is given by the following expression containing the enthalpy of melting, Δ&quot;m&quot;&quot;H&quot;, and the mole fraction formula_3 of the solute at saturation:
formula_4
where formula_5 is the partial molar enthalpy of the solute at infinite dilution and formula_6 the enthalpy per mole of the pure crystal.

This differential expression for a non-electrolyte can be integrated on a temperature interval to give:
formula_7

For nonideal solutions activity of the solute at saturation appears instead of mole fraction solubility in the derivative with respect to temperature:
formula_8

=== Common-ion effect ===
The common-ion effect is the effect of decreased solubility of one salt when another salt that has an ion in common with it is also present. For example, the solubility of silver chloride, AgCl, is lowered when sodium chloride, a source of the common ion chloride, is added to a suspension of AgCl in water.
formula_9
The solubility, &quot;S&quot;, in the absence of a common ion can be calculated as follows. The concentrations [Ag+] and [Cl−] are equal because one mole of AgCl would dissociate into one mole of Ag+ and one mole of Cl−. Let the concentration of [Ag+(aq)] be denoted by &quot;x&quot;. Then
formula_10
formula_11
&quot;K&quot;sp for AgCl is equal to at 25 °C, so the solubility is .

Now suppose that sodium chloride is also present, at a concentration of 0.01 mol dm−3 = 0.01 M. The solubility, ignoring any possible effect of the sodium ions, is now calculated by
formula_12
This is a quadratic equation in &quot;x&quot;, which is also equal to the solubility.
formula_13
In the case of silver chloride, &quot;x&quot;2 is very much smaller than 0.01 M &quot;x&quot;, so the first term can be ignored. Therefore
formula_14
a considerable reduction from . In gravimetric analysis for silver, the reduction in solubility due to the common ion effect is used to ensure &quot;complete&quot; precipitation of AgCl.

=== Particle size effect ===
The thermodynamic solubility constant is defined for large monocrystals. Solubility will increase with decreasing size of solute particle (or droplet) because of the additional surface energy. This effect is generally small unless particles become very small, typically smaller than 1 μm. The effect of the particle size on solubility constant can be quantified as follows:
formula_15
where *&quot;KA&quot; is the solubility constant for the solute particles with the molar surface area &quot;A&quot;, *&quot;K&quot;&quot;A&quot;→0 is the solubility constant for substance with molar surface area tending to zero (i.e., when the particles are large), &quot;γ&quot; is the surface tension of the solute particle in the solvent, &quot;A&quot;m is the molar surface area of the solute (in m2/mol), &quot;R &quot;is the universal gas constant, and &quot;T&quot; is the absolute temperature.

=== Salt effects ===
The salt effects (salting in and salting-out) refers to the fact that the presence of a salt which has no ion in common with the solute, has an effect on the ionic strength of the solution and hence on activity coefficients, so that the equilibrium constant, expressed as a concentration quotient, changes.

=== Phase effect ===
Equilibria are defined for specific crystal phases. Therefore, the solubility product is expected to be different depending on the phase of the solid. For example, aragonite and calcite will have different solubility products even though they have both the same chemical identity (calcium carbonate). Under any given conditions one phase will be thermodynamically more stable than the other; therefore, this phase will form when thermodynamic equilibrium is established. However, kinetic factors may favor the formation the unfavorable precipitate (e.g. aragonite), which is then said to be in a metastable state.

In pharmacology, the metastable state is sometimes referred to as amorphous state. Amorphous drugs have higher solubility than their crystalline counterparts due to the absence of long-distance interactions inherent in crystal lattice. Thus, it takes less energy to solvate the molecules in amorphous phase. The effect of amorphous phase on solubility is widely used to make drugs more soluble.

===Pressure effect===
For condensed phases (solids and liquids), the pressure dependence of solubility is typically weak and usually neglected in practice. Assuming an ideal solution, the dependence can be quantified as:
formula_16
where formula_3 is the mole fraction of the formula_18-th component in the solution, formula_19 is the pressure, formula_20 is the absolute temperature, formula_21 is the partial molar volume of the formula_18th component in the solution, formula_23 is the partial molar volume of the formula_18th component in the dissolving solid, and formula_25 is the universal gas constant.

The pressure dependence of solubility does occasionally have practical significance. For example, precipitation fouling of oil fields and wells by calcium sulfate (which decreases its solubility with decreasing pressure) can result in decreased productivity with time.

==Quantitative aspects==
===Simple dissolution===
Dissolution of an organic solid can be described as an equilibrium between the substance in its solid and dissolved forms. For example, when sucrose (table sugar) forms a saturated solution
formula_26
An equilibrium expression for this reaction can be written, as for any chemical reaction (products over reactants):
formula_27
where &quot;K&quot;o is called the thermodynamic solubility constant. The braces indicate activity. The activity of a pure solid is, by definition, unity. Therefore
formula_28
where formula_29 is the thermodynamic equilibrium constant and braces indicate activity. The activity of a pure solid is, by definition, equal to one.

When the solubility of the salt is very low the activity coefficients of the ions in solution are nearly equal to one. By setting them to be actually equal to one this expression reduces to the solubility product expression:
formula_30

For 2:2 and 3:3 salts, such as CaSO4 and FePO4, the general expression for the solubility product is the same as for a 1:1 electrolyte
formula_31
:formula_32 (electrical charges are omitted in general expressions, for simplicity of notation)
With an unsymmetrical salt like Ca(OH)2 the solubility expression is given by
formula_33
formula_34
Since the concentration of hydroxide ions is twice the concentration of calcium ions this reduces to formula_35

In general, with the chemical equilibrium
formula_36
formula_37
and the following table, showing the relationship between the solubility of a compound and the value of its solubility product, can be derived.
Solubility products are often expressed in logarithmic form. Thus, for calcium sulfate, with , . The smaller the value of &quot;K&quot;sp, or the more negative the log value, the lower the solubility.

Some salts are not fully dissociated in solution. Examples include MgSO4, famously discovered by Manfred Eigen to be present in seawater as both an inner sphere complex and an outer sphere complex. The solubility of such salts is calculated by the method outlined in dissolution with reaction.

==== Hydroxides ====
The solubility product for the hydroxide of a metal ion, M&quot;n&quot;+, is usually defined, as follows:
formula_38
formula_39
However, general-purpose computer programs are designed to use hydrogen ion concentrations with the alternative definitions.
formula_40
formula_41

For hydroxides, solubility products are often given in a modified form, &quot;K&quot;*sp, using hydrogen ion concentration in place of hydroxide ion concentration. The two values are related by the self-ionization constant for water, &quot;K&quot;w.
formula_42
formula_43
formula_44
For example, at ambient temperature, for calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2, lg &quot;K&quot;sp is ca. −5 and lg &quot;K&quot;*sp ≈ −5 + 2 × 14 ≈ 23.

=== Dissolution with reaction ===

A typical reaction with dissolution involves a weak base, B, dissolving in an acidic aqueous solution.
formula_45
This reaction is very important for pharmaceutical products. Dissolution of weak acids in alkaline media is similarly important.
formula_46
The uncharged molecule usually has lower solubility than the ionic form, so solubility depends on pH and the acid dissociation constant of the solute. The term &quot;intrinsic solubility&quot; is used to describe the solubility of the un-ionized form in the absence of acid or alkali.

Leaching of aluminium salts from rocks and soil by acid rain is another example of dissolution with reaction: alumino-silicates are bases which react with the acid to form soluble species, such as Al3+(aq).

Formation of a chemical complex may also change solubility. A well-known example is the addition of a concentrated solution of ammonia to a suspension of silver chloride, in which dissolution is favoured by the formation of an ammine complex.
formula_47
When sufficient ammonia is added to a suspension of silver chloride, the solid dissolves. The addition of water softeners to washing powders to inhibit the formation of soap scum provides an example of practical importance.

== Experimental determination ==
The determination of solubility is fraught with difficulties. First and foremost is the difficulty in establishing that the system is in equilibrium at the chosen temperature. This is because both precipitation and dissolution reactions may be extremely slow. If the process is very slow solvent evaporation may be an issue. Supersaturation may occur. With very insoluble substances, the concentrations in solution are very low and difficult to determine. The methods used fall broadly into two categories, static and dynamic.

=== Static methods ===
In static methods a mixture is brought to equilibrium and the concentration of a species in the solution phase is determined by chemical analysis. This usually requires separation of the solid and solution phases. In order to do this the equilibration and separation should be performed in a thermostatted room. Very low concentrations can be measured if a radioactive tracer is incorporated in the solid phase.

A variation of the static method is to add a solution of the substance in a non-aqueous solvent, such as dimethyl sulfoxide, to an aqueous buffer mixture. Immediate precipitation may occur giving a cloudy mixture. The solubility measured for such a mixture is known as &quot;kinetic solubility&quot;. The cloudiness is due to the fact that the precipitate particles are very small resulting in Tyndall scattering. In fact the particles are so small that the particle size effect comes into play and kinetic solubility is often greater than equilibrium solubility. Over time the cloudiness will disappear as the size of the crystallites increases, and eventually equilibrium will be reached in a process known as precipitate ageing.

=== Dynamic methods ===
Solubility values of organic acids, bases, and ampholytes of pharmaceutical interest may be obtained by a process called &quot;Chasing equilibrium solubility&quot;. In this procedure, a quantity of substance is first dissolved at a pH where it exists predominantly in its ionized form and then a precipitate of the neutral (un-ionized) species is formed by changing the pH. Subsequently, the rate of change of pH due to precipitation or dissolution is monitored and strong acid and base titrant are added to adjust the pH to discover the equilibrium conditions when the two rates are equal. The advantage of this method is that it is relatively fast as the quantity of precipitate formed is quite small. However, the performance of the method may be affected by the formation supersaturated solutions.

== See also ==
* Solubility table: A table of solubilities of mostly inorganic salts at temperatures between 0 and 100 °C.
* Solvent models

==References==
== External links ==
* Section 6.9: Solubilities of ionic salts. Includes a discussion of the thermodynamics of dissolution.
* IUPAC–NIST solubility database
* Solubility products of simple inorganic compounds
* Solvent activity along a saturation line and solubility
* Solubility challenge: Predict solubilities from a data base of 100 molecules. The database, of mostly compounds of pharmaceutical interest, is available at One hundred molecules with solubilities (Text file, tab separated).

A number of computer programs are available to do the calculations. They include:
* CHEMEQL: A comprehensive computer program for the calculation of thermodynamic equilibrium concentrations of species in homogeneous and heterogeneous systems. Many geochemical applications.

* JESS: All types of chemical equilibria can be modelled including protonation, complex formation, redox, solubility and adsorption interactions. Includes an extensive database.
* MINEQL+: A chemical equilibrium modeling system for aqueous systems. Handles a wide range of pH, redox, solubility and sorption scenarios.
* PHREEQC: USGS software designed to perform a wide variety of low-temperature aqueous geochemical calculations, including reactive transport in one dimension.
* MINTEQ: A chemical equilibrium model for the calculation of metal speciation, solubility equilibria etc. for natural waters.
* WinSGW: A Windows version of the SOLGASWATER computer program.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q863829" start="0" end="22" title="Solubility equilibrium" label="Solubility equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q908074" start="36" end="55" title="dynamic equilibrium" label="dynamic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="75" end="92" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="118" end="138" title="chemical equilibrium" label="chemical equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="146" end="154" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="445" end="465" title="equilibrium constant" label="equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="620" end="637" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="663" end="683" title="chemical equilibrium" label="chemical equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="691" end="699" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q908074" start="767" end="786" title="dynamic equilibrium" label="dynamic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="890" end="901" title="Dissolution (chemistry)" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="906" end="919" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="1057" end="1070" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="1125" end="1135" title="solubility" label="solubility"/>
<link wikidata="Q334104" start="1362" end="1376" title="supersaturation" label="supersaturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="1724" end="1729" title="salts" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634792" start="1888" end="1897" title="weak acid" label="weak acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155237" start="1902" end="1911" title="weak base" label="weak base"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1941" end="1943" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="1962" end="1982" title="equilibrium constant" label="equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q423220" start="2017" end="2027" title="activity (chemistry)" label="activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="2058" end="2071" title="dimensionless" label="dimensionless"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="2632" end="2650" title="saturated solution" label="saturated solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="2768" end="2777" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="2917" end="2928" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q192690" start="3126" end="3155" title="Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s Principle" label="Le Chatelier&amp;#x27;s Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="3189" end="3200" title="endothermic reaction" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61847" start="3311" end="3328" title="Recrystallization (chemistry)" label="recrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="3399" end="3409" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211737" start="3475" end="3489" title="Sodium sulfate" label="Sodium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088946" start="4047" end="4069" title="partial molar enthalpy" label="partial molar enthalpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754887" start="4470" end="4487" title="common-ion effect" label="common-ion effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q216918" start="4638" end="4653" title="silver chloride" label="silver chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q192414" start="5642" end="5662" title="gravimetric analysis" label="gravimetric analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="6496" end="6511" title="surface tension" label="surface tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q182333" start="6640" end="6662" title="universal gas constant" label="universal gas constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q264647" start="6689" end="6709" title="absolute temperature" label="absolute temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406135" start="6751" end="6761" title="salting in" label="salting in"/>
<link wikidata="Q739743" start="6766" end="6777" title="salting-out" label="salting-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754887" start="6836" end="6852" title="common ion effect" label="no ion in common"/>
<link wikidata="Q898396" start="6891" end="6905" title="ionic strength" label="ionic strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q745224" start="6935" end="6955" title="activity coefficient" label="activity coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="7106" end="7112" title="Phase (matter)" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="7226" end="7235" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="7240" end="7247" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="7343" end="7360" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="7658" end="7668" title="metastable" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274246" start="7985" end="7995" title="In vivo supersaturation" label="The effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779030" start="8241" end="8255" title="ideal solution" label="ideal solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088946" start="8476" end="8496" title="partial molar volume" label="partial molar volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q182333" start="8660" end="8682" title="universal gas constant" label="universal gas constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8783" end="8804" title="Fouling#Precipitation fouling" label="precipitation fouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="8832" end="8847" title="calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="9146" end="9153" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q423220" start="9423" end="9431" title="Activity (chemistry)" label="activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q288266" start="10830" end="10835" title="magnesium sulfate" label="MgSO4"/>
<link wikidata="Q76600" start="10860" end="10873" title="Manfred Eigen" label="Manfred Eigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="10891" end="10899" title="seawater" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035673" start="10911" end="10931" title="inner sphere complex" label="inner sphere complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098366" start="10939" end="10959" title="ion association" label="outer sphere complex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11030" end="11055" title="#Dissolution with reaction" label="dissolution with reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638091" start="11553" end="11568" title="Self-ionization of water" label="self-ionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155237" start="11863" end="11872" title="weak base" label="weak base"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="11901" end="11917" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="12179" end="12205" title="acid dissociation constant" label="acid dissociation constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="12368" end="12382" title="aluminium salt" label="aluminium salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="12407" end="12416" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q429979" start="12466" end="12482" title="alumino-silicate" label="alumino-silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="12588" end="12595" title="Complex (chemistry)" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="12691" end="12698" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216918" start="12718" end="12733" title="silver chloride" label="silver chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q899546" start="12924" end="12938" title="water softener" label="water softener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026364" start="12987" end="12996" title="soap scum" label="soap scum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="13755" end="13772" title="chemical analysis" label="chemical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="13984" end="13995" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q407927" start="14145" end="14163" title="dimethyl sulfoxide" label="dimethyl sulfoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="14179" end="14185" title="Buffer solution" label="buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q244040" start="14434" end="14452" title="Tyndall scattering" label="Tyndall scattering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14498" end="14518" title="#Particle size effect" label="particle size effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040478" start="15617" end="15633" title="Solubility table" label="Solubility table"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908915" start="15725" end="15739" title="Solvent models" label="Solvent models"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="16856" end="16860" title="USGS" label="USGS"/>
</links>
</doc>
