<doc id="723054" wikidata="Q1538559" url="?curid=723054" title="Solid South">
<text>The Solid South was the electoral voting bloc for the Democratic Party in the Southern United States between the end of the Reconstruction era in 1877 and the Civil Rights Act of 1964. During this period, the Democratic Party controlled southern state legislatures and most local, state and federal officeholders in the South were Democrats. During the late 19th century and the early 20th century, Southern Democrats disenfranchised nearly all blacks in all the former states of the Confederate States of America. This resulted in a one-party system, in which a candidate&#x27;s victory in Democratic primary elections was tantamount to election to the office itself. White primaries were another means that the Democrats used to consolidate their political power, excluding blacks from voting.

The &quot;Solid South&quot; included all 11 former Confederate states: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia. It also included to a lesser extent Oklahoma, which remained electorally competitive during the Jim Crow era. The Border states of Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and West Virginia were rarely identified with the Solid South after the 1896 United States presidential election, while Missouri became a bellwether state after the 1904 United States presidential election.

The Solid South can also refer to the &quot;Southern strategy&quot; that has been employed by Republicans since the 1960s to increase their electoral power in the South. Republicans have been the dominant party in most political offices within the South since 2010. The main exception to this trend has been the state of Virginia.

==Background==
At the start of the American Civil War, there were 34 states in the United States, 15 of which were slave states. Slavery was also legal in the District of Columbia until 1862. Eleven of these slave states seceded from the United States to form the Confederacy: South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas, Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina.

The southern slave states that stayed in the Union were Maryland, Missouri, Delaware, and Kentucky, and they were referred to as the border states. Kentucky and Missouri both had dual competing Confederate governments, the Confederate government of Kentucky and the Confederate government of Missouri. The Confederacy controlled more than half of Kentucky and the southern portion of Missouri early in the war but largely lost control in both states after 1862. West Virginia, created in 1863 from Unionist and Confederate counties of Virginia, was represented in both Union and Confederate legislatures, and was the only border state to have civilian voting in the 1863 Confederate States House of Representatives elections.

By the time the Emancipation Proclamation was made in 1863, Tennessee was already under Union control. Accordingly, the Proclamation applied only to the 10 remaining Confederate states. Some of the border states abolished slavery before the end of the Civil War—Maryland in 1864, Missouri in 1865, one of the Confederate states, Tennessee in 1865, West Virginia in 1865, and the District of Columbia in 1862. However, slavery persisted in Delaware, Kentucky, and 10 of the 11 former Confederate states, until the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution abolished slavery throughout the United States on December 18, 1865.

Democratic dominance of the South originated in the struggle of white Southerners during and after Reconstruction (1865–1877) to reestablish white supremacy and disenfranchise black people. The federal government of the United States under the Republican Party had defeated the Confederacy, abolished slavery, and enfranchised black people. In several states, black voters were a majority or close to it. Republicans supported by black people controlled state governments in these states. Thus the Democratic Party became the vehicle for the white supremacist Redeemers. The Ku Klux Klan, as well as other insurgent paramilitary groups such as the White League and Red Shirts from 1874, acted as &quot;the military arm of the Democratic party&quot; to disrupt Republican organizing, and to engage in voter intimidation and voter suppresion of black voters.

==History==

===1870s to 1910s===

By 1876, &quot;Redeemer&quot; Democrats had taken control of all state governments in the South. From then until the 1960s, state and local government in the South was almost entirely monopolized by Democrats. The Democrats elected all but a handful of U.S. Representatives and Senators, and Democratic presidential candidates regularly swept the region – from 1880 through 1944, winning a cumulative total of 182 of 187 states. The Democrats reinforced the loyalty of white voters by emphasizing the suffering of the South during the war at the hands of &quot;Yankee invaders&quot; under Republican leadership, and the noble service of their white forefathers in &quot;the Lost Cause&quot;. This rhetoric was effective with many Southerners. However, this propaganda was totally ineffective in areas that had been loyal to the Union during the war, such as East Tennessee. Most of East Tennessee welcomed U.S. troops as liberators, and voted Republican even in the Solid South period.

Even after white Democrats regained control of state legislatures, some black candidates were elected to local offices and state legislatures in the South. Black U.S. Representatives were elected from the South as late as the 1890s, usually from overwhelmingly black areas. The bi-racial Readjuster Party existed in Virginia from 1877 to 1895, electing William E. Cameron as the 39th Governor of Virginia from 1882 to 1886. Also, in the 1890s the Populists developed a following in the South, among poor white people who resented the Democratic Party establishment. Populists formed alliances with Republicans (including black Republicans) and challenged the Democratic bosses. In some cases, the Populists and their allies defeated their Democratic opponents, including in North Carolina.

In North Carolina, Republican Daniel Lindsay Russell was elected in 1896 as the 49th governor of North Carolina, serving from 1897 to 1901. On November 8, 1898, a part-black fusion slate won elections in Wilmington, then the state&#x27;s largest city and with a black majority. Alfred Waddell, whom Russell had defeated for Congress in 1878, led thousands of white rioters in the Wilmington Insurrection of 1898; they seized the city government by force, and destroyed the only black-owned newspaper in the state. Although Russell was not up for election in 1898, Democrats used him as a foil in their campaign that year, attacking him for undermining &quot;white supremacy&quot; and fanning fears of &quot;negro rule&quot; to regain control of the state legislature.

To prevent such coalitions in the future and to end the violence associated with suppressing the black vote during elections, Southern Democrats acted to disfranchise both black people and poor white people. From 1890 to 1910, beginning with Mississippi, all 11 former Confederate states adopted new constitutions and other laws which included various devices to restrict voter registration. These changes disfranchised virtually all black and many poor white residents. These devices applied to all citizens; in practice they disfranchised most black citizens and also &quot;would remove [from voter registration rolls] the less educated, less organized, more impoverished whites as well – and that would ensure one-party Democratic rules through most of the 20th century in the South&quot;. All the Southern states adopted provisions that restricted voter registration and suffrage, including new requirements for poll taxes, longer residency, and subjective literacy tests. Some also used the device of grandfather clauses, exempting voters who had a grandfather voting by a particular year (usually before the Civil War, when black people could not vote.)

U.S. Senator Benjamin Tillman explained how African Americans were disenfranchised in his state of South Carolina in a white supremacist speech:
In my State there were 135,000 negro voters, or negroes of voting age, and some 90,000 or 95,000 white voters... Now, I want to ask you, with a free vote and a fair count, how are you going to beat 135,000 by 95,000? How are you going to do it? You had set us an impossible task.We did not disfranchise the negroes until 1895. Then we had a constitutional convention convened which took the matter up calmly, deliberately, and avowedly with the purpose of disfranchising as many of them as we could under the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments. We adopted the educational qualification as the only means left to us, and the negro is as contented and as prosperous and as well protected in South Carolina to-day as in any State of the Union south of the Potomac. He is not meddling with politics, for he found that the more he meddled with them the worse off he got. As to his &quot;rights&quot;—I will not discuss them now. We of the South have never recognized the right of the negro to govern white men, and we never will... I would to God the last one of them was in Africa and that none of them had ever been brought to our shores.

White Democrats also opposed Republican economic policies such as the high tariff and the gold standard, both of which were seen as benefiting Northern industrial interests at the expense of the agrarian society of the South during the 19th century. Nevertheless, holding all political power was at the heart of their resistance. From 1876 through 1944, the national Democratic party opposed any calls for civil rights for black people. In Congress, Southern Democrats blocked such efforts whenever Republicans targeted the issue.

White Democrats passed &quot;Jim Crow&quot; laws which reinforced white supremacy through racial segregation. The Fourteenth Amendment provided for apportionment of representation in Congress to be reduced if a state disenfranchised part of its population. However, this clause was never applied to Southern states that disenfranchised black residents. No black candidate was elected to any office in the South for decades after the turn of the century. Black residents were also excluded from juries and other participation in civil life.

===Electoral dominance===
Democratic candidates won by large margins in a majority of Southern states in every presidential election from 1876 to 1948, except for 1928, when the Democratic candidate was Al Smith, a Catholic New Yorker. Even in that election, the divided South provided Smith with nearly three-fourths of his electoral votes. Scholar Richard Valelly credited Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s 1912 election to the disfranchisement of black people in the South, and also noted far-reaching effects in Congress, where the Democratic South gained &quot;about 25 extra seats in Congress for each decade between 1903 and 1953&quot;. Journalist Matthew Yglesias argues:
In the Deep South (South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana), Democratic dominance was overwhelming, with Democrats routinely receiving 80%–90% of the vote, and only a tiny number of Republicans holding state legislative seats or local offices. Mississippi and South Carolina were the most extreme cases – between 1900 and 1944, only in 1928, when the three subcoastal Mississippi counties of Pearl River, Stone and George went for Hoover, did the Democrats lose even one of these two states&#x27; counties in any presidential election.

The German-American Texas counties of Gillespie and Kendall, Arkansas Ozarks counties of Newton and Searcy, and a number of counties in Appalachian parts of Alabama and Georgia would vote Republican in presidential elections through this period. Arkansas consistently voted Democratic from 1876 to 1964, though Democratic margins were lower than in the Deep South. Even in 1939, Florida was described as &quot;still very largely an empty State,&quot; with only North Florida largely settled until after World War II. In Louisiana, non-partisan tendencies remained strong among wealthy sugar planters in Acadiana (Cajun Country) and within the business elite of New Orleans.

In East Tennessee, Western North Carolina, and Southwest Virginia, Republicans retained a significant presence in these remote Appalachian regions which supported the Union during the Civil War and had few African Americans, winning occasional U.S. House seats and often drawing over 40% in presidential votes statewide. In particular, Tennessee&#x27;s 1st and 2nd congressional districts have been continuously held by Republicans since 1881 and 1867, respectively, to the present day.

In 1900, as the 56th Congress considered proposals for apportioning its seats among the 45 states following the 1900 Federal Census, Representative Edgar D. Crumpacker (R-IN) filed an independent report urging that the Southern states be stripped of seats due to the large numbers of voters they had disfranchised. He noted this was provided for in Section 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment, which provided for stripping representation from states that reduced suffrage due to race. From 1896 until 1900, the House of Representatives with a Republican majority had acted in more than thirty cases to set aside election results from Southern states where the House Elections Committee had concluded that &quot;[B]lack voters had been excluded due to fraud, violence, or intimidation&quot;. However, in the early 1900s, it began to back off, after Democrats won a majority, which included Southern delegations that were solidly in Democratic hands. However, concerted opposition by the Southern Democratic bloc was aroused, and the effort failed.

===1920s onwards===

By the 1920s, as memories of the Civil War faded, the Solid South cracked slightly. For instance, a Republican was elected U.S. Representative from Texas in 1920, serving until 1932. The Republican national landslides in 1920 and 1928 had some effects. In the 1920 elections, Tennessee elected a Republican governor and five out of 10 Republican U.S. Representatives, and became the first former Confederate state to vote for a Republican candidate for U.S. President since Reconstruction. North Carolina abolished its poll tax in 1920.

In the 1928 presidential election, Al Smith received serious backlash as a Catholic in the largely Protestant South in 1928. Southern Baptist churches ordered their followers to vote against Smith, claiming that he would close down Protestant churches, end freedom of worship, and prohibit reading the Bible. However, it was widely believed that Republican Herbert Hoover supported integration or at least was not committed to maintaining racial segregation, overcoming opposition to Smith&#x27;s campaign in areas with large nonvoting black populations. Smith only managed to carry Arkansas (the home state of his running mate Joseph T. Robinson) and the 5 states of the Deep South, and nearly lost Alabama by less than 3%.

The boll weevil, a species of beetle that feeds on cotton buds and flowers, crossed the Rio Grande near Brownsville, Texas, to enter the United States from Mexico in 1892. It reached southeastern Alabama in 1909, and by the mid-1920s had entered all cotton-growing regions in the U.S., traveling 40 to 160 miles per year. The boll weevil contributed to Southern farmers&#x27; economic woes during the 1920s, a situation exacerbated by the Great Depression in the 1930s. The boll weevil infestation has been credited with bringing about economic diversification in the Southern US, including the expansion of peanut cropping. The citizens of Enterprise, Alabama, erected the Boll Weevil Monument in 1919, perceiving that their economy had been overly dependent on cotton, and that mixed farming and manufacturing were better alternatives. By 1922, it was taking 8% of the cotton in the country annually. A 2020 NBER paper found that the boll weevil spread contributed to fewer lynchings, less Confederate monument construction, less KKK activity, and higher non-white voter registration.

Southern demography also began to change. From 1910 through 1970, about 6.5 million black Southerners moved to urban areas in other parts of the country in the Great Migration, and demographics began to change Southern states in other ways. The failures of the South&#x27;s cotton crop due to the boll weevil was a major impetus for the Great Migration, although not the only one.

However, with the Democratic national landslide of 1932, the South again became solidly Democratic. A number of conservative Southern Democrats felt chagrin at the national party&#x27;s growing friendliness to organized labor during the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration, forming the conservative coalition with conservative Republicans in 1937 to stymie further New Deal legislation. Roosevelt was unsuccessful in attempting to purge some of these conservative Southern Democrats in white primaries in the 1938 elections, such as Senator Walter George of Georgia and Senator Ellison Smith of South Carolina, in contrast to successfully ousting representative and chair of the House Rules Committee John J. O&#x27;Connor of New York.

In the 1930s, black voters outside the South largely switched to the Democrats, and other groups with an interest in civil rights (notably Jews, Catholics, and academic intellectuals) became more powerful in the party. Louisiana abolished its poll tax in 1934, as did Florida in 1937.

The Republican Party began to make gains in the South after World War II, as the South industrialized and urbanized. World War II marked a time of dramatic change within the South from an economic standpoint, as new industries and military bases were developed by the federal government, providing much-needed capital and infrastructure in the former Confederate states. Per capita income jumped 140% from 1940 to 1945, compared to 100% elsewhere in the United States. Dewey Grantham said the war &quot;brought an abrupt departure from the South&#x27;s economic backwardness, poverty, and distinctive rural life, as the region moved perceptively closer to the mainstream of national economic and social life.&quot;

Florida began to expand rapidly after World War II, with retirees and other migrants in Central and South Florida becoming a majority of the state&#x27;s population. Many of these new residents brought their Republican voting habits with them, diluting traditional Southern hostility to the Republicans. In 1944, the Supreme Court ruled 8-1 in &quot;Smith v. Allwright&quot; against white primary systems, and most Southern states ended their racially discriminatory primary elections. They retained other techniques of disenfranchisement, such as poll taxes and literacy tests, which in theory applied to all potential voters, but in practice were administered in a discriminatory manner by white officials.

===Oklahoma===
Oklahoma was considered part of the Solid South, but did not become a state until 1907, and shared characteristics of both the border states and the former Confederate states in the Upper South. Oklahoma disenfranchised its African American population, which comprised less than 10% of the state&#x27;s population from 1870 to 1960. However, Oklahoma did not enact a poll tax and remained electorally competitive at the state and federal levels during the Jim Crow era. Oklahoma elected three Republican U.S. Senators before 1964: John W. Harreld (1921-1927), William B. Pine (1925-1931), and Edward H. Moore (1943-1949). Oklahoma had a strong Republican presence in Northwestern Oklahoma, which had close ties to neighboring Kansas, a Republican stronghold.

During the Civil War, most of present-day Oklahoma was designated as Indian Territory and permitted slavery, with most tribal leaders aligning with the Confederacy. However, some tribes and bands sided with the Union, resulting in bloody conflict in the territory, with severe hardships for all residents. The Oklahoma Territory was settled through a series of land runs from 1889 to 1895, which included significant numbers of Republican settlers from the Great Plains.

Oklahoma did not have a Republican governor until Henry Bellmon was elected in 1962, though Republicans were still able to draw over 40% of the vote statewide during the Jim Crow era. Democrats were strongest in Southeast Oklahoma, known as &quot;Little Dixie&quot;, whose white settlers were Southerners seeking a start in new lands following the American Civil War. In &quot;Guinn v. United States&quot; (1915), the Supreme Court invalidated the Oklahoma Constitution&#x27;s &quot;old soldier&quot; and &quot;grandfather clause&quot; exemptions from literacy tests. Oklahoma and other states quickly reacted by passing laws that created other rules for voter registration that worked against blacks and minorities.

However, Oklahoma did not enact a poll tax, unlike the former Confederate states. As a result, Oklahoma was still competitive at the presidential level, voting for Warren G. Harding in 1920 and Herbert Hoover in 1928. Oklahoma shifted earlier to supporting Republican presidential candidates, with the state voting for every Republican ticket since 1952, except for Lyndon B. Johnson in his 1964 landslide. Oklahoma is the only Southern state to have never voted for a Democratic presidential candidate after 1964. It was one of only two Southern states, the other being Virginia, to be carried by Republican Gerald Ford in the 1976 presidential election.

==Border states==

In contrast to the 11 former Confederate states, where almost all blacks were disenfranchised during the first half to two-thirds of the twentieth century, for varying reasons blacks remained enfranchised in the border states despite movements for disfranchisement during the 1900s. Note that Missouri is classified as a Midwestern state by the Census bureau, and also did not disenfranchise its African American population.

The border states, being the northern region of the Upper South, had close ties to the industrializing and urbanizing Northeast and Midwest, experiencing a realignment in the 1896 United States presidential election.

African Americans generally comprised a significantly lower percentage of the populations of the Border States than the percentages in the former Confederate states from 1870 to 1960. Less than 10% of the populations of West Virginia and Missouri were African American. In Kentucky, 5-20% of the state&#x27;s population was African American. In Delaware, 10-20% of the state&#x27;s population was African American. In Maryland, 15-25% of the state&#x27;s population was African American.

===West Virginia===
For West Virginia, &quot;reconstruction, in a sense, began in 1861&quot;. Unlike the other border states, West Virginia did not send the majority of its soldiers to the Union. The prospect of those returning ex-Confederates prompted the Wheeling state government to implement laws that restricted their right of suffrage, practicing law and teaching, access to the legal system, and subjected them to &quot;war trespass&quot; lawsuits. The lifting of these restrictions in 1871 resulted in the election of John J. Jacob, a Democrat, to the governorship. It also led to the rejection of the war-time constitution by public vote and a new constitution written under the leadership of ex-Confederates such as Samuel Price, Allen T. Caperton and Charles James Faulkner. In 1876 the state Democratic ticket of eight candidates were all elected, seven of whom were Confederate veterans. For nearly a generation West Virginia was part of the Solid South.

However, Republicans returned to power in 1896, controlling the governorship for eight of the next nine terms, and electing 82 of 106 U.S. Representatives until 1932. In 1932, as the nation swung to the Democrats, West Virginia again became solidly Democratic. It was perhaps the most reliably Democratic state in the nation between 1932 and 1996, being one of just two states (along with Minnesota) to vote for a Republican president as few as three times in that interval. Moreover, unlike Minnesota (or other nearly as reliably Democratic states like Massachusetts and Rhode Island), it usually had a unanimous (or nearly unanimous) congressional delegation and only elected two Republicans as governor (albeit for a combined 20 years between them).

===Kentucky===
Kentucky did usually vote for the Democratic Party in presidential elections from 1877 to 1964, but was still a competitive state at both the state and federal levels. The Democratic Party in the state was heavily divided over free silver and the role of corporations in the middle 1890s, and lost the governorship for the first time in forty years in 1895. In contrast to the former Confederate States, Kentucky was part of the Upper South and bordered the industrial Midwest across the Ohio River, and had a significant urban working class who supported Republicans. In the 1896 presidential election, the state was exceedingly close, with McKinley becoming the first Republican presidential candidate to carry Kentucky, by a mere 277 votes, or 0.06352%. McKinley&#x27;s victory was, by percentage margin, the seventh-closest popular results for presidential electors on record.

In Kentucky, Lexington&#x27;s city government had passed a poll tax in 1901, but it was declared invalid in state circuit courts. Six years later, a new state legislative effort to disenfranchise blacks failed because of the strong organization of the Republican Party in pro-Union regions of the state. Kentucky remained in the Union during the Civil War, with some pro-Union counties in the state having never voted Democratic to this day, similar to neighboring East Tennessee. 

Republicans won Kentucky in the 1924 and 1928 presidential elections, the former of which was the only state that Warren G. Harding lost in the 1920 presidential election, but Coolidge won in the 1924 presidential election. Kentucky also elected some Republican governors during this period, such as William O&#x27;Connell Bradley (1895-1899), Augustus E. Willson (1907-1911), Edwin P. Morrow (1919-1923), Flem D. Sampson (1927-1931), and Simeon Willis (1943-1947).

===Maryland===

Maryland very narrowly, by a vote of 30,174 to 28,380 (52% to 48%), abolished slavery in 1864. Maryland voted for the Democratic Party presidential candidate from 1868 to 1892, but the 1896 presidential election was a realignment in the state, similar to West Virginia. Maryland voted for the Republican Party presidential candidate from 1896 to 1928, except for Democrat Woodrow Wilson in 1912 and 1916.

In contrast to the former Confederate states, nearly half the African American population was free before the Civil War, and some had accumulated property. Literacy was high among African Americans and, as Democrats crafted means to exclude them, suffrage campaigns helped reach blacks and teach them how to resist. In 1895, a biracial Republican coalition enabled the election of Lloyd Lowndes, Jr. as governor (1896 to 1900).

The Democrat-dominated state legislature tried to pass disfranchising bills in 1905, 1907, and 1911, but was rebuffed on each occasion, in large part because of black opposition and strength. Black men comprised 20% of the electorate and had established themselves in several cities, where they had comparative security. In addition, immigrant men comprised 15% of the voting population and opposed these measures. The legislature had difficulty devising requirements against blacks that did not also disadvantage immigrants. In 1910, the legislature proposed the Digges Amendment to the state constitution. It would have used property requirements to effectively disenfranchise many African American men as well as many poor white men (including new immigrants). The Maryland General Assembly passed the bill, which Governor Austin Lane Crothers supported. Before the measure went to popular vote, a bill was proposed that would have effectively passed the requirements of the Digges Amendment into law. Due to widespread public opposition, that measure failed, and the amendment was also rejected by the voters of Maryland with 46,220 votes for and 83,920 votes against the proposal.

Nationally Maryland citizens achieved the most notable rejection of a black-disfranchising amendment. The power of black men at the ballot box and economically helped them resist these bills and disfranchising effort. In 1911, Republican Phillips Lee Goldsborough (1912 to 1916) was elected governor, succeeding Crothers. Maryland elected two more Republican governors from 1877 to 1964, Harry Nice (1935 to 1939) and Theodore McKeldin (1951 to 1959).

===Delaware===

Despite Delaware not abolishing slavery until the ratification of the 13th amendment, due its proximity to the Northeast and not bordering any of the former Confederate States, Delaware voted for the Republican Party in a majority of presidential elections from 1876 to 1964 (12 out of 23).

For a generation bitter memories of Republican actions during the Civil War had kept the Democrats firmly in control of the government throughout Delaware. However, during this period gas executive J. Edward Addicks, a Philadelphia millionaire, established residence in Delaware, and began pouring money into the Republican Party, especially in Kent and Sussex County. He succeeded in reigniting the Republican Party, which would soon become the dominant party in the state. In 1894, Republican Joshua H. Marvil was elected as the first Republican governor of Delaware since Reconstruction. The allegiance of industries with the Republican party allowed them to gain control of Delaware&#x27;s governorship throughout most of the twentieth century. The Republican Party ensured Black people could vote because of their general support for Republicans and thus undid restrictions on Black suffrage.

Delaware voted for the Democratic Party presidential candidate from 1876 to 1892, but then consistently voted for the Republican Party presidential candidate from 1896 to 1932, except in 1912 for Woodrow Wilson when the Republican Party split. Delaware voted for Republican Herbert Hoover in 1932, despite Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt winning in a landslide.

===Missouri===

Although a border state during the Civil War, Missouri abolished slavery in January 1865, before the Civil War ended. Missouri enacted racial segregation, but did not disenfranchise African Americans, who comprised less than 10% of the state&#x27;s population from 1870 to 1960. In particular, Missouri never implemented a poll tax as a requirement to vote, unlike even neighboring Kentucky.

Between the Civil War and the end of World War II, Missouri transitioned from a rural economy to a hybrid industrial-service-agricultural economy as the Midwest rapidly industrialized. Missouri voted for the Republican presidential candidate in the 1904 presidential election for the first time since 1872, repositioning itself from being associated with the Solid South to being seen as a bellwether state throughout the twentieth century. From 1904 until 2004, Missouri only backed a losing presidential candidate once, in 1956. Missouri also elected some Republican governors before 1964, beginning with Herbert S. Hadley (1909-1913).

==Presidential voting==
The 1896 election resulted in the first break in the Solid South. Florida politician Marion L. Dawson, writing in the &quot;North American Review&quot;, observed: &quot;The victorious party not only held in line those States which are usually relied upon to give Republican majorities ... More significant still, it invaded the Solid South, and bore off West Virginia, Maryland, and Kentucky; caused North Carolina to tremble in the balance and reduced Democratic majorities in the following States: Alabama, 39,000; Arkansas, 29,000; Florida, 6,000; Georgia, 49,000; Louisiana, 33,000; South Carolina, 6,000; and Texas, 29,000. These facts, taken together with the great landslide of 1894 and 1895, which swept Missouri and Tennessee, Maryland and Kentucky over into the country of the enemy, have caused Southern statesmen to seriously consider whether the so-called Solid South is not now a thing of past history&quot;. The former Confederate states stayed mostly a single bloc until the 1960s, with a brief break in the 1920s, however.

In the 1904 election, Missouri supported Republican Theodore Roosevelt, while Maryland awarded its electors to Democrat Alton Parker, despite Roosevelt&#x27;s winning by 51 votes. Missouri was a bellwether state from 1904 to 2004, voting for the winner of every presidential election except in 1956. By the 1916 election, disfranchisement of blacks and many poor whites was complete, and voter rolls had dropped dramatically in the South. Closing out Republican supporters gave a bump to Woodrow Wilson, who took all the electors across the South (apart from Delaware and West Virginia), as the Republican Party was stifled without support by African Americans.

The 1920 presidential election was a referendum on President Wilson&#x27;s League of Nations. Pro-isolation sentiment in the South benefited Republican Warren G. Harding, who won Tennessee, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Maryland. In 1924, Republican Calvin Coolidge won Kentucky, Missouri, and Maryland.

In 1928, Herbert Hoover, benefiting from bias against his Democratic opponent Al Smith (who was a Roman Catholic and opposed Prohibition), won not only those Southern states that had been carried by either Harding or Coolidge (Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Maryland), but also won Florida, North Carolina, Texas, and Virginia, none of which had voted Republican since Reconstruction. He furthermore came within 3% of carrying the Deep South state of Alabama. Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover all carried the two Southern states that had supported Hughes in 1916, West Virginia and Delaware. Al Smith received serious backlash as a Catholic in the largely Protestant South in 1928, carrying only his running mate Joseph T. Robinson&#x27;s home state of Arkansas and the 5 states of the Deep South. The only place where Smith&#x27;s Catholicism helped him in the South was heavily-Catholic Acadiana in Louisiana. Smith nearly lost Alabama, which he held by 3%, which had Hoover won, would have physically split the Solid South.

The South appeared &quot;solid&quot; again during the period of Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s political dominance, as his New Deal welfare programs and military buildup invested considerable money in the South, benefiting many of its citizens, including during the Dust Bowl. Roosevelt carried all the 11 former Confederate states and Oklahoma in each of his four presidential elections.

===After World War II===
Democratic President Harry S. Truman, who grew up in the border state of Missouri where segregation was practiced and largely accepted, issued Executive Order 9981 in July 1948, prohibiting racial segregation in the armed forces. Truman&#x27;s support of the civil rights movement, combined with the adoption of a civil rights plank in the 1948 Democratic platform proposed by future Vice President Hubert Humphrey, prompted many Southerners to walk out of the Democratic National Convention and form the Dixiecrat Party. This splinter party played a significant role in the 1948 election; the Dixiecrat candidate, Strom Thurmond, carried Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, his native South Carolina, and one electoral vote from Tennessee.

Despite this, in one of the greatest election upsets in American history, incumbent Democratic President Harry S. Truman defeated heavily favored Republican New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey. Truman vote every electoral vote in the former Confederate states not won by Thurmond. Three former Confederate states repealed their poll taxes after World War II, specifically Georgia (1945), South Carolina (1951), and Tennessee (1953).

In the elections of 1952 and 1956, the popular Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower, commander of the Allied armed forces during World War II, carried several Southern states, with especially strong showings in the new suburbs. Most of the Southern states he carried had voted for at least one of the Republican winners in the 1920s, but in 1956, Eisenhower carried Louisiana, becoming the first Republican to win the state since Rutherford B. Hayes in 1876. The rest of the Deep South voted for his Democratic opponent, Adlai Stevenson.

In the 1960 election, the Democratic nominee, John F. Kennedy, continued his party&#x27;s tradition of selecting a Southerner as the vice presidential candidate (in this case, Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas). Kennedy and Johnson, however, both supported civil rights. In October 1960, when Martin Luther King Jr. was arrested at a peaceful sit-in in Atlanta, Georgia, Kennedy placed a sympathetic phone call to King&#x27;s wife, Coretta Scott King, and Kennedy&#x27;s brother Robert F. Kennedy helped secure King&#x27;s release. King expressed his appreciation for these calls. Although King made no endorsement, his father, who had previously endorsed Republican Richard Nixon, switched his support to Kennedy.

By the mid-1960s, changes had come in many Southern states. Former Dixiecrat Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina changed parties in 1964; Texas elected a Republican Senator in 1961; Florida and Arkansas elected Republican governors in 1966, as did Virginia in 1969. In the Upper South, where Republicans had always been a small presence, Republicans gained a few seats in the House and Senate.

Because of these and other events, the Democrats lost ground with white voters in the South, as those same voters increasingly lost control over what was once a whites-only Democratic Party in much of the South. The 1960 election was the first in which a Republican presidential candidate received electoral votes from the former Confederacy while losing nationally. Nixon carried Virginia, Tennessee, and Florida. Though the Democrats also won Alabama and Mississippi, slates of unpledged electors, representing Democratic segregationists, awarded those states&#x27; electoral votes to Harry Byrd, rather than Kennedy.

The parties&#x27; positions on civil rights continued to evolve in the run up to the 1964 election. The Democratic candidate, Johnson, who had become president after Kennedy&#x27;s assassination, spared no effort to win passage of a strong Civil Rights Act of 1964. After signing the landmark legislation, Johnson said to his aide, Bill Moyers: &quot;I think we just delivered the South to the Republican Party for a long time to come.&quot; In contrast, Johnson&#x27;s Republican opponent, Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, voted against the Civil Rights Act, believing it enhanced the federal government and infringed on the private property rights of businessmen. Goldwater did support civil rights in general and universal suffrage, and voted for the 1957 Civil Rights Act (though casting no vote on the 1960 Civil Rights Act), as well as voting for the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which banned poll taxes as a requirement for voting. This was one of the devices that states used to disfranchise African Americans and the poor.

In November 1964, Johnson won a landslide electoral victory, and the Republicans suffered significant losses in Congress. Goldwater, however, besides carrying his home state of Arizona, carried the Deep South: voters in Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, and South Carolina had switched parties for the first time since Reconstruction. Goldwater notably won only in Southern states that had voted against Republican Richard Nixon in 1960, while not winning a single Southern state which Nixon had carried. Previous Republican inroads in the South had been concentrated on high-growth suburban areas, often with many transplants, as well as on the periphery of the South.

Harold D, Woodman summarizes the explanation that external forces caused the disintegration of the Jim Crow South from the 1920s to the 1970s:
:When a significant change finally occurred, its impetus came from outside the South. Depression-bred New Deal reforms, war-induced demand for labor in the North, perfection of cotton-picking machinery, and civil rights legislation and court decisions finally... destroyed the plantation system, undermined landlord or merchant hegemony, diversified agriculture and transformed it from a labor- to a capital-intensive industry, and ended the legal and extra-legal support for racism. The discontinuity that war, invasion, military occupation, the confiscation of slave property, and state and national legislation failed to bring in the mid-19th century, finally arrived in the second third of the 20th century. A &quot;second reconstruction&quot; created a real New South.

==Southern strategy==
The &quot;Southern strategy&quot; was the long-term Republican Party electoral strategy to increase political support among white voters in the Southern United States since the 1960s. According to a quantitative analysis done by Ilyana Kuziemko and Ebonya Washington, racial backlash played a central role in the decline in relative white Southern Democratic identification. Support for the civil rights movement in the 1960s by Democratic presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson solidified the Democrats&#x27; support within the African American community. African Americans have consistently voted between 85% and 95% Democratic since the 1960s.

Although Richard Nixon carried 49 states in 1972, including every Southern state, the Republican Party remained quite weak at the local and state levels across the entire South for decades. Glenn Feldman argues that &quot;the South did not become Republican so much as the Republican Party became southern.&quot; Republicans first won a majority of U.S. House seats in the South in the 1994 &quot;Republican Revolution&quot;, and only began to dominate the South after the 2010 elections. Many analysts believe the Southern Strategy that has been employed by Republicans since the 1960s is now virtually complete, with Republicans in dominant, almost total, control of political offices in the South since the 2010s.

Scholars have debated the extent to which ideological &quot;divisions over the size of government (including taxes, social programs, and regulation), national security, and moral issues such as abortion and gay rights, with racial issues only one of numerous areas about which liberals and conservatives disagree,&quot; were responsible for the realignment. When looked at broadly, studies have shown that White Southerners tend to be more conservative, both fiscally and socially, than most non-Southerners and African Americans. Historically, Southern Democrats were generally more conservative than non-Southern Democrats, joining factions such as the conservative coalition and Boll weevils.

===1965 to 1980===
In the 1968 election, Richard Nixon saw the cracks in the Solid South as an opportunity to tap into a group of voters who had historically been beyond the reach of the Republican Party. With the aid of Harry Dent and South Carolina Senator Strom Thurmond, who had switched to the Republican Party in 1964, Nixon ran his 1968 campaign on states&#x27; rights and &quot;law and order&quot;. As a key component of this strategy, he selected as his running mate Maryland Governor Spiro Agnew. Liberal Northern Democrats accused Nixon of pandering to Southern whites, especially with regard to his &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; and &quot;law and order&quot; positions, which were widely understood by black leaders to legitimize the status quo of Southern states&#x27; discrimination. This tactic was described in 2007 by David Greenberg in &quot;Slate&quot; as &quot;dog-whistle politics&quot;. According to an article in &quot;The American Conservative&quot;, Nixon adviser and speechwriter Pat Buchanan disputed this characterization.

The independent candidacy of George Wallace, former Democratic governor of Alabama, partially negated Nixon&#x27;s Southern Strategy. With a much more explicit attack on integration and black civil rights, Wallace won all but two of Goldwater&#x27;s states (the exceptions being South Carolina and Arizona) as well as Arkansas and one of North Carolina&#x27;s electoral votes. Nixon picked up Virginia, Tennessee, North Carolina, South Carolina, Florida, Oklahoma, Kentucky, Missouri, and Delaware. The Democrat, Hubert Humphrey, won Texas, heavily unionized West Virginia, and heavily urbanized Maryland. Writer Jeffrey Hart, who worked on the Nixon campaign as a speechwriter, said in 2006 that Nixon did not have a &quot;Southern Strategy&quot;, but &quot;Border State Strategy&quot; as he said that the 1968 campaign ceded the Deep South to George Wallace. Hart suggested that the press called it a &quot;Southern Strategy&quot; as they are &quot;very lazy&quot;.

The 1968 election had been the first election in which both the Upper South and Deep South bolted from the Democratic party simultaneously. The Upper South had backed Eisenhower in 1952 and 1956, as well as Nixon in 1960. The Deep South had backed Goldwater just four years prior. Despite the two regions of the South still backing different candidates, Wallace in the Deep South and Nixon in the Upper South, only Texas, Maryland, and West Virginia had held up against the majority Nixon-Wallace vote for Humphrey. By 1972, Nixon had swept the South altogether, Upper and Deep South alike, marking the first time in American history a Republican won every Southern state.

In the 1976 election, former Georgia governor Jimmy Carter gave Democrats a short-lived comeback in the South, winning every state in the old Confederacy except for Virginia, which was narrowly lost. However, in his unsuccessful 1980 re-election bid, the only Southern states he won were his native state of Georgia, West Virginia, and Maryland. The year 1976 was the last year a Democratic presidential candidate won a majority of Southern electoral votes, or won Texas, Mississippi, Alabama, and South Carolina in a presidential election. The Republicans took all the region&#x27;s electoral votes in the 1984 election and every state except West Virginia in 1988.

===1980 to 1999===

Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the South was still overwhelmingly Democratic at the state level, with majorities in all state legislatures and most U.S. House delegations. Many conservative Southern white voters split their tickets, supporting conservative Democrats for local and statewide office while simultaneously voting for Republican presidential candidates. Republicans held 10 of the 22 US Senate seats and 39 seats in the US House of Representatives from the South after the 1980 elections, after winning control of the U.S. Senate for the first time since 1952. Republican president Ronald Reagan was able to form a governing majority due to a coalition between Republicans and conservative Southern Democrats, known as the boll weevils, named after the species of beetle destructive to cotton crops.

Over the next 30 years, this gradually changed. Veteran Democratic officeholders retired or died, and older voters who were still rigidly Democratic died off. As part of the Republican Revolution in the 1994 elections, Republicans captured a majority of the U.S. House&#x27;s southern seats for the first time, which allowed them to win control of the U.S. House for the first time since 1952. There were also increasing numbers of migrants from other areas, especially in Florida, Georgia, Texas, North Carolina, and Virginia.

Some former Southern Democrats became Republicans, such as Kent Hance (1985), Rick Perry (1989), and Ralph Hall (2004) from Texas; Billy Tauzin (1995) and Jimmy Hayes (1995) from Louisiana; Richard Shelby (1994) and Kay Ivey (2002) from Alabama; and Nathan Deal (1995) and Sonny Perdue (1998) from Georgia.

In the 1992 and 1996 elections, when the Democratic ticket consisted of two Southerners (Bill Clinton and Al Gore), the Democrats and Republicans split the region. In both elections, Clinton won Arkansas, Louisiana, Kentucky, Tennessee, West Virginia, Missouri, Maryland, and Delaware, while the Republican won Texas, Mississippi, Alabama, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, and Oklahoma. Bill Clinton won Georgia in 1992, but lost it in 1996 to Bob Dole. Conversely, Clinton lost Florida in 1992 to George H.W. Bush, but won it in 1996. The year 1996 was the last year a Democratic presidential candidate won Louisiana, Arkansas, Tennessee, Missouri, Kentucky, and West Virginia.

====Northeast realignment====

While the South was shifting from the Democrats to the Republicans, the Northeastern United States went the other way. The Northeastern United States is defined by the US Census Bureau as Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, and the New England States. Maryland and Delaware also are included in some definitions of the Northeast, being located in the Northeast megalopolis.

The argument that the South shifted to the Republicans in part by having higher ideological support for conservatism gains support from the Northeast having higher ideological support for liberalism and shifting to the Democrats. In the 1980s, the term gypsy moth Republican described Republicans from the Northeast who voted against the Ronald Reagan administration&#x27;s proposed cuts in aid to economically distressed people, contrasting with boll weevil Southern Democrats who voted for these cuts. The gypsy moth is an invasive species destructive to trees in the Northeastern United States.

In Harry S. Truman&#x27;s 1948 upset victory, he only won the Northeastern states of Massachusetts and Rhode Island. Truman won every Southern electoral vote not won by Dixiecrat Strom Thurmond except for the border states of Maryland and Delaware, which he narrowly lost to Republican Thomas E. Dewey.

In his close 1976 presidential election victory, former governor of Georgia Jimmy Carter lost the Northeastern states of New Jersey, Connecticut, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine while winning every former Confederate state except Virginia. Well into the 1980s, much of the Northeast – in particular the heavily suburbanized states of New Jersey and Connecticut, and the rural states of northern New England – were strongholds of the Republican Party. The Democratic Party made steady gains there, however, and from 1992 through 2012, all nine Northeastern states plus Maryland and Delaware voted Democratic, with the exception of New Hampshire&#x27;s plurality for George W. Bush in 2000.

===21st century===
Although Republican presidents had dominated the South during landslide victories in the late 20th century, the South only became a Republican stronghold at the presidential level in the 21st century. In 2000, Al Gore received no electoral votes from the South, even from his home state of Tennessee, apart from heavily urbanized and uncontested Maryland and Delaware. The popular vote in Florida was extraordinarily close in awarding the state&#x27;s electoral votes to George W. Bush. This pattern continued in the 2004 election; the Democratic ticket of John Kerry and John Edwards received no electoral votes from the South apart from Maryland and Delaware, even though Edwards was from North Carolina, and was born in South Carolina.

The border states of the Upper South have split in the 21st century, with Maryland and Delaware being Democratic strongholds while Missouri, Kentucky, and West Virginia are Republican strongholds. In particular, Appalachia remained a Democratic stronghold until the 21st century. The region gradually realigned towards Republicans, particularly the state of West Virginia. 

West Virginia was perhaps the most reliably Democratic state in the nation between 1932 and 1996, being one of just two states (along with Minnesota) to vote for a Republican president as few as three times in that interval. Moreover, unlike Minnesota (or other nearly as reliably Democratic states like Massachusetts and Rhode Island), it usually had a unanimous (or nearly unanimous) congressional delegation and only elected two Republicans as governor (albeit for a combined 20 years between them). West Virginian voters shifted toward the Republican Party from 2000 onward, as the Democratic Party became more strongly identified with environmental policies anathema to the state&#x27;s coal industry and with socially liberal policies, and is now a solidly red state. After the 2010 elections, West Virginia had a majority-Republican U.S. House delegation for the first time since 1949.

In the 2008 election, as some areas in the South became more urbanized, liberal, and demographically diverse, Barack Obama won the former Republican strongholds of Virginia and North Carolina as well as Florida. However, Obama narrowly lost Missouri in 2008, ending its bellwether status, as the state has not supported a Democratic presidential candidate since 1996. Obama lost further ground in the Upland South, becoming the first person to win the presidency while losing Missouri since 1956, Kentucky and Tennessee since 1960, and Arkansas since 1968. Obama also became the first president to win without carrying West Virginia since 1916.

The tendency of many Southern Whites to split their tickets, voting for Republican presidential candidates but Democrats for state offices, lasted until the 2010 United States elections. In the November 2008 elections, Democrats won 3 out of 4 U.S. House seats from Mississippi, 3 out of 4 in Arkansas, 5 out of 9 in Tennessee, and achieved near parity in the Georgia and Alabama delegations. In 2016, Republican Donald Trump won Elliott County in Kentucky, which had previously never voted for a Republican presidential candidate since its creation in 1869. Elliott County was the last majority-White rural county in the South to have never voted Republican, until 2016.

Even after 2010, Democrats have still been competitive in some Southern swing states in presidential elections. Obama won Virginia and Florida again in 2012 and lost North Carolina by only 2.04 percent. In 2016, Hillary Clinton won only Virginia while narrowly losing Florida and North Carolina. In 2020, Joe Biden won Virginia, a growing stronghold for Democrats, and narrowly won Georgia, in large part due to the rapidly growing Atlanta metropolitan area, while narrowly losing Florida and North Carolina. In 2024, Kamala Harris won only Virginia while narrowly losing Georgia and North Carolina.

===2010 to present===
Although Republicans gradually began doing better in presidential elections in the South starting in 1952, Republicans did not finish taking over Southern politics at the non-presidential level until the elections of November 2010. On the eve of the 2010 elections, Democrats had a majority in the Alabama, North Carolina, Mississippi, Arkansas and Louisiana Legislatures, a majority in the Kentucky House of Representatives and Virginia Senate, a near majority of the Tennessee House of Representatives, and a majority of the U.S. House delegations from Arkansas, North Carolina, Mississippi, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia, as well as near-even splits of the Georgia and Alabama U.S. House delegations.
However, during the 2010 midterm elections, Republicans swept the South, successfully reelecting every Senate incumbent, electing freshmen Marco Rubio in Florida and Rand Paul in Kentucky, and defeating Democratic incumbent Blanche Lincoln in Arkansas for a seat now held by John Boozman. In the House, Republicans reelected every incumbent except for Joseph Cao of New Orleans, defeated several Democratic incumbents, and gained a number of Democratic-held open seats. They won the majority in the congressional delegations of every Southern state. Most Solid South states, with the exceptions of Arkansas, Kentucky, North Carolina, and West Virginia, also elected or reelected Republicans governors. Most significantly, Republicans took control of both houses of the Alabama and North Carolina State Legislatures for the first time since Reconstruction, with Mississippi and Louisiana flipping a year later during their off-year elections. Even in Arkansas, the GOP won three of six statewide down-ballot positions for which they had often not fielded candidates. They also went from eight to 15 out of 35 seats in the state senate and from 28 to 45 out of 100 in the State House of Representatives. In 2012, the Republicans finally took control of the Arkansas State Legislature and the North Carolina Governorship.

In 2014, both houses of the West Virginia legislature were finally taken by the GOP, and most other legislative chambers in the South up for election that year saw increased GOP gains. Shelley Moore Capito also became the first Republican Senator from West Virginia in 2014 for the first time since 1956. Arkansas&#x27; governorship finally flipped GOP in 2014 when incumbent Mike Beebe was term-limited, as did every other statewide office not previously held by the Republicans. Georgia Representative John Barrow was defeated in 2014, being the last white Democratic Representative in a state that George Wallace won in 1968 (Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Georgia).

Following the 2016 elections, when Republicans won the Kentucky House of Representatives, every state legislative chamber in the South had a Republican majority for the first time ever. Republicans would control every state legislature in the former Confederate states until Democrats regained both Houses of the Virginia Legislature in 2019.

Today, the South is considered a Republican stronghold at the state and federal levels. As of 2024, Republicans account for a majority of every Southern state&#x27;s House delegation apart from Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware. Republicans also control 10 of the 11 state legislatures in the former Confederacy, the sole exception being the Virginia General Assembly.

In 2024, Republican president Donald Trump won the majority of Hispanics in Texas and Florida, making substantial gains in majority-Hispanic counties in South Texas and South Florida in the 2024 presidential election. This signals a potential realignment among Hispanic Americans in the South towards Republicans to further strengthen the party&#x27;s power in the region. In particular, Trump won Miami-Dade County for the first time since 1988, Osceola County, Florida for the first time since 2004, and Hendry County, Florida. Trump also won all but four counties in South Texas, some of which had not voted Republican in over a century.

====Virginia====
The biggest exception to Republican gains in the former Confederate states has been the commonwealth of Virginia. It got an earlier start in the trend towards the Republican Party than the rest of the region. It voted Republican for president in 13 of the 14 elections between 1952 and 2004, the exception being Lyndon B. Johnson&#x27;s 1964 landslide, while no other former Confederate state did so more than 9 times (that state being Florida). Moreover, it had a Republican Governor more often than not between 1970 and 2002, and Republicans held at least half the seats in the Virginia congressional delegation from 1968 to 1990 (although the Democrats had a narrow minority throughout the 1990s), while with single-term exceptions (Alabama from 1965 to 1967, Tennessee from 1973 to 1975, and South Carolina from 1981 to 1983) and the exception of Florida (which had its delegation turn majority Republican in 1989), Democrats held at least half the seats in the delegations of the rest of the Southern states until the Republican Revolution of 1994.

This is largely due to massive population growth in Northern Virginia, part of the strongly Democratic Washington metropolitan area, which is politically oriented with the Northeast. The Democratic Party has won most statewide races in Virginia since 2005, including consistently at the presidential level since 2008.

Virginia was the only former Confederate state to vote Democratic in the 2016 and 2024 presidential elections. As of 2024, the Virginia General Assembly is the only state legislature Democrats control in the former Confederate States.

==Solid South in presidential elections==
While Republicans occasionally won southern states in elections in which they won the presidency in the Solid South, it was not until 1960 that a Republican carried any of the 11 former Confederate states, Kentucky, or Oklahoma, while losing the election. This table includes data for all 16 states considered part of the Southern United States by the Census Bureau.


Bold denotes candidates elected as president

==Solid South in gubernatorial elections==
Officials who acted as governor for less than ninety days are excluded from this chart. This chart is intended to be a visual exposition of party strength in the solid south and the dates listed are not exactly precise. Governors not elected in their own right are listed in italics.

The parties are as follows: (D), (FA), (P), (RA), (R).

==See also==
* Bible Belt
* Blue wall
* Bourbon Democrat
* Conservative Democrat
* Culture of the Southern United States
* Democrat in Name Only
* History of the Southern United States
* Left Coast
* Neo-Confederates
* Southern Democrats
* Tantamount to election
* Yellow dog Democrat
== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Feldman, Glenn (2015). &quot;The Great Melding: War, the Dixiecrat Rebellion, and the Southern Model for America&#x27;s New Conservatism.&quot; Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.
* Feldman, Glenn (2013). &quot;The Irony of the Solid South: Democrats, Republicans, and Race, 1864-1944.&quot; Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.
* Frederickson, Kari A. (2001). &quot;The Dixiecrat Revolt and the End of the Solid South, 1932–1968.&quot; Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
* Grantham, Dewey W. (1992). &quot;The Life and Death of the Solid South.&quot; Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky.
* Herbert, Hilary A., et al. (1890). &quot;Why the Solid South? Or, Reconstruction and Its Results.&quot; Baltimore, MD: R. H. Woodward &amp; Co.
* Sabato, Larry (1977). &quot;The Democratic Party Primary in Virginia: Tantamount to Election No Longer.&quot; Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="4" end="15" title="Solid South" label="Solid South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640988" start="34" end="45" title="voting bloc" label="voting bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="54" end="70" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="78" end="100" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="124" end="142" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="159" end="183" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="209" end="225" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="399" end="417" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="418" end="451" title="Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era" label="disenfranchised nearly all blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="484" end="513" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="534" end="550" title="Dominant-party system" label="one-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="602" end="618" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="624" end="646" title="tantamount to election" label="tantamount to election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995674" start="669" end="684" title="White primaries" label="White primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="868" end="875" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="877" end="885" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="887" end="894" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="896" end="903" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="905" end="914" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="916" end="927" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="929" end="943" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="945" end="959" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="961" end="970" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="972" end="977" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="983" end="991" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="1029" end="1037" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="1089" end="1101" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow era"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="1107" end="1120" title="Border states (American Civil War)" label="Border states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="1124" end="1132" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1134" end="1142" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="1144" end="1152" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="1158" end="1171" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="1226" end="1266" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="1274" end="1282" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879807" start="1292" end="1308" title="Missouri bellwether" label="bellwether state"/>
<link wikidata="Q699252" start="1319" end="1359" title="1904 United States presidential election" label="1904 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570722" start="1406" end="1423" title="Southern strategy" label="Southern strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1456" end="1467" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1683" end="1691" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1729" end="1747" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="1809" end="1820" title="slave state" label="slave state"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1853" end="1873" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283407" start="1880" end="1884" title="District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1958" end="1969" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="1971" end="1985" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="1987" end="1998" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="2000" end="2007" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="2009" end="2016" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="2018" end="2025" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="2027" end="2036" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="2038" end="2043" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="2045" end="2053" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="2055" end="2063" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="2065" end="2074" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="2080" end="2094" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="2153" end="2161" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="2163" end="2171" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="2173" end="2181" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="2187" end="2195" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="2230" end="2243" title="Border states (American Civil War)" label="border states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112525" start="2320" end="2354" title="Confederate government of Kentucky" label="Confederate government of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159757" start="2363" end="2397" title="Confederate government of Missouri" label="Confederate government of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="2559" end="2572" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058050" start="2763" end="2821" title="1863 Confederate States House of Representatives elections" label="1863 Confederate States House of Representatives elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="2840" end="2865" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781293" start="3098" end="3102" title="Maryland Constitution of 1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="3337" end="3391" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071188" start="3526" end="3543" title="white Southerners" label="white Southerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="3561" end="3575" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="3603" end="3618" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="3656" end="3695" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019598" start="3776" end="3801" title="Black suffrage" label="enfranchised black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q607648" start="4022" end="4031" title="Redeemers" label="Redeemers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="4037" end="4049" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="4078" end="4090" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516642" start="4110" end="4122" title="White League" label="White League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305032" start="4127" end="4137" title="Red Shirts (United States)" label="Red Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="4262" end="4280" title="voter intimidation" label="voter intimidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101979" start="4285" end="4301" title="Voter suppression in the United States" label="voter suppresion"/>
<link wikidata="Q607648" start="4370" end="4378" title="Redeemers" label="Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q692062" start="4916" end="4922" title="Yankee" label="Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="5025" end="5046" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="the Lost Cause&amp;quot;."/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="5112" end="5122" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="5213" end="5227" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134572" start="5630" end="5646" title="Readjuster Party" label="Readjuster Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q881425" start="5695" end="5713" title="William E. Cameron" label="William E. Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="5726" end="5746" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="5789" end="5798" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="Populists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348679" start="5841" end="5851" title="poor white" label="poor white"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430775" start="6012" end="6018" title="Political boss" label="bosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q885765" start="6163" end="6185" title="Daniel Lindsay Russell" label="Daniel Lindsay Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q98079161" start="6190" end="6205" title="1896 North Carolina gubernatorial election" label="elected in 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q878647" start="6218" end="6244" title="List of governors of North Carolina" label="governor of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="6337" end="6347" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645529" start="6411" end="6425" title="Alfred Waddell" label="Alfred Waddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022766" start="6513" end="6544" title="Wilmington Insurrection of 1898" label="Wilmington Insurrection of 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="7818" end="7828" title="poll tax (United States)" label="poll taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="7863" end="7877" title="literacy tests" label="literacy tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q830408" start="7908" end="7926" title="grandfather clause" label="grandfather clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q736903" start="8076" end="8092" title="Benjamin Tillman" label="Benjamin Tillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="8962" end="8969" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="9421" end="9427" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="9436" end="9449" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q95641153" start="9498" end="9518" title="Industrial complex" label="industrial interests"/>
<link wikidata="Q396108" start="9541" end="9557" title="agrarian society" label="agrarian society"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="9752" end="9764" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="9907" end="9915" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="9944" end="9959" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="9968" end="9986" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="9992" end="10012" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q58445615" start="10311" end="10330" title="turn of the century" label="turn of the century"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="10372" end="10378" title="juries" label="juries"/>
<link wikidata="Q72251" start="10557" end="10561" title="1876 United States presidential election" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="10565" end="10569" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="10582" end="10586" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="10622" end="10630" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="10794" end="10808" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791456" start="11062" end="11078" title="Matthew Yglesias" label="Matthew Yglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="11094" end="11104" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q699227" start="11421" end="11425" title="1900 United States presidential election" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q596667" start="11430" end="11434" title="1944 United States presidential election" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q485392" start="11500" end="11511" title="Pearl River County, Mississippi" label="Pearl River"/>
<link wikidata="Q490255" start="11513" end="11518" title="Stone County, Mississippi" label="Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q485445" start="11523" end="11529" title="George County, Mississippi" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="11649" end="11664" title="German-American" label="German-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q757323" start="11665" end="11679" title="list of Texas counties" label="Texas counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q27024" start="11683" end="11692" title="Gillespie County, Texas" label="Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q115428" start="11697" end="11704" title="Kendall County, Texas" label="Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="11715" end="11721" title="Ozarks" label="Ozarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q61370" start="11734" end="11740" title="Newton County, Arkansas" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q61379" start="11745" end="11751" title="Searcy County, Arkansas" label="Searcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="11781" end="11791" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055353" start="12106" end="12119" title="North Florida" label="North Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12148" end="12160" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q337417" start="12248" end="12256" title="Acadiana" label="Acadiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="12258" end="12263" title="Cajuns" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="12306" end="12317" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="12323" end="12337" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988113" start="12339" end="12361" title="Western North Carolina" label="Western North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571371" start="12367" end="12385" title="Southwest Virginia" label="Southwest Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699986" start="12673" end="12676" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699987" start="12681" end="12684" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640768" start="12824" end="12837" title="56th United States Congress" label="56th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892376" start="12863" end="12875" title="United States congressional apportionment" label="apportioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311513" start="12920" end="12939" title="1900 United States census" label="1900 Federal Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283840" start="12956" end="12975" title="Edgar D. Crumpacker" label="Edgar D. Crumpacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="13174" end="13194" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586648" start="13969" end="13981" title="Harry M. Wurzbach" label="a Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q884027" start="14165" end="14186" title="Alfred A. Taylor" label="a Republican governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="14416" end="14442" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="1928 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="14444" end="14452" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="14766" end="14780" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q888196" start="15037" end="15055" title="Joseph T. Robinson" label="Joseph T. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217336" start="15139" end="15150" title="boll weevil" label="boll weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="15165" end="15171" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="15223" end="15233" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="15239" end="15257" title="Brownsville, Texas" label="Brownsville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="15574" end="15590" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="15743" end="15749" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q79260" start="15776" end="15795" title="Enterprise, Alabama" label="Enterprise, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q891422" start="15809" end="15829" title="Boll Weevil Monument" label="Boll Weevil Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="16383" end="16398" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="16842" end="16863" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163103" start="16892" end="16914" title="conservative coalition" label="conservative coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="17070" end="17088" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892425" start="17115" end="17129" title="1938 United States elections" label="1938 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q352331" start="17147" end="17160" title="Walter F. George" label="Walter George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332476" start="17184" end="17197" title="Ellison Smith" label="Ellison Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495353" start="17285" end="17306" title="House Rules Committee" label="House Rules Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539454" start="17307" end="17328" title="John J. O&amp;#x27;Connor (New York representative)" label="John J. O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17689" end="17701" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4464386" start="17746" end="17758" title="United States home front during World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920358" start="18433" end="18440" title="Central Florida" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567226" start="18445" end="18458" title="South Florida" label="South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545390" start="18695" end="18713" title="Smith v. Allwright" label="Smith v. Allwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995674" start="18728" end="18741" title="white primary" label="white primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="18893" end="18903" title="poll tax (United States)" label="poll taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="18908" end="18922" title="literacy tests" label="literacy tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="19070" end="19078" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082219" start="19131" end="19156" title="Oklahoma Enabling Act" label="become a state until 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="19252" end="19263" title="Upland South" label="Upper South"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600986" start="19329" end="19383" title="List of U.S. states and territories by African-American population" label="comprised less than 10% of the state&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663143" start="19601" end="19616" title="John W. Harreld" label="John W. Harreld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680019" start="19630" end="19645" title="William B. Pine" label="William B. Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292437" start="19663" end="19678" title="Edward H. Moore" label="Edward H. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060358" start="19737" end="19758" title="Northwestern Oklahoma" label="Northwestern Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="19796" end="19802" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200684" start="19899" end="19915" title="Indian Territory in the American Civil War" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853082" start="19920" end="19937" title="History of slavery in Oklahoma" label="permitted slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020509" start="20004" end="20046" title="Indian Home Guard" label="some tribes and bands sided with the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017330" start="20140" end="20158" title="Oklahoma Territory" label="Oklahoma Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052689" start="20191" end="20199" title="land run" label="land run"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="20287" end="20299" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q887344" start="20324" end="20345" title="List of governors of Oklahoma" label="a Republican governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q881173" start="20352" end="20365" title="Henry Bellmon" label="Henry Bellmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048409" start="20381" end="20385" title="1962 Oklahoma gubernatorial election" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649800" start="20543" end="20567" title="Little Dixie (Oklahoma)" label="&amp;quot;Little Dixie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616570" start="20679" end="20701" title="Guinn v. United States" label="Guinn v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="20750" end="20758" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164221" start="20759" end="20771" title="Oklahoma Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="21054" end="21062" title="Poll taxes in the United States" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="21184" end="21201" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q85721528" start="21205" end="21209" title="1920 United States presidential election in Oklahoma" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="21214" end="21228" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q85721942" start="21232" end="21236" title="1928 United States presidential election in Oklahoma" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060080" start="21369" end="21373" title="1952 United States presidential election in Oklahoma" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="21386" end="21403" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222292" start="21411" end="21415" title="1964 United States presidential election in Oklahoma" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="21629" end="21640" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="21648" end="21674" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="21774" end="21850" title="Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era" label="disenfranchised during the first half to two-thirds of the twentieth century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="21989" end="21997" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="22017" end="22027" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="22174" end="22185" title="Upland South" label="Upper South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900235" start="22229" end="22239" title="Urbanization in the United States" label="urbanizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="22240" end="22249" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="22254" end="22261" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="22297" end="22337" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600986" start="22380" end="22429" title="List of U.S. states and territories by African-American population" label="significantly lower percentage of the populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="22853" end="22866" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="22874" end="22888" title="Reconstruction Era" label="reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="22940" end="22953" title="Border States (American Civil War)" label="border states"/>
<link wikidata="Q369023" start="23355" end="23368" title="John J. Jacob (West Virginia politician)" label="John J. Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520819" start="23555" end="23567" title="Samuel Price" label="Samuel Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q477737" start="23569" end="23586" title="Allen T. Caperton" label="Allen T. Caperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065023" start="23591" end="23613" title="Charles James Faulkner" label="Charles James Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846959" start="24434" end="24458" title="United States congressional delegations from West Virginia" label="congressional delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500299" start="24794" end="24805" title="free silver" label="free silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q96359978" start="24919" end="24923" title="1895 Kentucky gubernatorial election" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="25036" end="25043" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="25055" end="25065" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q55012944" start="25143" end="25169" title="1896 United States presidential election in Kentucky" label="1896 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405184" start="25848" end="25877" title="Political party loyalty of United States counties" label="having never voted Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="25914" end="25928" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q96361263" start="25964" end="25968" title="1924 United States presidential election in Kentucky" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q96361519" start="25973" end="25977" title="1928 United States presidential election in Kentucky" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="26046" end="26063" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="26076" end="26102" title="1920 United States presidential election" label="1920 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q699360" start="26128" end="26154" title="1924 United States presidential election" label="1924 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q880992" start="26232" end="26262" title="William O&amp;#x27;Connell Bradley" label="William O&amp;#x27;Connell Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q359530" start="26276" end="26295" title="Augustus E. Willson" label="Augustus E. Willson"/>
<link wikidata="Q680671" start="26309" end="26324" title="Edwin P. Morrow" label="Edwin P. Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q883540" start="26338" end="26353" title="Flem D. Sampson" label="Flem D. Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q889501" start="26371" end="26384" title="Simeon Willis" label="Simeon Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781293" start="26504" end="26508" title="Maryland Constitution of 1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="26787" end="26801" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108685255" start="27140" end="27144" title="1895 Maryland gubernatorial election" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q881279" start="27202" end="27220" title="Lloyd Lowndes, Jr." label="Lloyd Lowndes, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5275651" start="27814" end="27830" title="Digges Amendment" label="Digges Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566065" start="28018" end="28043" title="Maryland General Assembly" label="Maryland General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q693032" start="28067" end="28075" title="Governor of Maryland" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q781109" start="28076" end="28096" title="Austin Lane Crothers" label="Austin Lane Crothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q96360572" start="28658" end="28662" title="1911 Maryland gubernatorial election" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q648130" start="28675" end="28700" title="Phillips Lee Goldsborough" label="Phillips Lee Goldsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q432983" start="28825" end="28835" title="Harry Nice" label="Harry Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q431641" start="28855" end="28872" title="Theodore McKeldin" label="Theodore McKeldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="29017" end="29026" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221947" start="29126" end="29162" title="United States presidential elections in Delaware" label="a majority of presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105540" start="29396" end="29413" title="J. Edward Addicks" label="J. Edward Addicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="29417" end="29429" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128137" start="29543" end="29547" title="Kent County, Delaware" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q107377200" start="29676" end="29680" title="1894 Delaware gubernatorial election" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q886885" start="29693" end="29709" title="Joshua H. Marvil" label="Joshua H. Marvil"/>
<link wikidata="Q887210" start="29746" end="29766" title="List of governors of Delaware" label="governor of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q887210" start="29876" end="29904" title="list of governors of Delaware" label="Delaware&amp;#x27;s governorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="30371" end="30385" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="30389" end="30393" title="1932 United States presidential election" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="30412" end="30433" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934114" start="30530" end="30563" title="history of slavery in Missouri" label="abolished slavery in January 1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="30798" end="30806" title="Poll taxes in the United States" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="31021" end="31028" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892871" start="31117" end="31143" title="1904 United States presidential election in Missouri" label="1904 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879807" start="31258" end="31274" title="Missouri bellwether" label="bellwether state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892872" start="31393" end="31397" title="1956 United States presidential election in Missouri" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q886943" start="31426" end="31446" title="List of governors of Missouri" label="Republican governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q889347" start="31475" end="31492" title="Herbert S. Hadley" label="Herbert S. Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="31535" end="31548" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344093" start="31655" end="31676" title="North American Review" label="North American Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450166" start="32193" end="32220" title="1894 United States House of Representatives elections" label="the great landslide of 1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q699252" start="32579" end="32592" title="1904 United States presidential election" label="1904 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q443866" start="32692" end="32704" title="Alton B. Parker" label="Alton Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879807" start="32761" end="32783" title="Missouri bellwether" label="was a bellwether state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892872" start="32866" end="32870" title="1956 United States presidential election in Missouri" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q699318" start="32879" end="32892" title="1916 United States presidential election" label="1916 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="33060" end="33074" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="33239" end="33265" title="1920 United States presidential election" label="1920 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="33387" end="33404" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q699360" start="33462" end="33466" title="1924 United States presidential election" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="33479" end="33494" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="33537" end="33541" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="33543" end="33557" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="33612" end="33620" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="33632" end="33646" title="Catholic Church in the United States" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="33659" end="33670" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="34189" end="34217" title="Bible Belt" label="the largely Protestant South"/>
<link wikidata="Q888196" start="34258" end="34276" title="Joseph T. Robinson" label="Joseph T. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316150" start="34298" end="34306" title="1928 United States presidential election in Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q337417" start="34434" end="34442" title="Acadiana" label="Acadiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q96361521" start="34446" end="34455" title="1928 United States presidential election in Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222366" start="34475" end="34482" title="1928 United States presidential election in Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="34637" end="34658" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="34694" end="34702" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="34837" end="34846" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="35007" end="35022" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419908" start="35129" end="35149" title="Executive Order 9981" label="Executive Order 9981"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="35245" end="35266" title="American Civil Rights Movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="35385" end="35400" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566248" start="35447" end="35477" title="1948 Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="35491" end="35506" title="Dixiecrat Party" label="Dixiecrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="35561" end="35574" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="35601" end="35615" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406791" start="35771" end="35777" title="Upset (competition)" label="upsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="35820" end="35829" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="35830" end="35845" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="35882" end="35899" title="Governor of New York" label="New York Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="35900" end="35915" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="36177" end="36181" title="1952 United States presidential election" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q699567" start="36186" end="36190" title="1956 United States presidential election" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="36215" end="36235" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046322" start="36499" end="36527" title="1956 United States presidential election in Louisiana" label="Eisenhower carried Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="36582" end="36601" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q72251" start="36605" end="36609" title="1876 United States presidential election" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="36673" end="36688" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="36698" end="36711" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="36737" end="36752" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="36875" end="36892" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="36985" end="37007" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="37035" end="37041" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="37045" end="37061" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230969" start="37124" end="37142" title="Coretta Scott King" label="Coretta Scott King"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="37171" end="37188" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="37359" end="37372" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="37493" end="37507" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q96362505" start="37589" end="37593" title="1961 United States Senate special election in Texas" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152295" start="37648" end="37652" title="1966 United States gubernatorial elections" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153007" start="37673" end="37677" title="1969 Virginia gubernatorial election" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100339" start="38253" end="38260" title="1960 United States presidential election in Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097598" start="38265" end="38276" title="1960 United States presidential election in Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897290" start="38288" end="38305" title="unpledged elector" label="unpledged elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q775382" start="38395" end="38405" title="Harry F. Byrd" label="Harry Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="38514" end="38527" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="38669" end="38693" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q605370" start="38761" end="38772" title="Bill Moyers" label="Bill Moyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="38928" end="38943" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="38947" end="38954" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="39058" end="39074" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="39148" end="39166" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678778" start="39186" end="39207" title="1957 Civil Rights Act" label="1957 Civil Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678779" start="39239" end="39260" title="1960 Civil Rights Act" label="1960 Civil Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q216963" start="39289" end="39346" title="Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="39361" end="39371" title="Poll tax (United States)" label="poll taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="39693" end="39703" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="41155" end="41171" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="41247" end="41269" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q77023179" start="41332" end="41347" title="Ilyana Kuziemko" label="Ilyana Kuziemko"/>
<link wikidata="Q29654564" start="41352" end="41369" title="Ebonya Washington" label="Ebonya Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995711" start="41371" end="41386" title="white backlash" label="racial backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="41494" end="41515" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="41554" end="41569" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="41574" end="41591" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="41642" end="41658" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="41770" end="41783" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="41805" end="41809" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932336" start="42051" end="42067" title="Southernization" label="became southern."/>
<link wikidata="Q7892454" start="42147" end="42151" title="1994 United States elections" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="42158" end="42179" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351781" start="42234" end="42248" title="2010 United States elections" label="2010 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="42521" end="42532" title="ideology" label="ideological"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071188" start="42885" end="42902" title="White Southerners" label="White Southerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="42919" end="42931" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="42938" end="42946" title="fiscal conservatism" label="fiscally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551013" start="42951" end="42959" title="social conservatism in the United States" label="socially"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="43024" end="43042" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231238" start="43058" end="43075" title="conservative Democrat" label="more conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163103" start="43134" end="43156" title="conservative coalition" label="conservative coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939741" start="43161" end="43173" title="Boll weevil (politics)" label="Boll weevils"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="43202" end="43215" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328075" start="43515" end="43528" title="Richard Nixon 1968 presidential campaign" label="1968 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="43532" end="43551" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="43670" end="43681" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="43924" end="43934" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="44038" end="44043" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288144" start="44059" end="44079" title="dog-whistle politics" label="dog-whistle politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q149127" start="44184" end="44196" title="Pat Buchanan" label="Pat Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="44509" end="44523" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="44528" end="44535" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="44548" end="44556" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="44568" end="44582" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="44623" end="44631" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="44633" end="44642" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="44644" end="44658" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="44660" end="44674" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="44676" end="44683" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="44685" end="44693" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="44695" end="44703" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="44705" end="44713" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="44719" end="44727" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="44764" end="44769" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="44789" end="44802" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="44826" end="44834" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176039" start="44843" end="44855" title="Jeffrey Hart" label="Jeffrey Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q175301" start="44895" end="44907" title="speechwriter" label="speechwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="45263" end="45274" title="Upland South" label="Upper South"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="45279" end="45289" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="45880" end="45893" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="45919" end="45931" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="46038" end="46046" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="46102" end="46122" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 re-election bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="46181" end="46188" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="46190" end="46203" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="46209" end="46217" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="46480" end="46493" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="46517" end="46530" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="46534" end="46538" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578606" start="46774" end="46793" title="split-ticket voting" label="split their tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892446" start="47047" end="47061" title="1980 United States elections" label="1980 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348063" start="47129" end="47133" title="1952 United States Senate elections" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="47156" end="47169" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939741" start="47297" end="47309" title="Boll weevil (politics)" label="boll weevils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902447" start="47505" end="47523" title="Yellow dog Democrat" label="rigidly Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="47549" end="47570" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771218" start="47578" end="47592" title="1994 United States House of Representatives elections" label="1994 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450610" start="47763" end="47767" title="1952 United States House of Representatives elections" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="47916" end="47934" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629347" start="47963" end="47973" title="Kent Hance" label="Kent Hance"/>
<link wikidata="Q215057" start="47982" end="47992" title="Rick Perry" label="Rick Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q966332" start="48005" end="48015" title="Ralph Hall" label="Ralph Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q863238" start="48035" end="48047" title="Billy Tauzin" label="Billy Tauzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414790" start="48059" end="48070" title="Jimmy Hayes" label="Jimmy Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q472254" start="48094" end="48108" title="Richard Shelby" label="Richard Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380211" start="48120" end="48128" title="Kay Ivey" label="Kay Ivey"/>
<link wikidata="Q179732" start="48154" end="48165" title="Nathan Deal" label="Nathan Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q525362" start="48177" end="48189" title="Sonny Perdue" label="Sonny Perdue"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="48219" end="48223" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="48228" end="48242" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="48301" end="48313" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="48318" end="48325" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="48407" end="48415" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="48417" end="48426" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="48428" end="48436" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="48438" end="48447" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="48449" end="48462" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="48464" end="48472" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="48474" end="48482" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="48488" end="48496" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="48523" end="48528" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="48530" end="48541" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="48543" end="48550" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="48552" end="48566" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="48568" end="48582" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="48584" end="48592" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="48598" end="48606" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="48665" end="48673" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="48700" end="48707" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="49004" end="49030" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="49120" end="49132" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="49134" end="49144" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="49146" end="49154" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="49164" end="49175" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422082" start="49283" end="49304" title="Northeast megalopolis" label="Northeast megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="49495" end="49505" title="modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49560" end="49581" title="Republican in name only#Gypsy moth Republican" label="gypsy moth Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="49613" end="49622" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="49645" end="49673" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q45532" start="49815" end="49825" title="gypsy moth" label="gypsy moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="49832" end="49848" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="49909" end="49924" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="49932" end="49936" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="49991" end="50004" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="50009" end="50021" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q48845359" start="50132" end="50140" title="1948 United States presidential election in Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48845296" start="50145" end="50153" title="1948 United States presidential election in Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="50192" end="50207" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="50223" end="50249" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29529370" start="50266" end="50285" title="List of governors of Georgia" label="governor of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="50343" end="50354" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="50356" end="50363" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="50365" end="50378" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="50384" end="50389" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873629" start="50746" end="50818" title="Blue wall (U.S. politics)" label="all nine Northeastern states plus Maryland and Delaware voted Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="51125" end="51129" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892747" start="51322" end="51343" title="2000 United States presidential election in Florida" label="extraordinarily close"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="51392" end="51406" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="51438" end="51451" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="51478" end="51488" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q217314" start="51493" end="51505" title="John Edwards" label="John Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892978" start="51612" end="51626" title="2004 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="51873" end="51883" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846959" start="52422" end="52446" title="United States congressional delegations from West Virginia" label="congressional delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="52676" end="52698" title="environmentalism" label="environmental policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="52728" end="52732" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q939214" start="52751" end="52776" title="cultural liberalism" label="socially liberal policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846959" start="52876" end="52897" title="United States congressional delegations from West Virginia" label="U.S. House delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="52937" end="52950" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="53040" end="53052" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="53094" end="53102" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="53107" end="53121" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="53133" end="53140" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892881" start="53171" end="53187" title="2008 United States presidential election in Missouri" label="Missouri in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="53331" end="53343" title="Upland South" label="Upland South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578606" start="53616" end="53635" title="Split-ticket voting" label="split their tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351781" start="53733" end="53761" title="2010 United States elections" label="2010 United States elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190410" start="53770" end="53793" title="2008 United States House of Representatives elections" label="November 2008 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018281" start="53972" end="53976" title="2016 United States presidential election in Kentucky" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="53989" end="54001" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q400753" start="54006" end="54020" title="Elliott County" label="Elliott County"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="54321" end="54333" title="swing states" label="swing states"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="54401" end="54405" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="54455" end="54459" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="54461" end="54476" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="54548" end="54552" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="54554" end="54563" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q971998" start="54681" end="54706" title="Metro Atlanta" label="Atlanta metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="54761" end="54765" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="54767" end="54780" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q324546" start="55724" end="55735" title="Marco Rubio" label="Marco Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q463557" start="55751" end="55760" title="Rand Paul" label="Rand Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q237681" start="55809" end="55824" title="Blanche Lincoln" label="Blanche Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344707" start="55860" end="55872" title="John Boozman" label="John Boozman"/>
<link wikidata="Q336324" start="55937" end="55947" title="Joseph Cao" label="Joseph Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791907" start="56553" end="56579" title="2010 Arkansas elections" label="won three of six statewide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138669" start="56580" end="56601" title="Down-ballot effect" label="down-ballot positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q459618" start="57090" end="57110" title="Shelley Moore Capito" label="Shelley Moore Capito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892105" start="57174" end="57178" title="2014 United States Senate election in West Virginia" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519077" start="57204" end="57208" title="United States Senate special election in West Virginia, 1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q361460" start="57281" end="57291" title="Mike Beebe" label="Mike Beebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699277" start="57409" end="57420" title="John Barrow (U.S. politician)" label="John Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494716" start="57647" end="57680" title="Kentucky House of Representatives" label="Kentucky House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="57905" end="57925" title="Virginia Legislature" label="Virginia Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q56042666" start="57929" end="57933" title="2019 Virginia elections" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="58277" end="58302" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="58458" end="58469" title="South Texas" label="South Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567226" start="58474" end="58487" title="South Florida" label="South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="58566" end="58584" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="58703" end="58720" title="Miami-Dade County" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q501067" start="58752" end="58775" title="Osceola County, Florida" label="Osceola County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q488488" start="58811" end="58833" title="Hendry County, Florida" label="Hendry County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="59068" end="59076" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="59301" end="59305" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221954" start="59400" end="59407" title="United States presidential elections in Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q887234" start="59429" end="59448" title="list of governors of Virginia" label="Republican Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892391" start="59544" end="59577" title="United States congressional delegations from Virginia" label="Virginia congressional delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="59987" end="60008" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="60071" end="60088" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="60122" end="60150" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="60191" end="60200" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018340" start="60411" end="60415" title="2016 United States presidential election in Virginia" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q116736264" start="60420" end="60424" title="2024 United States presidential election in Virginia" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="60465" end="60490" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="61430" end="61440" title="Bible Belt" label="Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873629" start="61443" end="61452" title="Blue wall (U.S. politics)" label="Blue wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q895181" start="61455" end="61471" title="Bourbon Democrat" label="Bourbon Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231238" start="61474" end="61495" title="Conservative Democrat" label="Conservative Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193678" start="61498" end="61535" title="Culture of the Southern United States" label="Culture of the Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022180" start="61538" end="61559" title="Democrat in Name Only" label="Democrat in Name Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q11285118" start="61562" end="61599" title="History of the Southern United States" label="History of the Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516828" start="61602" end="61612" title="Left Coast" label="Left Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991715" start="61615" end="61631" title="Neo-Confederates" label="Neo-Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="61634" end="61652" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="61655" end="61677" title="Tantamount to election" label="Tantamount to election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902447" start="61680" end="61699" title="Yellow dog Democrat" label="Yellow dog Democrat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723056" wikidata="Q4723447" url="?curid=723056" title="Alfred Smith (VC)">
<text>Alfred Smith VC (18616 January 1932) was an English recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.

Smith was about 24 years old, and a gunner in the Royal Regiment of Artillery, British Army during the Mahdist War, when the following deed took place for which he was awarded the VC.

:&quot;&quot;At the Action of Abu Klea, on the 17th January last [1885], when the enemy charged, the square fell back a short, distance, leaving Lieutenant Guthrie, Royal Artillery, with his gun, in a comparatively unprotected position. At this moment a native rushed at Lieutenant Guthrie with a spear and would in all probability have killed that officer, who had no weapon in his hand at the time (being engaged in superintending the working of his gun), when Gunner Smith with a gun handspike warded off the thrust, thus giving Lieutenant Guthrie time to draw his sword, and with a blow bring the assailant to his knees, but as the latter fell he made a wild thrust at the Officer with a long knife, which Gunner Smith again warded off, not however before the native had managed to inflict a wound in Lieutenant Guthrie&#x27;s thigh. Before the Soudani could repeat the thrust Gunner Smith killed him with the handspike and thus for the time saved the life of his Officer, though the latter unfortunately died some days afterwards of his wound&quot;.&quot; 

In 1895, while working at the Royal Arsenal at Woolwich, Smith was involved in an accident when his forearm was crushed by machinery.

His Victoria Cross is displayed at the Royal Artillery Museum, Woolwich, England.

Gunner Smith&#x27;s unit, 1 Battery, Southern Division, Royal Artillery, was later re-numbered 176 Battery and still exists today. In 1955 it was awarded the honour title &quot;Abu Klea&quot; in recognition of Gunner Smith&#x27;s VC.

==References==

*&quot;Monuments to Courage&quot; (David Harvey, 1999)
*&quot;The Register of the Victoria Cross&quot; (This England, 1997)

==External links==
*Location of grave and VC medal &quot;(S.E. London)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4723447" start="0" end="12" title="Alfred Smith (VC)" label="Alfred Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="13" end="15" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="44" end="51" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="69" end="83" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="186" end="193" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="198" end="210" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="270" end="297" title="Royal Regiment of Artillery" label="Royal Regiment of Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="299" end="311" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q31944" start="323" end="334" title="Mahdist War" label="Mahdist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288821" start="435" end="443" title="Abu Klea" label="Abu Klea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170996" start="1498" end="1511" title="Royal Arsenal" label="Royal Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006232" start="1515" end="1523" title="Woolwich" label="Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q682917" start="1642" end="1664" title="Royal Artillery Museum" label="Royal Artillery Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553069" start="1781" end="1792" title="176 (Abu Klea) Battery Royal Artillery" label="176 Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q262775" start="1844" end="1856" title="honour title" label="honour title"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264386" start="1944" end="1964" title="Monuments to Courage" label="Monuments to Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760066" start="1999" end="2033" title="The Register of the Victoria Cross" label="The Register of the Victoria Cross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723059" wikidata="Q849730" url="?curid=723059" title="Soviet space program">
<text>The Soviet space program () was the state space program of the Soviet Union, active from 1951 until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Contrary to its American, European, and Chinese competitors, which had their programs run under single coordinating agencies, the Soviet space program was divided between several internally competing design bureaus led by Korolev, Kerimov, Keldysh, Yangel, Glushko, Chelomey, Makeyev, Chertok and Reshetnev. Several of these bureaus were subordinated to the Ministry of General Machine-Building. The Soviet space program served as an important marker of claims by the Soviet Union to its superpower status.

Soviet investigations into rocketry began with the formation of the Gas Dynamics Laboratory in 1921, and these endeavors expanded during the 1930s and 1940s. In the years following World War II, both the Soviet and United States space programs utilised German technology in their early efforts at space programs. In the 1950s, the Soviet program was formalized under the management of Sergei Korolev, who led the program based on unique concepts derived from Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, sometimes known as the father of theoretical astronautics.

Competing in the Space Race with the United States and later with the European Union and with China, the Soviet space program was notable in setting many records in space exploration, including the first intercontinental missile (R-7 Semyorka) that launched the first satellite (Sputnik 1) and sent the first animal (Laika) into Earth orbit in 1957, and placed the first human in space in 1961, Yuri Gagarin. In addition, the Soviet program also saw the first woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova, in 1963 and the first spacewalk in 1965. Other milestones included computerized robotic missions exploring the Moon starting in 1959: being the first to reach the surface of the Moon, recording the first image of the far side of the Moon, and achieving the first soft landing on the Moon. The Soviet program also achieved the first space rover deployment with the Lunokhod programme in 1966, and sent the first robotic probe that automatically extracted a sample of lunar soil and brought it to Earth in 1970, Luna 16. The Soviet program was also responsible for leading the first interplanetary probes to Venus and Mars and made successful soft landings on these planets in the 1960s and 1970s. It put the first space station, Salyut 1, into low Earth orbit in 1971, and the first modular space station, Mir, in 1986. Its Interkosmos program was also notable for sending the first citizen of a country other than the United States or Soviet Union into space.

The primary spaceport, Baikonur Cosmodrome, is now in Kazakhstan, which leases the facility to Russia.

==Origins==

===Early Russian-Soviet efforts===
The theory of space exploration had a solid basis in the Russian Empire before the First World War with the writings of the Russian and Soviet rocket scientist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky (1857–1935), who published pioneering papers in the late 19th and early 20th centuries on astronautic theory, including calculating the Rocket equation and in 1929 introduced the concept of the multistaged rocket. Additional astronautic and spaceflight theory was also provided by the Ukrainian and Soviet engineer and mathematician Yuri Kondratyuk who developed the first known lunar orbit rendezvous (LOR), a key concept for landing and return spaceflight from Earth to the Moon. The LOR was later used for the plotting of the first actual human spaceflight to the Moon. Many other aspects of spaceflight and space exploration are covered in his works. Both theoretical and practical aspects of spaceflight was also provided by the Latvian pioneer of rocketry and spaceflight Friedrich Zander, including suggesting in a 1925 paper that a spacecraft traveling between two planets could be accelerated at the beginning of its trajectory and decelerated at the end of its trajectory by using the gravity of the two planets&#x27; moons – a method known as gravity assist.

====Gas Dynamics Laboratory (GDL)====

The first Soviet development of rockets was in 1921, when the Soviet military sanctioned the commencement of a small research laboratory to explore solid fuel rockets, led by Nikolai Tikhomirov, a chemical engineer, and supported by Vladimir Artemyev, a Soviet engineer. Tikhomirov had commenced studying solid and Liquid-fueled rockets in 1894, and in 1915, he lodged a patent for &quot;self-propelled aerial and water-surface mines.&quot; In 1928 the laboratory was renamed the Gas Dynamics Laboratory (GDL). The First test-firing of a solid fuel rocket was carried out in March 1928, which flew for about 1,300 meters Further developments in the early 1930s were led by Georgy Langemak. and 1932 in-air test firings of RS-82 missiles from an Tupolev I-4 aircraft armed with six launchers successfully took place.

====Sergey Korolev====

A key contributor to early soviet efforts came from a young Russian aircraft engineer Sergey Korolev, who would later become the de facto head of the Soviet space programme. 
In 1926, as an advanced student, Korolev was mentored by the famous Soviet aircraft designer Andrey Tupolev, who was a professor at his University. In 1930, while working as a lead engineer on the Tupolev TB-3 heavy bomber he became interested in the possibilities of liquid-fueled rocket engines to propel airplanes. This led to contact with Zander, and sparked his interest in space exploration and rocketry.

====Group for the Study of Reactive Motion (GIRD)====
Practical aspects built on early experiments carried out by members of the &#x27;Group for the Study of Reactive Motion&#x27; (better known by its Russian acronym &quot;GIRD&quot;) in the 1930s, where Zander, Korolev and other pioneers such as the Russian engineers Mikhail Tikhonravov, Leonid Dushkin, Vladimir Vetchinkin and Yuriy Pobedonostsev worked together. On August 18, 1933, the Leningrad branch of GIRD, led by Tikhonravov, launched the first hybrid propellant rocket, the GIRD-09, and on November 25, 1933, the Soviet&#x27;s first liquid-fueled rocket GIRD-X.

====Reactive Scientific Research Institute (RNII)====

In 1933 GIRD was merged with GDL by the Soviet government to form the Reactive Scientific Research Institute (RNII), which brought together the best of the Soviet rocket talent, including Korolev, Langemak, Ivan Kleymyonov and former GDL engine designer Valentin Glushko. Early success of RNII included the conception in 1936 and first flight in 1941 of the RP-318 the Soviets first rocket-powered aircraft and the RS-82 and RS-132 missiles entered service by 1937, which became the basis for development in 1938 and serial production from 1940 to 1941 of the Katyusha multiple rocket launcher, another advance in the reactive propulsion field. RNII&#x27;s research and development were very important for later achievements of the Soviet rocket and space programs.

During the 1930s, Soviet rocket technology was comparable to Germany&#x27;s, but Joseph Stalin&#x27;s Great Purge severely damaged its progress. In November 1937, Kleymyonov and Langemak were arrested and later executed, Glushko and many other leading engineers were imprisoned in the Gulag. Korolev was arrested in June 1938 and sent to a forced labour camp in Kolyma in June 1939. However, due to intervention by Tupolev, he was relocated to a prison for scientists and engineers in September 1940.

===World War II===
During World War II rocketry efforts were carried out by three Soviet design bureaus. RNII continued to develop and improve solid fuel rockets, including the RS-82 and RS-132 missiles and the Katyusha rocket launcher, where Pobedonostsev and Tikhonravov continued to work on rocket design. In 1944, RNII was renamed Scientific Research Institute No 1 (NII-I) and combined with design bureau OKB-293, led by Soviet engineer Viktor Bolkhovitinov, which developed, with Aleksei Isaev, Boris Chertok, Leonid Voskresensky and Nikolay Pilyugin a short-range rocket powered interceptor called Bereznyak-Isayev BI-1.

Special Design Bureau for Special Engines (OKB-SD) was led by Glushko and focused on developing auxiliary liquid-fueled rocket engines to assist takeoff and climbing of prop aircraft, including the RD-IKhZ, RD-2 and RD-3. In 1944, the RD-1 kHz auxiliary rocket motor was tested in a fast-climb Lavochkin La-7R for protection of the capital from high-altitude &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; attacks. In 1942 Korolev was transferred to OKB-SD, where he proposed development of the long range missiles D-1 and D-2.

The third design bureau was Plant No 51 (OKB-51), led by Soviet Ukrainian Engineer Vladimir Chelomey, where he created the first Soviet pulsating air jet engine in 1942, independently of similar contemporary developments in Nazi Germany.

=== German influence ===
During World War II, Nazi Germany developed rocket technology that was more advanced than the Allies and a race commenced between the Soviet Union and the United States to capture and exploit the technology. Soviet rocket specialist was sent to Germany in 1945 to obtain V-2 rockets and worked with German specialists in Germany and later in the Soviet Union to understand and replicate the rocket technology. The involvement of German scientists and engineers was an essential catalyst to early Soviet efforts. In 1945 and 1946 the use of German expertise was invaluable in reducing the time needed to master the intricacies of the V-2 rocket, establishing production of the R-1 rocket and enable a base for further developments. On 22 October 1946, 302 German rocket scientists and engineers, including 198 from the Zentralwerke (a total of 495 persons including family members), were deported to the Soviet Union as part of Operation Osoaviakhim. However, after 1947 the Soviets made very little use of German specialists and their influence on the future Soviet rocket program was marginal.

==Sputnik and Vostok==
The Soviet space program was tied to the USSR&#x27;s Five-Year Plans and from the start was reliant on support from the Soviet military. Although he was &quot;single-mindedly driven by the dream of space travel&quot;, Korolev generally kept this a secret while working on military projects—especially, after the Soviet Union&#x27;s first atomic bomb test in 1949, a missile capable of carrying a nuclear warhead to the United States—as many mocked the idea of launching satellites and crewed spacecraft. Nonetheless, the first Soviet rocket with animals aboard launched in July 1951; the two dogs, Dezik and Tsygan, were recovered alive after reaching 101 km in altitude. Two months ahead of America&#x27;s first such achievement, this and subsequent flights gave the Soviets valuable experience with space medicine.

Because of its global range and large payload of approximately five tons, the reliable R-7 was not only effective as a strategic delivery system for nuclear warheads, but also as an excellent basis for a space vehicle. The United States&#x27; announcement in July 1955 of its plan to launch a satellite during the International Geophysical Year greatly benefited Korolev in persuading Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to support his plans. In a letter addressed to Khrushchev, Korolev stressed the necessity of launching a &quot;simple satellite&quot; in order to compete with the American space effort. Plans were approved for Earth-orbiting satellites (&quot;Sputnik&quot;) to gain knowledge of space, and four uncrewed military reconnaissance satellites, Zenit. Further planned developments called for a crewed Earth orbit flight by and an uncrewed lunar mission at an earlier date.

After the first Sputnik proved to be successful, Korolev—then known publicly only as the anonymous &quot;Chief Designer of Rocket-Space Systems&quot;—was charged to accelerate the crewed program, the design of which was combined with the Zenit program to produce the Vostok spacecraft. After Sputnik, Soviet scientists and program leaders envisioned establishing a crewed station to study the effects of zero-gravity and the long term effects on lifeforms in a space environment. Still influenced by Tsiolkovsky—who had chosen Mars as the most important goal for space travel—in the early 1960s, the Soviet program under Korolev created substantial plans for crewed trips to Mars as early as 1968 to 1970. With closed-loop life support systems and electrical rocket engines, and launched from large orbiting space stations, these plans were much more ambitious than America&#x27;s goal of landing on the Moon.

In late 1963 and early 1964 the Polyot 1 and Polyot 2 satellites were launched, these were the first satellites capable of adjusting both orbital inclination and Apsis. This marked a significant step in the potential use of spacecraft in Anti-satellite warfare, as it demonstrated the potential to eventually for unmanned satellites to intercept and destroy other satellites. This would have highlighted the potential use of the space program in a conflict with the US.

===Funding and support===
The Soviet space program was secondary in military funding to the Strategic Rocket Forces&#x27; ICBMs. While the West believed that Khrushchev personally ordered each new space mission for propaganda purposes, and the Soviet leader did have an unusually close relationship with Korolev and other chief designers, Khrushchev emphasized missiles rather than space exploration and was not very interested in competing with Apollo.

While the government and the Communist Party used the program&#x27;s successes as propaganda tools after they occurred, systematic plans for missions based on political reasons were rare, one exception being Valentina Tereshkova, the first woman in space, on Vostok 6 in 1963. Missions were planned based on rocket availability or ad hoc reasons, rather than scientific purposes. For example, the government in February 1962 abruptly ordered an ambitious mission involving two Vostoks simultaneously in orbit launched &quot;in ten days time&quot; to eclipse John Glenn&#x27;s Mercury-Atlas 6 that month; the program could not do so until August, with Vostok 3 and Vostok 4.

==Internal competition==
Unlike the American space program, which had NASA as a single coordinating structure directed by its administrator, James Webb through most of the 1960s, the USSR&#x27;s program was split between several competing design groups. Despite the successes of the Sputnik Program between 1957 and 1961 and Vostok Program between 1961 and 1964, after 1958 Korolev&#x27;s OKB-1 design bureau faced increasing competition from his rival chief designers, Mikhail Yangel, Valentin Glushko, and Vladimir Chelomei. Korolev planned to move forward with the Soyuz craft and N-1 heavy booster that would be the basis of a permanent crewed space station and crewed exploration of the Moon. However, Dmitry Ustinov directed him to focus on near-Earth missions using the Voskhod spacecraft, a modified Vostok, as well as on uncrewed missions to nearby planets Venus and Mars.

Yangel had been Korolev&#x27;s assistant but with the support of the military, he was given his own design bureau in 1954 to work primarily on the military space program. This had the stronger rocket engine design team including the use of hypergolic fuels but following the Nedelin catastrophe in 1960 Yangel was directed to concentrate on ICBM development. He also continued to develop his own heavy booster designs similar to Korolev&#x27;s N-1 both for military applications and for cargo flights into space to build future space stations.

Glushko was the chief rocket engine designer but he had a personal friction with Korolev and refused to develop the large single chamber cryogenic engines that Korolev needed to build heavy boosters.

Chelomey benefited from the patronage of Khrushchev and in 1960 was given the plum job of developing a rocket to send a crewed vehicle around the Moon and a crewed military space station. With limited space experience, his development was slow.

The progress of the Apollo program alarmed the chief designers, who each advocated for his own program as the response. Multiple, overlapping designs received approval, and new proposals threatened already approved projects. Due to Korolev&#x27;s &quot;singular persistence&quot;, in August 1964—more than three years after the United States declared its intentions—the Soviet Union finally decided to compete for the Moon. It set the goal of a lunar landing in 1967—the 50th anniversary of the October Revolution—or 1968. At one stage in the early 1960s the Soviet space program was actively developing multiple launchers and spacecraft. With the fall of Krushchev in 1964, Korolev was given complete control of the crewed program.

In 1961, Valentin Bondarenko, a cosmonaut training for a crewed Vostok mission, was killed in an endurance experiment after the chamber he was in caught on fire. The Soviet Union chose to cover up his death and continue on with the space program.

=== After Korolev ===
Korolev died in January 1966 from complications of heart disease and severe hemorrhaging following a routine operation that uncovered colon cancer. Kerim Kerimov, who had previously served as the head of the Strategic Rocket Forces and had participated in the State Commission for Vostok as part of his duties, was appointed Chairman of the State Commission on Piloted Flights and headed it for the next 25 years (1966–1991). He supervised every stage of development and operation of both crewed space complexes as well as uncrewed interplanetary stations for the former Soviet Union. One of Kerimov&#x27;s greatest achievements was the launch of Mir in 1986.

The leadership of the OKB-1 design bureau was given to Vasily Mishin, who had the task of sending a human around the Moon in 1967 and landing a human on it in 1968. Mishin lacked Korolev&#x27;s political authority and still faced competition from other chief designers. Under pressure, Mishin approved the launch of the Soyuz 1 flight in 1967, even though the craft had never been successfully tested on an uncrewed flight. The mission launched with known design problems and ended with the vehicle crashing to the ground, killing Vladimir Komarov. This was the first in-flight fatality of any space program.

The Soviets were beaten in sending the first crewed flight around the Moon in 1968 by Apollo 8, but Mishin pressed ahead with development of the flawed super heavy N1, in the hope that the Americans would have a setback, leaving enough time to make the N1 workable and land a man on the Moon first. There was a success with the joint flight of Soyuz 4 and Soyuz 5 in January 1969 that tested the rendezvous, docking, and crew transfer techniques that would be used for the landing, and the LK lander was tested successfully in earth orbit. But after four uncrewed test launches of the N1 ended in failure, the program was suspended for two years and then cancelled, removing any chance of the Soviets landing men on the Moon before the United States.

Besides the crewed landings, the abandoned Soviet Moon program included the multipurpose moon base Zvezda, first detailed with developed mockups of expedition vehicles and surface modules.

Following this setback, Chelomey convinced Ustinov to approve a program in 1970 to advance his Almaz military space station as a means of beating the US&#x27;s announced Skylab. Mishin remained in control of the project that became Salyut but the decision backed by Mishin to fly a three-man crew without pressure suits rather than a two-man crew with suits to Salyut 1 in 1971 proved fatal when the re-entry capsule depressurized killing the crew on their return to Earth. Mishin was removed from many projects, with Chelomey regaining control of Salyut. After working with NASA on the Apollo–Soyuz, the Soviet leadership decided a new management approach was needed, and in 1974 the N1 was canceled and Mishin was out of office. The design bureau was renamed NPO Energia with Glushko as chief designer.

In contrast with the difficulty faced in its early crewed lunar programs, the USSR found significant success with its remote moon operations, achieving two historical firsts with the automatic Lunokhod and the Luna sample return missions. The Mars probe program was also continued with some success, while the explorations of Venus and then of the Halley comet by the Venera and Vega probe programs were more effective.

== Lunar missions ==

The &quot;Luna&quot; programme, achieved the first flyby of the moon by Luna 1 in 1959 (also marking the first time a probe reached the far side of the moon), the first impact of the moon by Luna 2, and the first photos of the far side of the moon by Luna 3.

As well as garnering scientific information on the moon, Luna 1 was able to detect a strong flow of ionized plasma emanating from the Sun, streaming through interplanetary space. Luna 2 impacted the moon east of Mare Imbrium. Photography transmitted by Luna 3 showed two dark regions which were named Mare Moscoviense (Sea of Moscow) and Mare Desiderii (Sea of Dreams), the latter was found to be composed of the smaller Mare Ingenii and other dark craters. Luna 2 marked the first time a man-made object has contacted a celestial body. Luna 1 discovered the Moon had no magnetic field.

In 1963, the Soviet Union&#x27;s &quot;2nd Generation&quot; Luna programme was less successful, Luna 4, Luna 5, Luna 6, Luna 7, and Luna 8 were all met with mission failures. However, in 1966 Luna 9 achieved the first soft-landing on the Moon, and successfully transmitted photography from the surface. Luna 10 marked the first man-made object to establish an orbit around the Moon, followed by Luna 11, Luna 12, and Luna 14 which also successfully established orbits. Luna 12 was able to transmit detailed photography of the surface from orbit. Luna 10, 12, and Luna 14 conducted Gamma ray spectrometry of the Moon, among other tests.

The Zond programme was orchestrated alongside the &quot;Luna&quot; programme with Zond 1 and Zond 2 launching in 1964, intended as flyby missions, however both failed. Zond 3 however was successful, and transmitted high quality photography from the far side of the moon. 
In late 1966, Luna 13 became the third spacecraft to make a soft-landing on the Moon, with the American Surveyor 1 having now taken second.

Zond 4, launched in 1968 was intended as a means to test the possibility of a manned mission to the moon, including methods of a stable re-entry to earth from a Lunar trajectory using a heat shield. It did not flyby the moon, but established an elliptical orbit at Lunar distance. Due to issues with the crafts orientation, it was unable to make a soft-landing in the Soviet union and instead was self destructed. Later in the year Zond 5, carrying two Russian tortoises became the first man-made object to flyby the moon and return to Earth (as well as the first animal to flyby the moon), splashing down in the Indian Ocean. Zond 6, Zond 7, and Zond 8 had similar mission profiles, Zond 6 failed to return to earth safely, Zond 7 did however and returned high quality color photography of the earth and the moon from varying distances, Zond 8 successfully returned to earth after a Lunar flyby. 

In 1969, Luna 15 was an intended lunar sample return mission, however resulted in a crash landing. In 1970 however Luna 16 became the first robotic probe to land on the Moon and return a surface sample, having drilled 35 cm into the surface, to Earth and represented the first lunar sample return mission by the Soviet Union and the third overall, having followed the Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 crewed missions.

Luna 17, Luna 21 and Luna 24 delivered rovers onto the surface of the moon. Luna 20 was another successful sample return mission. Luna 18 and Luna 23 resulted in crash landings.

In total there were 24 missions in the &quot;Luna&quot; Programme, 15 were considered to be successful, including 4 hard landings and 3 soft landings, 6 orbits, and 2 flybys. The programme was continued after the collapse of the Soviet union, when the Russian federation space agency launched Luna 25 in 2023.

== Venusian missions ==

The Venera programme marked many firsts in space exploration and explorations of Venus. Venera 1 and Venera 2 resulted in failure due to losses of contact, Venera 3, which also lost contact, marked the first time a man-made object made contact with another planet after it impacted Venus on March 1, 1966. Venera 4, Venera 5, and Venera 6 performed successful atmospheric entry. In 1970 Venera 7 marked the first time a spacecraft was able to return data after landing on another planet.

Venera 7 held a resistant thermometer and an aneroid barometer to measure the temperature and atmospheric pressure on the surface, the transmitted data showed 475 C at the surface, and a pressure of 92 bar. A wind of 2.5 meters/sec was extrapolated from other measurements. The landing point of Venera 7 was . Venera 7 impacted the surface at a somewhat high speed of 17 metres per second, later analysis of the recorded radio signals revealed that the probe had survived the impact and continued transmitting a weak signal for another 23 minutes. It is believed that the spacecraft may have bounced upon impact and come to rest on its side, so the antenna was not pointed towards Earth.

In 1972, Venera 8 landed on Venus and measured the light level as being suitable for surface photography, finding it to be similar to the amount of light on Earth on an overcast day with roughly 1 km visibility.

In 1975, Venera 9 established an orbit around Venus and successfully returned the first photography of the surface of Venus. Venera 10 landed on Venus and followed with further photography shortly after.

In 1978, Venera 11 and Venera 12 successfully landed, however ran into issues performing photography and soil analysis. Venera 11&#x27;s light sensor detected lightning strikes.

In 1981, Venera 13 performed a successful soft-landing on Venus and marked the first probe to drill into the surface of another planet and take a sample. Venera 13 also took an audio sample of the Venusian environment, marking another first.

Venera 13 returned the first color images of the surface of Venus, revealing an orange-brown flat bedrock surface covered with loose regolith and small flat thin angular rocks. The composition of the sample determined by the X-ray fluorescence spectrometer put it in the class of weakly differentiated melanocratic alkaline gabbroids, similar to terrestrial leucitic basalt with a high potassium content. The acoustic detector returned the sounds of the spacecraft operations and the background wind, estimated to be a speed of around 0.5 m/sec wind.

Venera 14, an identical spacecraft to Venera 13, launched 5 days apart. The mission profiles were very similar, except 14 ran into issues using it&#x27;s spectrometer to analyze the soil.

In total 10 Venera probes achieved a soft landing on the surface of Venus.

In 1984, the Vega programme began and ended with the launch of two crafts launched 6 days apart, Vega 1 and Vega 2. Both crafts deployed a balloon in addition to a lander, marking a first in spaceflight.

== Martian missions ==
The first Soviet mission to explore Mars, Mars 1, was launched in 1962. Although it was intended to fly by the planet and transmit scientific data, the spacecraft lost contact before reaching Mars, marking a setback for the program. In 1971, the Soviet Union launched Mars 2 and Mars 3. Mars 2 became the first spacecraft to reach the surface of mars, however this was a hard landing and was destroyed on impact. However, Mars 3 achieved a historic milestone by becoming the first successful soft landing on Mars. Mars 3 used parachutes and rockets as part of its landing system, however contacted the surface at a somewhat high speed of 20 metres per second. Unfortunately, its lander transmitted data for only up to 20 seconds before it went silent.

Following the initial successes and setbacks, the Mars 4, Mars 5, Mars 6, and Mars 7 missions were launched between 1969 and 1973. Mars 4 and Mars 5 performed successful flybys, performing analysis which detected the presence of a weak Ozone layer and magnetic field corroborating analysis done by the American Mariner 4 and Mariner 9. Mars 6 and Mars 7 failed to successfully land.

== Salyut space station ==

The Salyut programme was a series of missions which established the first earth orbit Space station. &quot;Salyut&quot; meaning &quot;Salute&quot; translated.

Initially, the &quot;Salyut&quot; stations served as research laboratories in orbit. Salyut 1, the first in the series, launched in 1971, was primarily a civilian scientific mission. The crew set a then record-setting 24-day mission though its tragic end due to the death of the &quot;Soyuz-11&quot; crew after a docking accident underscored the high risks of human spaceflight. Following this, the Soviet Union also developed Salyut 2 and Salyut 3, which featured reconnaissance capabilities and carried a large gun, both ran into significant issues during their missions. This dual use design of both scientific and military research applications demonstrated the Soviet Union&#x27;s strategy of blending scientific achievement with defense applications.
As the &quot;Salyut&quot; program progressed, later missions like Salyut 6 and Salyut 7 improved upon earlier designs by allowing long-duration crewed missions and more complex experiments. These stations, with their expanded crew capacity and amenities for long term stay, carrying electric stoves, a refrigerator, and constant hot water. The &quot;Salyut&quot; series effectively paved the way for future Soviet and later Russian space stations, including the Mir space station, which would become a significant part in the history of long-term space exploration.

The longest stay, aboard Salyut 7, was 237 days.

==Program secrecy==
The Soviet space program had withheld information on its projects predating the success of Sputnik, the world&#x27;s first artificial satellite. In fact, when the Sputnik project was first approved, one of the most immediate courses of action the Politburo took was to consider what to announce to the world regarding their event.

The Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union (TASS) established precedents for all official announcements on the Soviet space program. The information eventually released did not offer details on who built and launched the satellite or why it was launched. The public release revealed, &quot;there is an abundance of arcane scientific and technical data... as if to overwhelm the reader with mathematics in the absence of even a picture of the object&quot;. What remains of the release is the pride for Soviet cosmonautics and the vague hinting of future possibilities then available after Sputnik&#x27;s success.

The Soviet space program&#x27;s use of secrecy served as both a tool to prevent the leaking of classified information between countries and also to create a mysterious barrier between the space program and the Soviet populace. The program&#x27;s nature embodied ambiguous messages concerning its goals, successes, and values. Launchings were not announced until they took place. Cosmonaut names were not released until they flew. Mission details were sparse. Outside observers did not know the size or shape of their rockets or cabins or most of their spaceships, except for the first Sputniks, lunar probes and Venus probe.

However, the military influence over the Soviet space program may be the best explanation for this secrecy. The OKB-1 was subordinated under the Ministry of General Machine-Building, tasked with the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles, and continued to give its assets random identifiers into the 1960s: &quot;For example, the Vostok spacecraft was referred to as &#x27;object IIF63&#x27; while its launch rocket was &#x27;object 8K72K&#x27;&quot;. Soviet defense factories had been assigned numbers rather than names since 1927. Even these internal codes were obfuscated: in public, employees used a separate code, a set of special post-office numbers, to refer to the factories, institutes, and departments.

The program&#x27;s public pronouncements were uniformly positive: as far as the people knew, the Soviet space program had never experienced failure. According to historian James Andrews, &quot;With almost no exceptions, coverage of Soviet space exploits, especially in the case of human space missions, omitted reports of failure or trouble&quot;.

According to Dominic Phelan in the book &quot;Cold War Space Sleuths&quot;, &quot;The USSR was famously described by Winston Churchill as &#x27;a riddle, wrapped in a mystery, inside an enigma&#x27; and nothing signified this more than the search for the truth behind its space program during the Cold War. Although the Space Race was literally played out above our heads, it was often obscured by a figurative &#x27;space curtain&#x27; that took much effort to see through.&quot;

==Projects and accomplishments==
===Completed projects===
The Soviet space program&#x27;s projects include:

* Almaz space stations
* Cosmos satellites
* Foton
* Luna – Moon flybys, orbiters, impacts, landers, rovers, sample returns
* Mars probe program
* Meteor meteorological satellites
* Molniya communications satellites
* Mir space station
* Proton satellites
* Phobos Mars probes program
* Salyut space stations
* Soyuz program spacecraft
* Sputnik satellites
* TKS spacecraft
* Venera – Venus probes program
* Vega program – Venus and comet Halley probes program
* Vostok program spacecraft
* Voskhod program spacecraft
* Zond program
===Notable firsts===

Two days after the United States announced its intention to launch an artificial satellite, on July 31, 1955, the Soviet Union announced its intention to do the same. Sputnik 1 was launched on October 4, 1957, beating the United States and stunning people all over the world.

The Soviet space program pioneered many aspects of space exploration:
* 1957: First intercontinental ballistic missile and orbital launch vehicle, the R-7 Semyorka.
* 1957: First satellite, Sputnik 1.
* 1957: First animal in Earth orbit, the dog Laika on Sputnik 2.
* 1959: First rocket ignition in Earth orbit, first man-made object to escape Earth&#x27;s gravity, Luna 1.
* 1959: First data communications, or telemetry, to and from outer space, Luna 1.
* 1959: First man-made object to pass near the Moon, first man-made object in Heliocentric orbit, Luna 1.
* 1959: First probe to impact the Moon, Luna 2.
* 1959: First images of the Moon&#x27;s far side, Luna 3.
* 1960: First animals to safely return from Earth orbit, the dogs Belka and Strelka on Sputnik 5.
* 1961: First probe launched to Venus, Venera 1.
* 1961: First person in space (International definition) and in Earth orbit, Yuri Gagarin on Vostok 1, Vostok program.
* 1961: First person to spend over 24 hours in space Gherman Titov, Vostok 2 (also first person to sleep in space).
* 1962: First dual crewed spaceflight, Vostok 3 and Vostok 4.
* 1962: First probe launched to Mars, Mars 1.
* 1963: First woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova, Vostok 6.
* 1964: First multi-person crew (3), Voskhod 1.
* 1965: First extra-vehicular activity (EVA), by Alexsei Leonov, Voskhod 2.
* 1965: First radio telescope in space, Zond 3.
* 1965: First probe to hit another planet of the Solar System (Venus), Venera 3.
* 1966: First probe to make a soft landing on and transmit from the surface of the Moon, Luna 9.
* 1966: First probe in lunar orbit, Luna 10.
* 1966: First image of the whole Earth disk, Molniya 1.
* 1967: First uncrewed rendezvous and docking, Cosmos 186/Cosmos 188.
* 1968: First living beings to reach the Moon (circumlunar flights) and return unharmed to Earth, Russian tortoises and other lifeforms on Zond 5.
* 1969: First docking between two crewed craft in Earth orbit and exchange of crews, Soyuz 4 and Soyuz 5.
* 1970: First soil samples automatically extracted and returned to Earth from another celestial body, Luna 16.
* 1970: First robotic space rover, Lunokhod 1 on the Moon.
* 1970: First full interplanetary travel with a soft landing and useful data transmission. Data received from the surface of another planet of the Solar System (Venus), Venera 7
* 1971: First space station, Salyut 1.
* 1971: First probe to impact the surface of Mars, Mars 2.
* 1971: First probe to land on Mars, Mars 3.
* 1971: First armed space station, Almaz.
* 1975: First probe to orbit Venus, to make a soft landing on Venus, first photos from the surface of Venus, Venera 9.
* 1980: First Asian person in space, Vietnamese Cosmonaut Pham Tuan on Soyuz 37; and First Latin American, Cuban and person with African ancestry in space, Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez on Soyuz 38
* 1984: First Indian Astronaut in space, Rakesh Sharma on Soyuz T-11 (Salyut-7 space station).
* 1984: First woman to walk in space, Svetlana Savitskaya (Salyut 7 space station).
* 1986: First crew to visit two separate space stations (Mir and Salyut 7).
* 1986: First probes to deploy robotic balloons into Venus atmosphere and to return pictures of a comet during close flyby Vega 1, Vega 2.
* 1986: First permanently crewed space station, Mir, 1986–2001, with a permanent presence on board (1989–1999).
* 1987: First crew to spend over one year in space, Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov on board of Soyuz TM-4 – Mir.
* 1988: First fully automated flight of a spaceplane (&quot;Buran&quot;).

==Incidents, failures, and setbacks==
===Accidents and cover-ups===
The Soviet space program experienced a number of fatal incidents and failures.

The first official cosmonaut fatality during training occurred on March 23, 1961, when Valentin Bondarenko died in a fire within a low pressure, high oxygen atmosphere.

On April 23, 1967, Soyuz 1 crashed into the ground at due to a parachute failure, killing Vladimir Komarov. Komarov&#x27;s death was the first in-flight fatality in the history of spaceflight.

The Soviets continued striving for the first lunar mission with the N-1 rocket, which exploded on each of four uncrewed tests shortly after launch. The Americans won the race to land men on the Moon with Apollo 11 on July 20, 1969.

In 1971, the Soyuz 11 mission to stay at the Salyut 1 space station resulted in the deaths of three cosmonauts when the reentry capsule depressurized during preparations for reentry. This accident resulted in the only human casualties to occur in space (beyond , as opposed to the high atmosphere). The crew members aboard Soyuz 11 were Vladislav Volkov, Georgy Dobrovolsky, and Viktor Patsayev.

On April 5, 1975, Soyuz 7K-T No.39, the second stage of a Soyuz rocket carrying two cosmonauts to the Salyut 4 space station malfunctioned, resulting in the first crewed launch abort. The cosmonauts were carried several thousand miles downrange and became worried that they would land in China, which the Soviet Union was having difficult relations with at the time. The capsule hit a mountain, sliding down a slope and almost slid off a cliff; however, the parachute lines snagged on trees and kept this from happening. As it was, the two suffered severe injuries and the commander, Lazarev, never flew again.

On March 18, 1980, a Vostok rocket exploded on its launch pad during a fueling operation, killing 48 people.

In August 1981, Kosmos 434, which had been launched in 1971, was about to re-enter. To allay fears that the spacecraft carried nuclear materials, a spokesperson from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the USSR assured the Australian government on 26 August 1981, that the satellite was &quot;an experimental lunar cabin&quot;. This was one of the first admissions by the Soviet Union that it had ever engaged in a crewed lunar spaceflight program.

In September 1983, a Soyuz rocket being launched to carry cosmonauts to the Salyut 7 space station exploded on the pad, causing the Soyuz capsule&#x27;s abort system to engage, saving the two cosmonauts on board.

===Buran===

The Soviet Buran program attempted to produce a class of spaceplanes launched from the Energia rocket, in response to the US Space Shuttle. It was intended to operate in support of large space-based military platforms as a response to the Strategic Defense Initiative. Buran only had orbital maneuvering engines, unlike the Space Shuttle, Buran did not fire engines during launch, instead relying entirely on Energia to lift it out of the atmosphere. It copied the airframe and thermal protection system design of the US Space Shuttle Orbiter, with a maximum payload of 30 metric tons (slightly higher than that of the Space Shuttle), and weighed less. It also had the capability to land autonomously. Due to this, some retroactively consider it to be the more capable launch vehicle. By the time the system was ready to fly in orbit in 1988, strategic arms reduction treaties made Buran redundant. On November 15, 1988, Buran and its Energia rocket were launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, and after two orbits in three hours, glided to a landing a few miles from its launch pad. While the craft survived that re-entry, the heat shield was not reusable. This failure resulted from United States counter intelligence efforts. After this test flight, the Soviet Ministry of Defense would defund the program, considering it relatively pointless compared to its price.

===Polyus satellite===
The Polyus satellite was a prototype orbital weapons platform designed to destroy Strategic Defense Initiative satellites with a megawatt carbon-dioxide laser. Launched mounted upside-down on its Energia rocket, its single flight test was a failure when the inertial guidance system failed to rotate it 180° and instead rotated a complete 360°.

==Canceled projects==

===Energia rocket===

The Energia was a successfully developed super heavy-lift launch vehicle which burned liquid hydrogen fuel. But without the Buran or Polyus payloads to launch, it was also canceled due to lack of funding on dissolution of the USSR.

===Interplanetary projects===

====Mars missions====
* Heavy rover Mars 4NM was going to be launched by the abandoned N1 launcher between 1974 and 1975.
* Mars sample return mission Mars 5NM was going to be launched by a single N1 launcher in 1975.
* Mars sample return mission Mars 5M or (Mars-79) was to be double launched in parts by Proton launchers, and then joined in orbit for flight to Mars in 1979.

====Vesta====
The Vesta mission would have consisted of two identical double-purposed interplanetary probes to be launched in 1991. It was intended to fly-by Mars (instead of an early plan to Venus) and then study four asteroids belonging to different classes. At 4 Vesta a penetrator would be released.

====Tsiolkovsky====
The Tsiolkovsky mission was planned as a double-purposed deep interplanetary probe to be launched in the 1990s to make a &quot;sling shot&quot; flyby of Jupiter and then pass within five or seven radii of the Sun. A derivative of this spacecraft would possibly be launched toward Saturn and beyond.

==See also==

* DRAKON, an algorithmic visual programming language developed for the Buran space project.
* Intercosmos, a Soviet space program designed to give nations on friendly relations with the Soviet Union access to crewed and uncrewed space missions
* List of Russian aerospace engineers
* List of Russian explorers
* List of space disasters
* Pilot-Cosmonaut of the USSR, an honorary title
* Roscosmos, the program&#x27;s eventual post-Soviet continuation under the Russian Federation
* Roscosmos Cosmonaut Corps, Russian astronaut corps
* Sheldon names, which were used to identify launch vehicles of the Soviet Union when their Soviet names were unknown in the USA
* Soviet rocketry
* Space Race
* &quot;Tank on the Moon&quot;, a 2007 French documentary film on the Lunokhod program

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Andrews, James T.: &quot;Red Cosmos: K. E. Tsiolkovskii, Grandfather of Soviet Rocketry&quot;. (College Station: Texas A&amp;M University Press, 2009)
* Brzezinski, Matthew: &quot;Red Moon Rising: Sputnik and the Hidden Rivalries that Ignited the Space Age&quot;. (Holt Paperbacks, 2008)
* Burgess, Colin; French, Francis: &quot;Into That Silent Sea: Trailblazers of the Space Era&quot;, 1961–1965. (University of Nebraska Press, 2007)
* Burgess, Colin; French, Francis: &quot;In the Shadow of the Moon: A Challenging Journey to Tranquility&quot;, 1965–1969. (University of Nebraska Press, 2007)
* Harford, James: &quot;Korolev: How One Man Masterminded the Soviet Drive to Beat America to the Moon&quot;. (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 1997)
* Siddiqi, Asif A.: &quot;Challenge to Apollo: The Soviet Union and the Space Race, 1945–1974&quot;. (Washington, D.C.: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2000)
* Siddiqi, Asif A.: &quot;The Red Rockets&#x27; Glare: Spaceflight and the Soviet Imagination, 1857–1957&quot;. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010)
* Siddiqi, Asif A.; Andrews, James T. (eds.): &quot;Into the Cosmos: Space Exploration and Soviet Culture&quot;. (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2011)
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Russian Space Web
* Soviet Exploration of Venus
* Sputnik: 50 Years Ago
* Zarya – Soviet, Russian and International Space Flight
* Korolev, Mastermind of the Soviet Space Program
* Soviet crewed lunar program
* The Cosmonautics Memorial Museum in Moscow</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="4" end="24" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036349" start="42" end="55" title="space program" label="space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="63" end="75" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="104" end="135" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="161" end="169" title="NASA" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="171" end="179" title="European Space Agency" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866598" start="185" end="192" title="Ministry of Aerospace Industry" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q507437" start="345" end="359" title="OKB" label="design bureaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170842" start="367" end="374" title="Sergei Korolev" label="Korolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q669448" start="376" end="383" title="Kerim Kerimov" label="Kerimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q246497" start="385" end="392" title="Mstislav Keldysh" label="Keldysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q463450" start="394" end="400" title="Mikhail Yangel" label="Yangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q342397" start="402" end="409" title="Valentin Glushko" label="Glushko"/>
<link wikidata="Q333260" start="411" end="419" title="Vladimir Chelomey" label="Chelomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q277559" start="421" end="428" title="Viktor Makeyev" label="Makeyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q470193" start="430" end="437" title="Boris Chertok" label="Chertok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371486" start="442" end="451" title="Information Satellite Systems Reshetnev" label="Reshetnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509846" start="503" end="539" title="Ministry of General Machine-Building" label="Ministry of General Machine-Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="633" end="643" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325367" start="653" end="688" title="Soviet rocketry" label="Soviet investigations into rocketry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214453" start="721" end="744" title="Gas Dynamics Laboratory" label="Gas Dynamics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="834" end="846" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707009" start="868" end="895" title="United States space program" label="United States space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q170842" start="1038" end="1052" title="Sergei Korolev" label="Sergei Korolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q41239" start="1112" end="1134" title="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky" label="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q22719" start="1181" end="1193" title="astronautics" label="astronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="1213" end="1223" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1224" end="1246" title="NASA" label="with the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="1257" end="1280" title="European Space Agency" label="with the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866598" start="1285" end="1295" title="Ministry of Aerospace Industry" label="with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q221675" start="1426" end="1438" title="R-7 Semyorka" label="R-7 Semyorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="1475" end="1484" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q53662" start="1513" end="1518" title="Laika" label="Laika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579577" start="1525" end="1536" title="Geocentric orbit" label="Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="1591" end="1603" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="1672" end="1692" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644755" start="1710" end="1725" title="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999" label="first spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q39049278" start="1761" end="1781" title="Cybernetics in the Soviet Union" label="computerized robotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192372" start="1791" end="1809" title="Luna programme" label="exploring the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="1847" end="1876" title="Moon landing" label="reach the surface of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="1911" end="1931" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q669895" start="2058" end="2076" title="Lunokhod programme" label="Lunokhod programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037499" start="2160" end="2170" title="lunar soil" label="lunar soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q858293" start="2204" end="2211" title="Luna 16" label="Luna 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="2275" end="2295" title="interplanetary probe" label="interplanetary probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192144" start="2300" end="2305" title="Venera" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31316" start="2310" end="2314" title="Mars program" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="2407" end="2420" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q211761" start="2422" end="2430" title="Salyut 1" label="Salyut 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="2437" end="2452" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="2499" end="2502" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="2517" end="2528" title="Interkosmos" label="Interkosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q177477" start="2678" end="2697" title="Baikonur Cosmodrome" label="Baikonur Cosmodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="2709" end="2719" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="2821" end="2838" title="space exploration" label="space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2864" end="2878" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2890" end="2905" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41239" start="2967" end="2989" title="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky" label="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q22719" start="3080" end="3098" title="Astronautics" label="astronautic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q834199" start="3126" end="3141" title="Rocket equation" label="Rocket equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161829" start="3184" end="3202" title="multistaged rocket" label="multistaged rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="3231" end="3242" title="spaceflight" label="spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q921167" start="3323" end="3338" title="Yuri Kondratyuk" label="Yuri Kondratyuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q938183" start="3369" end="3391" title="lunar orbit rendezvous" label="lunar orbit rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="3466" end="3470" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="3532" end="3561" title="Apollo 11" label="human spaceflight to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="3601" end="3618" title="space exploration" label="space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="3743" end="3749" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="3756" end="3767" title="spaceflight" label="spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q327279" start="3768" end="3784" title="Friedrich Zander" label="Friedrich Zander"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="4044" end="4058" title="gravity assist" label="gravity assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q280602" start="4248" end="4266" title="Solid-fuel rocket" label="solid fuel rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341701" start="4275" end="4293" title="Nikolai Tikhomirov (chemical engineer)" label="Nikolai Tikhomirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333277" start="4333" end="4350" title="Vladimir Artemyev" label="Vladimir Artemyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="4415" end="4435" title="Liquid-fueled rocket" label="Liquid-fueled rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214453" start="4580" end="4603" title="Gas Dynamics Laboratory" label="Gas Dynamics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600801" start="4773" end="4788" title="Georgy Langemak" label="Georgy Langemak"/>
<link wikidata="Q949963" start="4822" end="4836" title="RS-82 (rocket family)" label="RS-82 missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491654" start="4845" end="4856" title="Tupolev I-4" label="Tupolev I-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q170842" start="5027" end="5041" title="Sergey Korolev" label="Sergey Korolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q219734" start="5209" end="5223" title="Andrey Tupolev" label="Andrey Tupolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q616465" start="5313" end="5325" title="Tupolev TB-3" label="Tupolev TB-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q132332" start="5751" end="5755" title="GIRD" label="GIRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q430359" start="5848" end="5867" title="Mikhail Tikhonravov" label="Mikhail Tikhonravov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875586" start="5869" end="5883" title="Leonid Dushkin" label="Leonid Dushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q704903" start="5885" end="5904" title="Vladimir Vetchinkin" label="Vladimir Vetchinkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639965" start="6035" end="6059" title="Hybrid-propellant rocket" label="hybrid propellant rocket"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6065" end="6072" title="Group for the Study of Reactive Motion#GIRD-9" label="GIRD-09"/>
<link wikidata="Q132332" start="6145" end="6151" title="GIRD-X" label="GIRD-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q28647524" start="6279" end="6317" title="Reactive Scientific Research Institute" label="Reactive Scientific Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394456" start="6416" end="6431" title="Ivan Kleymyonov" label="Ivan Kleymyonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q342397" start="6463" end="6479" title="Valentin Glushko" label="Valentin Glushko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619461" start="6567" end="6573" title="Korolyov RP-318" label="RP-318"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619461" start="6592" end="6615" title="Korolyov RP-318" label="rocket-powered aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q949963" start="6624" end="6649" title="RS-82 (rocket family)" label="RS-82 and RS-132 missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192223" start="6769" end="6802" title="Katyusha rocket launcher" label="Katyusha multiple rocket launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="7057" end="7070" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="7078" end="7089" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="7261" end="7266" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575240" start="7316" end="7344" title="Sevvostlag" label="forced labour camp in Kolyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081812" start="7422" end="7457" title="Sharashka" label="prison for scientists and engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q507437" start="7567" end="7581" title="OKB" label="design bureaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q563428" start="7920" end="7940" title="Viktor Bolkhovitinov" label="Viktor Bolkhovitinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970020" start="7964" end="7977" title="Aleksei Isaev" label="Aleksei Isaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q470193" start="7979" end="7992" title="Boris Chertok" label="Boris Chertok"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176500" start="7994" end="8013" title="Leonid Voskresensky" label="Leonid Voskresensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119416" start="8018" end="8034" title="Nikolay Pilyugin" label="Nikolay Pilyugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q548963" start="8083" end="8104" title="Bereznyak-Isayev BI-1" label="Bereznyak-Isayev BI-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="8213" end="8241" title="Liquid rocket" label="liquid-fueled rocket engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676551" start="8245" end="8259" title="JATO" label="assist takeoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8401" end="8416" title="La-7#La-7R" label="Lavochkin La-7R"/>
<link wikidata="Q628397" start="8639" end="8659" title="NPO Mashinostroyeniya" label="Plant No 51 (OKB-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q333260" start="8694" end="8711" title="Vladimir Chelomey" label="Vladimir Chelomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q671090" start="8747" end="8764" title="Pulse jet engine" label="pulsating air jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="8835" end="8847" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="8969" end="8975" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9009" end="9021" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="9146" end="9156" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q938603" start="9551" end="9561" title="R-1 rocket" label="R-1 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q422427" start="9802" end="9823" title="Operation Osoaviakhim" label="Operation Osoaviakhim"/>
<link wikidata="Q161226" start="10047" end="10062" title="Five-Year Plan (USSR)" label="Five-Year Plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q586755" start="10326" end="10348" title="RDS-1" label="first atomic bomb test"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156826" start="10592" end="10608" title="Dezik and Tsygan" label="Dezik and Tsygan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430622" start="10795" end="10809" title="space medicine" label="space medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q724505" start="11126" end="11156" title="International Geophysical Year" label="International Geophysical Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="11211" end="11228" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="11472" end="11479" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q189576" start="11569" end="11574" title="Zenit (satellite)" label="Zenit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579577" start="11625" end="11636" title="Geocentric orbit" label="Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q624038" start="11965" end="11982" title="Vostok spacecraft" label="Vostok spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548765" start="12409" end="12441" title="Controlled Ecological Life Support System" label="closed-loop life support systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="12587" end="12606" title="Project Apollo" label="landing on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394530" start="12641" end="12662" title="Polyot (satellite)" label="Polyot 1 and Polyot 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="12747" end="12766" title="orbital inclination" label="orbital inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="12771" end="12776" title="Apsis" label="Apsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385916" start="12847" end="12861" title="Anti-satellite weapon" label="Anti-satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q63113668" start="13172" end="13195" title="Strategic Rocket Forces" label="Strategic Rocket Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="13743" end="13763" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q269668" start="13794" end="13802" title="Vostok 6" label="Vostok 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="14093" end="14103" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q498533" start="14111" end="14126" title="Mercury-Atlas 6" label="Mercury-Atlas 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878176" start="14186" end="14194" title="Vostok 3" label="Vostok 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878176" start="14199" end="14207" title="Vostok 4" label="Vostok 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q537520" start="14351" end="14361" title="James E. Webb" label="James Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q170413" start="14493" end="14508" title="Sputnik program" label="Sputnik Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q623873" start="14535" end="14549" title="Vostok programme" label="Vostok Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q463450" start="14680" end="14694" title="Mikhail Yangel" label="Mikhail Yangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q342397" start="14696" end="14712" title="Valentin Glushko" label="Valentin Glushko"/>
<link wikidata="Q333260" start="14718" end="14735" title="Vladimir Chelomei" label="Vladimir Chelomei"/>
<link wikidata="Q579421" start="14778" end="14783" title="Soyuz spacecraft" label="Soyuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q622762" start="14794" end="14797" title="N1 rocket" label="N-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="14902" end="14906" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48067" start="14917" end="14931" title="Dmitry Ustinov" label="Dmitry Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q841176" start="14987" end="15005" title="Voskhod spacecraft" label="Voskhod spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="15076" end="15081" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="15086" end="15090" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q81614" start="15333" end="15343" title="hypergolic" label="hypergolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q386074" start="15368" end="15387" title="Nedelin catastrophe" label="Nedelin catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="16580" end="16598" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q538639" start="16828" end="16847" title="Valentin Bondarenko" label="Valentin Bondarenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="17223" end="17235" title="colon cancer" label="colon cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q669448" start="17237" end="17250" title="Kerim Kerimov" label="Kerim Kerimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q63113668" start="17297" end="17320" title="Strategic Rocket Forces" label="Strategic Rocket Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q623873" start="17370" end="17376" title="Vostok programme" label="Vostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="17736" end="17739" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q948941" start="17805" end="17818" title="Vasily Mishin" label="Vasily Mishin"/>
<link wikidata="Q517003" start="17828" end="17913" title="Soviet crewed lunar programs" label="the task of sending a human around the Moon in 1967 and landing a human on it in 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q211254" start="18070" end="18077" title="Soyuz 1" label="Soyuz 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865" start="18281" end="18297" title="Vladimir Komarov" label="Vladimir Komarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="18446" end="18454" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q622762" start="18524" end="18526" title="N1 (rocket)" label="N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q619807" start="18704" end="18711" title="Soyuz 4" label="Soyuz 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q748593" start="18716" end="18723" title="Soyuz 5" label="Soyuz 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q940767" start="18850" end="18859" title="LK (spacecraft)" label="LK lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189371" start="19211" end="19217" title="Zvezda (moonbase)" label="Zvezda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143" start="19397" end="19402" title="Almaz" label="Almaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="19472" end="19478" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q207933" start="19534" end="19540" title="Salyut" label="Salyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q211761" start="19663" end="19671" title="Salyut 1" label="Salyut 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="19877" end="19881" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q208759" start="19889" end="19901" title="Apollo–Soyuz" label="Apollo–Soyuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q763402" start="20063" end="20074" title="NPO Energia" label="NPO Energia"/>
<link wikidata="Q669895" start="20301" end="20309" title="Lunokhod" label="Lunokhod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093833" start="20323" end="20344" title="sample return mission" label="sample return mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q31316" start="20351" end="20369" title="Mars program" label="Mars probe program"/>
<link wikidata="Q192144" start="20476" end="20482" title="Venera" label="Venera"/>
<link wikidata="Q755286" start="20487" end="20491" title="Vega program" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q192372" start="20551" end="20581" title="Luna programme" label="The &amp;quot;Luna&amp;quot; programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159913" start="20623" end="20629" title="Luna 1" label="Luna 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159927" start="20742" end="20748" title="Luna 2" label="Luna 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q942814" start="20802" end="20808" title="Luna 3" label="Luna 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="20911" end="20948" title="Solar wind" label="ionized plasma emanating from the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="21023" end="21035" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q326868" start="21112" end="21128" title="Mare Moscoviense" label="Mare Moscoviense"/>
<link wikidata="Q486938" start="21149" end="21163" title="Mare Desiderii" label="Mare Desiderii"/>
<link wikidata="Q333835" start="21232" end="21244" title="Mare Ingenii" label="Mare Ingenii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159899" start="21495" end="21501" title="Luna 4" label="Luna 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q620396" start="21503" end="21509" title="Luna 5" label="Luna 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q617898" start="21511" end="21517" title="Luna 6" label="Luna 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q620336" start="21519" end="21525" title="Luna 7" label="Luna 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q620426" start="21531" end="21537" title="Luna 8" label="Luna 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159933" start="21591" end="21597" title="Luna 9" label="Luna 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159895" start="21702" end="21709" title="Luna 10" label="Luna 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q590956" start="21794" end="21801" title="Luna 11" label="Luna 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q291210" start="21803" end="21810" title="Luna 12" label="Luna 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q748333" start="21816" end="21823" title="Luna 14" label="Luna 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q291210" start="21868" end="21875" title="Luna 12" label="Luna 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q748333" start="21962" end="21969" title="Luna 14" label="Luna 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q906816" start="21980" end="22002" title="Gamma ray spectrometry" label="Gamma ray spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q219857" start="22040" end="22052" title="Zond program" label="Zond program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085985" start="22118" end="22124" title="Zond 1" label="Zond 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q917929" start="22129" end="22135" title="Zond 2" label="Zond 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q769448" start="22204" end="22210" title="Zond 3" label="Zond 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q935627" start="22322" end="22329" title="Luna 13" label="Luna 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q837692" start="22412" end="22422" title="Surveyor 1" label="Surveyor 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q668831" start="22449" end="22455" title="Zond 4" label="Zond 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q372945" start="22881" end="22887" title="Zond 5" label="Zond 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q754182" start="22902" end="22918" title="Russian tortoise" label="Russian tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q265766" start="23076" end="23082" title="Zond 6" label="Zond 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042955" start="23084" end="23090" title="Zond 7" label="Zond 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q366944" start="23096" end="23102" title="Zond 8" label="Zond 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042955" start="23174" end="23180" title="Zond 7" label="Zond 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q920298" start="23357" end="23364" title="Luna 15" label="Luna 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q858293" start="23463" end="23470" title="Luna 16" label="Luna 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="23716" end="23725" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q188433" start="23730" end="23739" title="Apollo 12" label="Apollo 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q371939" start="23758" end="23765" title="Luna 17" label="Luna 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q684044" start="23767" end="23774" title="Luna 21" label="Luna 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q657771" start="23779" end="23786" title="Luna 24" label="Luna 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q761733" start="23834" end="23841" title="Luna 20" label="Luna 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q668942" start="23888" end="23895" title="Luna 18" label="Luna 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q950990" start="23900" end="23907" title="Luna 23" label="Luna 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="24189" end="24220" title="Roscosmos" label="Russian federation space agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042357" start="24230" end="24237" title="Luna 25" label="Luna 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q192144" start="24277" end="24283" title="Venera" label="Venera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707053" start="24338" end="24359" title="Observations and explorations of Venus" label="explorations of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152500" start="24361" end="24369" title="Venera 1" label="Venera 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q719617" start="24374" end="24382" title="Venera 2" label="Venera 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q719607" start="24429" end="24437" title="Venera 3" label="Venera 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q719613" start="24579" end="24587" title="Venera 4" label="Venera 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q728276" start="24589" end="24597" title="Venera 5" label="Venera 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q742458" start="24603" end="24611" title="Venera 6" label="Venera 6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24660" end="24668" title="Venera#Venera 7" label="Venera 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q646" start="24788" end="24799" title="thermometer" label="thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79757" start="24815" end="24824" title="barometer" label="barometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q251645" start="25460" end="25468" title="Venera 8" label="Venera 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q728292" start="25673" end="25681" title="Venera 9" label="Venera 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q836463" start="25789" end="25798" title="Venera 10" label="Venera 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q751873" start="25878" end="25887" title="Venera 11" label="Venera 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q25029" start="25892" end="25901" title="Venera 12" label="Venera 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q372064" start="26057" end="26066" title="Venera 13" label="Venera 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q106551" start="26424" end="26432" title="regolith" label="regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q891991" start="26843" end="26852" title="Venera 14" label="Venera 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q755286" start="27121" end="27133" title="Vega program" label="Vega program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153267" start="27205" end="27211" title="Vega 1" label="Vega 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191435" start="27216" end="27222" title="Vega 2" label="Vega 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q716774" start="27364" end="27376" title="Exploration of Mars" label="explore Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q678689" start="27378" end="27384" title="Mars 1" label="Mars 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q247305" start="27604" end="27610" title="Mars 2" label="Mars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q718908" start="27615" end="27621" title="Mars 3" label="Mars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527693" start="27707" end="27719" title="hard landing" label="hard landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067650" start="28139" end="28145" title="Mars 4" label="Mars 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065662" start="28147" end="28153" title="Mars 5" label="Mars 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q909664" start="28155" end="28161" title="Mars 6" label="Mars 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041855" start="28167" end="28173" title="Mars 7" label="Mars 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q203805" start="28400" end="28409" title="Mariner 4" label="Mariner 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q203801" start="28414" end="28423" title="Mariner 9" label="Mariner 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q207933" start="28505" end="28521" title="Salyut programme" label="Salyut programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q211761" start="28746" end="28754" title="Salyut 1" label="Salyut 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q838179" start="29088" end="29096" title="Salyut 2" label="Salyut 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q842637" start="29101" end="29109" title="Salyut 3" label="Salyut 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29168" end="29177" title="Salyut 3#On-board gun" label="large gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q613601" start="29484" end="29492" title="Salyut 6" label="Salyut 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="29497" end="29505" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="29880" end="29883" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="30146" end="30153" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="30302" end="30311" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223799" start="30391" end="30427" title="Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union" label="Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q22719" start="30893" end="30905" title="cosmonautics" label="cosmonautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="30973" end="30980" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="31377" end="31386" title="Cosmonaut" label="Cosmonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q763402" start="31736" end="31741" title="OKB-1" label="OKB-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509846" start="31769" end="31805" title="Ministry of General Machine-Building" label="Ministry of General Machine-Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q624038" start="31966" end="31972" title="Vostok (spacecraft)" label="Vostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="32785" end="32789" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="32816" end="32833" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="33019" end="33029" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143" start="33292" end="33297" title="Almaz" label="Almaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q147802" start="33315" end="33321" title="Cosmos (satellite)" label="Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q52047" start="33335" end="33340" title="Foton (space programs)" label="Foton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192372" start="33343" end="33347" title="Luna program" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q31316" start="33416" end="33434" title="Mars probe program" label="Mars probe program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925316" start="33437" end="33469" title="Meteor (satellite)" label="Meteor meteorological satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q593283" start="33472" end="33479" title="Molniya (satellite)" label="Molniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="33508" end="33511" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406559" start="33528" end="33544" title="Proton satellite" label="Proton satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q94927" start="33548" end="33554" title="Phobos program" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q207933" start="33577" end="33583" title="Salyut" label="Salyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q207329" start="33601" end="33614" title="Soyuz program" label="Soyuz program"/>
<link wikidata="Q170413" start="33628" end="33635" title="Sputnik program" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064584" start="33649" end="33663" title="TKS spacecraft" label="TKS spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q192144" start="33666" end="33672" title="Venera" label="Venera"/>
<link wikidata="Q755286" start="33698" end="33710" title="Vega program" label="Vega program"/>
<link wikidata="Q623873" start="33753" end="33767" title="Vostok program" label="Vostok program"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860000" start="33781" end="33796" title="Voskhod program" label="Voskhod program"/>
<link wikidata="Q219857" start="33810" end="33822" title="Zond program" label="Zond program"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="33915" end="33935" title="artificial satellite" label="artificial satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="34012" end="34021" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q221675" start="34273" end="34285" title="R-7 Semyorka" label="R-7 Semyorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="34312" end="34321" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q53662" start="34368" end="34373" title="Laika" label="Laika"/>
<link wikidata="Q190555" start="34377" end="34386" title="Sputnik 2" label="Sputnik 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159913" start="34488" end="34494" title="Luna 1" label="Luna 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="34534" end="34543" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="34557" end="34568" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159913" start="34570" end="34576" title="Luna 1" label="Luna 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="34625" end="34629" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159913" start="34676" end="34682" title="Luna 1" label="Luna 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159927" start="34724" end="34730" title="Luna 2" label="Luna 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="34772" end="34780" title="far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q942814" start="34782" end="34788" title="Luna 3" label="Luna 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415309" start="34856" end="34873" title="Belka and Strelka" label="Belka and Strelka"/>
<link wikidata="Q823456" start="34877" end="34886" title="Korabl-Sputnik 2" label="Sputnik 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q152500" start="34927" end="34935" title="Venera 1" label="Venera 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="35014" end="35026" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182524" start="35030" end="35038" title="Vostok 1" label="Vostok 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q623873" start="35040" end="35054" title="Vostok programme" label="Vostok program"/>
<link wikidata="Q152298" start="35109" end="35122" title="Gherman Titov" label="Gherman Titov"/>
<link wikidata="Q221678" start="35124" end="35132" title="Vostok 2" label="Vostok 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878176" start="35211" end="35219" title="Vostok 3" label="Vostok 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878176" start="35224" end="35232" title="Vostok 4" label="Vostok 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q678689" start="35272" end="35278" title="Mars 1" label="Mars 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="35310" end="35330" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q269668" start="35332" end="35340" title="Vostok 6" label="Vostok 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q750101" start="35379" end="35388" title="Voskhod 1" label="Voskhod 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="35430" end="35433" title="extra-vehicular activity" label="EVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q154269" start="35439" end="35453" title="Alexsei Leonov" label="Alexsei Leonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q722791" start="35455" end="35464" title="Voskhod 2" label="Voskhod 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q769448" start="35506" end="35512" title="Zond 3" label="Zond 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="35563" end="35575" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="35577" end="35582" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q719607" start="35585" end="35593" title="Venera 3" label="Venera 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159933" start="35684" end="35690" title="Luna 9" label="Luna 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159895" start="35728" end="35735" title="Luna 10" label="Luna 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861265" start="35745" end="35780" title="first images of Earth from space" label="First image of the whole Earth disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752541" start="35782" end="35791" title="Molniya 1" label="Molniya 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q545509" start="35840" end="35850" title="Cosmos 186" label="Cosmos 186"/>
<link wikidata="Q545509" start="35851" end="35861" title="Cosmos 188" label="Cosmos 188"/>
<link wikidata="Q754182" start="35961" end="35977" title="Russian tortoise" label="Russian tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q372945" start="36002" end="36008" title="Zond 5" label="Zond 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q619807" start="36095" end="36102" title="Soyuz 4" label="Soyuz 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q748593" start="36107" end="36114" title="Soyuz 5" label="Soyuz 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q858293" start="36218" end="36225" title="Luna 16" label="Luna 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q261052" start="36262" end="36272" title="Lunokhod 1" label="Lunokhod 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q834235" start="36305" end="36326" title="interplanetary travel" label="interplanetary travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="36447" end="36452" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152800" start="36455" end="36463" title="Venera 7" label="Venera 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q211761" start="36493" end="36501" title="Salyut 1" label="Salyut 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q247305" start="36554" end="36560" title="Mars 2" label="Mars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q718908" start="36599" end="36605" title="Mars 3" label="Mars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143" start="36642" end="36647" title="Almaz" label="Almaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q728292" start="36758" end="36766" title="Venera 9" label="Venera 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q353687" start="36826" end="36835" title="Pham Tuan" label="Pham Tuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q847126" start="36839" end="36847" title="Soyuz 37" label="Soyuz 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="36859" end="36873" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="36875" end="36879" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q362902" start="36924" end="36945" title="Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez" label="Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q847009" start="36949" end="36957" title="Soyuz 38" label="Soyuz 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="36972" end="36977" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q325205" start="36999" end="37012" title="Rakesh Sharma" label="Rakesh Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="37016" end="37026" title="Soyuz T-11" label="Soyuz T-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="37028" end="37036" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="37076" end="37089" title="Extra-vehicular activity" label="walk in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q152318" start="37091" end="37110" title="Svetlana Savitskaya" label="Svetlana Savitskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="37112" end="37120" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="37194" end="37197" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="37202" end="37210" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153267" start="37336" end="37342" title="Vega 1" label="Vega 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191435" start="37344" end="37350" title="Vega 2" label="Vega 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="37400" end="37403" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q466069" start="37516" end="37530" title="Vladimir Titov (cosmonaut)" label="Vladimir Titov"/>
<link wikidata="Q467732" start="37535" end="37547" title="Musa Manarov" label="Musa Manarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q904285" start="37560" end="37570" title="Soyuz TM-4" label="Soyuz TM-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="37573" end="37576" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548" start="37638" end="37643" title="Buran (spacecraft)" label="Buran"/>
<link wikidata="Q538639" start="37888" end="37907" title="Valentin Bondarenko" label="Valentin Bondarenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q211254" start="37990" end="37997" title="Soyuz 1" label="Soyuz 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865" start="38061" end="38077" title="Vladimir Komarov" label="Vladimir Komarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q603630" start="38114" end="38132" title="List of spaceflight-related accidents and incidents" label="in-flight fatality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516939" start="38140" end="38162" title="history of spaceflight" label="history of spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q622762" start="38233" end="38243" title="N-1 rocket" label="N-1 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="38317" end="38326" title="United States" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="38369" end="38378" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q648581" start="38411" end="38419" title="Soyuz 11" label="Soyuz 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q211761" start="38443" end="38451" title="Salyut 1" label="Salyut 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q345658" start="38735" end="38751" title="Vladislav Volkov" label="Vladislav Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q355433" start="38753" end="38771" title="Georgy Dobrovolsky" label="Georgy Dobrovolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q358525" start="38777" end="38792" title="Viktor Patsayev" label="Viktor Patsayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q902812" start="38813" end="38829" title="Soyuz 7K-T No.39" label="Soyuz 7K-T No.39"/>
<link wikidata="Q841586" start="38897" end="38905" title="Salyut 4" label="Salyut 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="39090" end="39160" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="which the Soviet Union was having difficult relations with at the time"/>
<link wikidata="Q841262" start="39428" end="39441" title="Vostok rocket" label="Vostok rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662654" start="39442" end="39468" title="1980 Plesetsk launch pad disaster" label="exploded on its launch pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155053" start="39533" end="39543" title="Kosmos 434" label="Kosmos 434"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="39687" end="39726" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Soviet Union)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="40042" end="40050" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010251" start="40204" end="40217" title="Buran program" label="Buran program"/>
<link wikidata="Q731859" start="40280" end="40287" title="Energia (rocket)" label="Energia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="40318" end="40331" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="40432" end="40460" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="40671" end="40696" title="thermal protection system" label="thermal protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064394" start="40714" end="40735" title="Space Shuttle Orbiter" label="Space Shuttle Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q177477" start="41162" end="41181" title="Baikonur Cosmodrome" label="Baikonur Cosmodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="41185" end="41195" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q388630" start="41600" end="41616" title="Polyus (spacecraft)" label="Polyus satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q392212" start="41633" end="41657" title="space weapon" label="orbital weapons platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="41678" end="41706" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362150" start="41734" end="41754" title="Carbon dioxide laser" label="carbon-dioxide laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q731859" start="41792" end="41806" title="Energia (rocket)" label="Energia rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="41854" end="41878" title="inertial guidance system" label="inertial guidance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q731859" start="41991" end="41998" title="Energia (rocket)" label="Energia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23759442" start="42028" end="42059" title="super heavy-lift launch vehicle" label="super heavy-lift launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397199" start="42073" end="42093" title="Hydrogen rocket fuel" label="liquid hydrogen fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q31316" start="42287" end="42295" title="Mars 4NM" label="Mars 4NM"/>
<link wikidata="Q622762" start="42338" end="42340" title="N1 (rocket)" label="N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093833" start="42380" end="42401" title="sample return mission" label="sample return mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q31316" start="42402" end="42410" title="Mars 5NM" label="Mars 5NM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282411" start="42498" end="42505" title="Mars 5M" label="Mars 5M"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923373" start="42647" end="42660" title="Vesta mission" label="Vesta mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="42893" end="42900" title="4 Vesta" label="4 Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="43107" end="43114" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="43163" end="43166" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="43234" end="43240" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671999" start="43270" end="43276" title="DRAKON" label="DRAKON"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="43362" end="43373" title="Intercosmos" label="Intercosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596045" start="43514" end="43549" title="List of Russian aerospace engineers" label="List of Russian aerospace engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793481" start="43552" end="43577" title="List of Russian explorers" label="List of Russian explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q603630" start="43580" end="43603" title="List of space disasters" label="List of space disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428575" start="43606" end="43633" title="Pilot-Cosmonaut of the USSR" label="Pilot-Cosmonaut of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="43655" end="43664" title="Roscosmos" label="Roscosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="43729" end="43747" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108907880" start="43750" end="43775" title="Roscosmos Cosmonaut Corps" label="Roscosmos Cosmonaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493569" start="43803" end="43816" title="Sheldon names" label="Sheldon names"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325367" start="43932" end="43947" title="Soviet rocketry" label="Soviet rocketry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="43950" end="43960" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055488" start="43969" end="43985" title="Tank on the Moon" label="Tank on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057861" start="44412" end="44463" title="Into That Silent Sea" label="Into That Silent Sea: Trailblazers of the Space Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012889" start="44560" end="44623" title="In the Shadow of the Moon (book)" label="In the Shadow of the Moon: A Challenging Journey to Tranquility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625113" start="44821" end="44837" title="Asif Azam Siddiqi" label="Siddiqi, Asif A."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723060" wikidata="Q2975413" url="?curid=723060" title="Willis Carto">
<text>Willis Allison Carto (July 17, 1926 – October 26, 2015) was an American far-right political activist. He described himself as a Jeffersonian and a populist, but was primarily known for his promotion of antisemitic conspiracy theories and Holocaust denial.

Carto was known for the Liberty Lobby and successor racial extremist organizations which he helped create. Carto ran a group supporting segregationist George Wallace&#x27;s 1968 presidential campaign and reorganized the group into the National Youth Alliance, which promoted Francis Parker Yockey&#x27;s ideology. Carto helped found the Populist Party, which served as an electoral vehicle for white supremacist group and Ku Klux Klan members, such as David Duke in the 1988 presidential election and Christian Identity supporter Bo Gritz in 1992. Carto ran the &quot;American Free Press&quot; newspaper which publishes antisemitic and racist books and features columns by Joe Sobran, James Traficant, Paul Craig Roberts, and others. The organization promotes 9/11 conspiracy theories. Carto&#x27;s many other projects included the Institute for Historical Review, which promotes Holocaust denial.

== Biography ==
=== Early life ===
Willis Carto was born in Fort Wayne, Indiana. He served in the United States Army in the Philippines in World War II and earned the Purple Heart when he was shot in the shoulder by an enemy sniper. After leaving the military, he lived with his parents in Mansfield, Ohio. He studied law for a semester at the University of Cincinnati Law School. He later worked for Procter &amp; Gamble and moved west to San Francisco, California where he worked for the Household Finance Company.

===Liberty Lobby and publications===
In 1955, Carto founded an organization called Liberty Lobby, which remained in operation under his control until 2001, when the organization was forced into bankruptcy as a result of a lawsuit. Liberty Lobby published &quot;The Spotlight&quot; newspaper between 1975 and 2001.

Carto and several &quot;Spotlight&quot; staff members and writers subsequently founded a new newspaper called &quot;American Free Press&quot;. The paper includes articles from syndicated columnists who have no direct ties to Carto or his organizations.

In 1966, Carto acquired control of &quot;The American Mercury&quot; via the Legion for the Survival of Freedom organization. It was published until 1980.

===Political activism in the 1960s and 1970s===
Carto ran a group called &quot;Youth for George Wallace&quot; to aid the third party presidential campaign of George Wallace in 1968. When the campaign failed, he converted what remained of the Youth for George Wallace organization into the National Youth Alliance. As National Chairman for the group, Carto recruited William Luther Pierce, who later became known for writing &quot;The Turner Diaries&quot;. Carto eventually lost control of the National Youth Alliance to Pierce who transformed it into the National Alliance, a white nationalist and white separatist political organization.

On September 10, 1971, the conservative magazine &quot;National Review&quot; published a detailed critique of Carto&#x27;s activities up to that point. It was titled &quot;Liberty Lobby - Willis Carto and his Fronts&quot;.

===Historical revisionism and Holocaust denial===
Carto founded the Institute for Historical Review in 1979. He was also the founder of a publishing company called Noontide Press, which published books on white racialism, including Yockey&#x27;s &quot;Imperium&quot; and David Hoggan&#x27;s &quot;The Myth of the Six Million&quot;, one of the first books to deny the Holocaust. Noontide Press later became closely associated with the IHR, and fell out of Carto&#x27;s hands at the same time as the IHR did.

The IHR and Carto were sued in 1981 by public interest attorney William John Cox on behalf of Auschwitz survivor Mel Mermelstein. In that case, which was to eventually last eleven years, the court took &quot;judicial notice of the fact that Jews were gassed to death at Auschwitz concentration camp in Poland during the summer of 1944.&quot; The court went on to state, &quot;It is simply a fact.&quot; The law firm of Robert Von Esch, Jr., representing the defendants, settled with the plaintiff to remove themselves from the case by agreeing to pay $100,000 and an explicit apology for having filed an August 1986 libel suit by the IHR against Mermelstein. The Von Esches also formally acknowledged that Jews had been gassed at Auschwitz and that millions of Jews had perished in German wartime camps. On September 19, 1991, the plaintiffs withdrew complaints of libel, conspiracy to inflict emotional distress and intentional infliction of emotional distress, following Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Stephen M. Lachs&#x27; dismissal of the malicious prosecution portion of the case.

After losing control of Noontide Press and the IHR in a hostile takeover by former associates, Carto started another publication, &quot;The Barnes Review&quot;, with the focus also on Holocaust denial.

===Populist Party (1984–1996)===
In 1984, Carto was involved in starting a new political party called the Populist Party. It quickly fell out of his hands in a hostile takeover by disgruntled former associates. Critics asserted that this Populist Party (not to be confused with the 19th-century People&#x27;s Party, commonly known as &quot;Populists&quot;) was little more than an electoral vehicle for current and former Ku Klux Klan and Christian Identity members. Olympic athlete Bob Richards (1984), David Duke (a founder of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan and a future Louisiana state representative, 1988) and former Green Beret Bo Gritz (1992) were the Populist Party&#x27;s only three presidential candidates. It folded before it could nominate a candidate for the 1996 elections.

===Radio and other activism===
Carto&#x27;s Liberty Lobby acquired the Sun Radio Network in December 1989, and attempted to use talk radio as a vehicle for espousing his views. It was eventually a financial failure. Liberty Lobby and &quot;American Free Press&quot; also sponsored the &quot;Radio Free America&quot; talk show. Carto also formed the Foundation to Defend the First Amendment, one of several nonprofits Carto used to spread money to like-minded individuals and groups. Carto&#x27;s Liberty Lobby also published &quot;The Barnes Review&quot; from 1994.

In 2004, Carto joined in signing David Duke&#x27;s New Orleans Protocol on behalf of &quot;American Free Press&quot;. The New Orleans Protocol sought to &quot;mainstream our cause&quot; by reducing internecine warfare.
Carto was featured as a guest on &quot;The Political Cesspool&quot;, which represents &quot;a philosophy that is pro-White.&quot; He spoke at meetings conducted by &quot;Pastor&quot; Thomas Robb, a Ku Klux Klan leader and Christian Identity advocate, and in 2015 participated in the ground breaking ceremony for the Christian Revival Research and Development Center being built on Robb&#x27;s compound in Arkansas, along with Edward Fields and Canadian white supremacist Paul Fromm.

In 2007, Carto condemned the &quot;genocidal maniacs like Vice President Cheney and commentator Bill O&#x27;Reilly&quot; in their support of the Bush administration&#x27;s attack on Iraq, and warned that &quot;now the crooks are prodding America to attack Iran&quot;. His media outlets supported presidential candidate and congressman Ron Paul.

===Death===
Carto died on October 26, 2015, at the age of 89, reportedly from cardiac arrest. In February 2016, he was buried at Arlington National Cemetery (which the family had the right to request because he had earned a Purple Heart). Far-right and white nationalist Pastor Thomas A. Robb presided at the funeral.

==Influences==
Willis Carto was a devotee of the writings of Francis Parker Yockey, a far-rightist who heralded Adolf Hitler&#x27;s Third Reich as the &quot;European Imperium&quot; against both Bolshevism and the United States, which he considered Jewish-controlled. Carto adopted Yockey&#x27;s book &quot;&quot; as his own guiding ideology, and he obtained a 15-minute interview with Yockey on June 10, 1960, while the latter was held in prison for passport fraud. Yockey committed suicide six days later on June 16. Scholars have asserted that Yockey would have probably been forgotten without Carto&#x27;s marketing of &quot;Imperium&quot; to the American audience.

Later, Carto would define his ideology as Jeffersonian and populist rather than National Socialist, particularly in Carto&#x27;s 1982 book, &quot;Profiles in Populism&quot;. That book presented sympathetic profiles of several United States political figures including Thomas Jefferson, Andrew Jackson, and Henry Ford, as well as Catholic priest Father Charles Coughlin, who used radio to support of the policies of Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini.

==References==
==Publications==
* (as editor). Old Greenwich, CT: Flag Press (1982) .
* Afterword to &quot;Best Witness: The Mermelstein Affair&quot;, by Michael C. Piper. America First Books. Washington: Center for Historical Review (1994)
* &quot;Populism vs. Plutocracy: The Universal Struggle&quot; (as editor). Liberty Lobby.

==Further reading==
*Cox, William John. (2015) &quot;The Holocaust Case: Defeat of Denial&quot;. Little Elm, TX: eLectio Publishing.
*Coogan, Kevin. (1999) &quot;Dreamer of the Day: Francis Parker Yockey and the Postwar Fascist International&quot;. Brooklyn, NY: Autonomedia.
*Michael, George. (2008) &quot;Willis Carto and the American Far Right&quot;. Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
*Mintz, Frank P. (1985) &quot;The Liberty Lobby and the American Right: Race, Conspiracy, and Culture&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

==External links==
* FAQ: Willis Carto &amp; The Institute for Historical Review 
* ADL: Willis A. Carto: Fabricating History 
* Extremist Files: Profile of Willis Carto from the Southern Poverty Law Center
* Willis Carto discussed in Season 2, Episode 8 of Rachel Maddow&#x27;s &quot;Ultra&quot; podcast (2024)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2975413" start="0" end="20" title="Willis Carto" label="Willis Allison Carto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280496" start="63" end="81" title="Far right in the United States" label="American far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="128" end="140" title="Jeffersonian democracy" label="Jeffersonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="147" end="155" title="Right-wing populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839017" start="202" end="233" title="antisemitic canard" label="antisemitic conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="238" end="254" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541867" start="281" end="294" title="Liberty Lobby" label="Liberty Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="393" end="407" title="racial segregation" label="segregationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="408" end="422" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545837" start="430" end="456" title="George Wallace presidential campaign, 1968" label="1968 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012039" start="492" end="515" title="National Youth Alliance" label="National Youth Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386299" start="532" end="553" title="Francis Parker Yockey" label="Francis Parker Yockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229832" start="594" end="608" title="Populist Party (United States, 1984)" label="Populist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="651" end="668" title="white supremacist" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="679" end="691" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163042" start="709" end="719" title="David Duke" label="David Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="727" end="753" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q477317" start="758" end="776" title="Christian Identity" label="Christian Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907490" start="787" end="795" title="Bo Gritz" label="Bo Gritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="799" end="803" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842936" start="825" end="844" title="American Free Press" label="American Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287091" start="930" end="940" title="Joe Sobran" label="Joe Sobran"/>
<link wikidata="Q465728" start="942" end="957" title="James Traficant" label="James Traficant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987836" start="959" end="977" title="Paul Craig Roberts" label="Paul Craig Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q22763" start="1017" end="1041" title="9/11 conspiracy theories" label="9/11 conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q699454" start="1089" end="1120" title="Institute for Historical Review" label="Institute for Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="1137" end="1153" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="1216" end="1235" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1280" end="1291" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1295" end="1307" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="1323" end="1335" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q983698" start="1446" end="1461" title="Mansfield, Ohio" label="Mansfield, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895273" start="1500" end="1535" title="University of Cincinnati College of Law" label="University of Cincinnati Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="1557" end="1577" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1596" end="1621" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635877" start="1646" end="1671" title="HSBC Finance" label="Household Finance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541867" start="1757" end="1770" title="Liberty Lobby" label="Liberty Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="1868" end="1878" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="1896" end="1903" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734599" start="1935" end="1948" title="The Spotlight" label="The Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842936" start="2105" end="2124" title="American Free Press" label="American Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713514" start="2284" end="2304" title="The American Mercury" label="The American Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q354239" start="2519" end="2530" title="third political party" label="third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="2531" end="2552" title="presidential campaign" label="presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="2556" end="2570" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="2574" end="2578" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012039" start="2687" end="2710" title="National Youth Alliance" label="National Youth Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399160" start="2764" end="2785" title="William Luther Pierce" label="William Luther Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542194" start="2828" end="2846" title="The Turner Diaries" label="The Turner Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="2953" end="2970" title="National Alliance (United States)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="2974" end="2991" title="White nationalism" label="white nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="2996" end="3012" title="White separatism" label="white separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="3093" end="3108" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q699454" start="3330" end="3361" title="Institute for Historical Review" label="Institute for Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933870" start="3426" end="3440" title="Noontide Press" label="Noontide Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="3473" end="3482" title="racialism" label="racialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175067" start="3533" end="3545" title="David Hoggan" label="David Hoggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="3620" end="3638" title="Holocaust denial" label="deny the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013609" start="3834" end="3850" title="William John Cox" label="William John Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q622867" start="3883" end="3898" title="Mel Mermelstein" label="Mel Mermelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302992" start="3978" end="3993" title="judicial notice" label="judicial notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="4011" end="4015" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="4040" end="4068" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4072" end="4078" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="4552" end="4572" title="Nazi concentration camp" label="German wartime camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682102" start="4743" end="4769" title="Los Angeles County Superior Court" label="Los Angeles Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609738" start="4776" end="4792" title="Stephen Lachs" label="Stephen M. Lachs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4916" end="4932" title="Takeover#Hostile takeovers" label="hostile takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034861" start="4996" end="5013" title="The Barnes Review" label="The Barnes Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229832" start="5169" end="5183" title="Populist Party (United States, 1984)" label="Populist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="5358" end="5377" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="5485" end="5497" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q477317" start="5502" end="5520" title="Christian Identity" label="Christian Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="5530" end="5537" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q558573" start="5546" end="5558" title="Bob Richards" label="Bob Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="5560" end="5564" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q163042" start="5567" end="5577" title="David Duke" label="David Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="5596" end="5623" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Knights of the Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494581" start="5637" end="5667" title="Louisiana House of Representatives" label="Louisiana state representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="5669" end="5673" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="5686" end="5697" title="United States Army Special Forces" label="Green Beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907490" start="5698" end="5706" title="Bo Gritz" label="Bo Gritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="5708" end="5712" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="5836" end="5850" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="5981" end="5991" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842936" start="6093" end="6112" title="American Free Press" label="American Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034861" start="6384" end="6401" title="The Barnes Review" label="The Barnes Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q163042" start="6453" end="6463" title="David Duke" label="David Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q163042" start="6471" end="6491" title="New Orleans Protocol" label="New Orleans Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859942" start="6678" end="6700" title="The Political Cesspool" label="The Political Cesspool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525523" start="6822" end="6833" title="Thomas Robb (Ku Klux Klan)" label="Thomas Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="7044" end="7052" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150748" start="7110" end="7120" title="Paul Fromm (activist)" label="Paul Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="7196" end="7202" title="Dick Cheney" label="Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q310953" start="7219" end="7237" title="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly (political commentator)" label="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="7268" end="7294" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush administration&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="7295" end="7309" title="Iraq War" label="attack on Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7379" end="7383" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="7458" end="7466" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="7547" end="7561" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="7598" end="7625" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="7693" end="7705" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="7708" end="7717" title="Far-right politics" label="Far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525523" start="7747" end="7761" title="Thomas Robb (Ku Klux Klan)" label="Thomas A. Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386299" start="7849" end="7870" title="Francis Parker Yockey" label="Francis Parker Yockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="7900" end="7912" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="7920" end="7931" title="Nazi Germany" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="7982" end="7992" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="8500" end="8512" title="Jeffersonian democracy" label="Jeffersonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="8517" end="8525" title="populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="8726" end="8742" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="8744" end="8758" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="8764" end="8774" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="8787" end="8802" title="Catholic priest" label="Catholic priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q181249" start="8810" end="8826" title="Charles Coughlin" label="Charles Coughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="8890" end="8906" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541867" start="9225" end="9238" title="Liberty Lobby" label="Liberty Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="9961" end="9988" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q555" start="10040" end="10060" title="Rachel Maddow" label="Rachel Maddow&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723061" wikidata="Q131010" url="?curid=723061" title="Augusto B. Leguía">
<text>Augusto Bernardino Leguía y Salcedo (19 February 1863 – 6 February 1932) was a Peruvian politician who served as President of Peru from 1908 to 1912 and from 1919 to 1930, the latter term known as the &quot;Oncenio&quot; after its eleven-year length.

==Early life==
Augusto Leguía was born in Lambayeque in 1863, and later married into one of the most distinguished families of the Peruvian oligarchy. Educated in Valparaíso, Chile, he served in the Peruvian Army during the War of the Pacific (1879–1881).

After the war he moved to the United States and became an insurance executive with the New York Life Insurance Company. By the 1900s, Leguía had become very wealthy and decided to return to Peru. He entered politics in 1903 at the urging of Manuel Candamo (the then-leader of the Civilista Party) and also of José Pardo, who was prime minister. Leguía took the position of Minister of Finance, a post he would retain until 1904, when the former Prime Minister José Pardo became president. Pardo offered the position of Prime Minister to Leguía, who accepted and remained so until 1907, when he resigned to run for the presidency the following year.

==Presidency==
===First term===

In 1908 he succeeded José Pardo (a succession event that would occur again in 1919) after being elected president for the first time by an alliance of the Civil and Constitutional parties. Some of Leguía&#x27;s first actions were to institute social and economic reforms in an attempt to industrialize Peru and turn it into a modern capitalist society.

On 29 May 1909, a group of citizens (supporters of Piérola&#x27;s Democratic Party) managed to force their entry into the &quot;Palacio de Gobierno&quot; demanding the resignation of Leguía. Among the group were the brother and sons of Piérola; &quot;Carlos de Piérola&quot;, &quot;Isaías de Piérola&quot; and &quot;Amadeo de Piérola&quot;. Since Leguía did not resign as planned, they kidnapped him and took him in front of the Bolivar Monument (located in &quot;Plaza inquisicion&quot; in Lima). Once there, Leguía did not acquiesce to their demands, and the police had to forcibly rescue the president in the midst of a fight that caused at least 100 deaths.

During this period the country was also confronting boundary disputes with five of its neighbors. Leguía succeeded in reaching agreements with two of them, Bolivia and Brazil.

The boundary with Brazil was settled with the signing of the &quot;Treaty of Velarde-Río Branco&quot;. This provided that two rivers (Yaravi and Yaverija) would compose most of the border for both countries. With Bolivia, The &quot;Treaty of Polo-Bustamante&quot; determined the partition of the Lake Titicaca and provided a much more accurate definition of the Peruvian-Bolivian border. This treaty also delimited the borders with Tacna (which was until then in Chilean control).

When Leguía&#x27;s term ended in 1912, he was succeeded by Guillermo Billinghurst, a millionaire businessman who had been the former mayor of Lima. During the following years, Leguía travelled in the United Kingdom and the United States, where he learned methods of banking and finance that he would later apply in Peru. During this time, Leguia was already in conflict with the &quot;Civilista Party&quot; and left its organization.

===Second term===
In 1919, he again sought the presidency of Peru by trying to succeed José Pardo. Fearing that the former president&#x27;s government along with the Civilist Parliament would not recognise his victory, he launched a successful military coup, which led Leguía to succeed Pardo as an interim president. He then proceeded to dissolve Congress and the new parliament elected him constitutional president of Peru.
Leguía changed the Peruvian constitution (which had the longest continuance since 1860), and promulgated a new one in 1920, which was more liberal than its predecessor and provided more civil guarantees and unlimited reelections. Nevertheless, having himself promulgated the constitution, Augusto B. Leguía almost completely ignored it.

The years of his tenure were marked with a dictatorial style of ruling by suppressing all opposition harshly.

Although he represented the Peruvian oligarchy, the oligarchs revolted against him when he came to power, and it was his loyal supporters who installed him. Therefore he broke ties with the oligarchy, who protested his coup.

Various political opponents of his government were exiled, of which the most prominent was Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre, who while in exile in Mexico founded the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) in 1924. It became one of modern Peru&#x27;s most active and controversial political parties. Another important political figure that would emerge during this era was José Carlos Mariátegui, leader of the Communist Party of Peru.

Among the positive initiatives that occurred during Leguía&#x27;s second term was a program to modernize Lima by planning and starting public works through various loans. These included improving the health-care system by founding hospitals and building drainage systems around the cities. Peru&#x27;s Government Palace (&quot;Palacio de Gobierno&quot;) was also remodeled in 1926. Banks such as the Banco Central de Reserva del Perú and Banco Hipotecario of Peru were also created during his second presidency.

Treaties of limits with Colombia and Chile were also signed. The boundary with Colombia was settled with the secession of all the lands between the Putumayo and Caquetá rivers. This was officially solved with the signing of the &quot;Treaty of Salomón-Lozano&quot; in 1922, published after Leguía&#x27;s 1930 overthrow. The Tacna–Arica compromise signed with Chile led to economic depression in later years and criticism of Leguía.

===Overthrow===
The Great Depression had drained foreign investment in Peru and after eleven years in power, Leguía&#x27;s government was overthrown. The coup, on 22 August 1930, was led by Luis Miguel Sánchez Cerro in Arequipa. Leguía was arrested and charged with misappropriating government funds. He remained in confinement in the Panopticon of Lima, and died at a naval hospital on 6 February 1932.

==Legacy==
Leguía is depicted as a tyrant in the 1937 novel &quot;Pity the Tyrant&quot; by American novelist Hans Otto Storm. American travel writer Richard Halliburton met Leguía during his Latin American travels chronicled in New World to Conquer. He describes Leguía as a charming and self-effacing &quot;man of the people&quot; who gives a humorous account of the 1908 coup attempt.

==Notes==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131010" start="0" end="35" title="Augusto B. Leguía" label="Augusto Bernardino Leguía y Salcedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708511" start="113" end="130" title="President of Peru" label="President of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050785" start="207" end="214" title="History of Peru (1919–1930)" label="Oncenio"/>
<link wikidata="Q768086" start="294" end="304" title="Lambayeque, Peru" label="Lambayeque"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="415" end="425" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="427" end="432" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658974" start="451" end="464" title="Peruvian Army" label="Peruvian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="476" end="494" title="War of the Pacific" label="War of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039380" start="596" end="627" title="New York Life Insurance Company" label="New York Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q170059" start="750" end="764" title="Manuel Candamo" label="Manuel Candamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q474074" start="789" end="804" title="Civilista Party" label="Civilista Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q136632" start="818" end="828" title="José Pardo y Barreda" label="José Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="838" end="852" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065145" start="882" end="901" title="Minister of Finance of Peru" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q136632" start="1213" end="1223" title="José Pardo y Barreda" label="José Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="1446" end="1462" title="Monetary policy" label="economic reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q170057" start="1597" end="1611" title="Nicolás de Piérola" label="Piérola&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255530" start="1612" end="1628" title="Democratic Party of Peru" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681402" start="1630" end="1658" title="1909 Peruvian coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="managed to force their entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="2365" end="2372" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2377" end="2383" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2404" end="2410" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2520" end="2526" title="Yaravi" label="Yaravi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2531" end="2539" title="Yaverija" label="Yaverija"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="2599" end="2606" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35342" start="2682" end="2695" title="Lake Titicaca" label="Lake Titicaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q136790" start="2927" end="2949" title="Guillermo Billinghurst" label="Guillermo Billinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="3010" end="3014" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3068" end="3082" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3091" end="3104" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q474074" start="3253" end="3268" title="Civilista Party" label="Civilista Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="4110" end="4127" title="Dictatorship" label="dictatorial style"/>
<link wikidata="Q379977" start="4495" end="4523" title="Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre" label="Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4547" end="4553" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q855669" start="4566" end="4605" title="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance" label="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q335544" start="4780" end="4802" title="José Carlos Mariátegui" label="José Carlos Mariátegui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154265" start="4818" end="4841" title="Communist Party of Peru" label="Communist Party of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q385938" start="5146" end="5163" title="Government Palace (Peru)" label="Government Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q932146" start="5244" end="5277" title="Banco Central de Reserva del Perú" label="Banco Central de Reserva del Perú"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5282" end="5307" title="Banco Hipotecario of Peru" label="Banco Hipotecario of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="5381" end="5389" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="5394" end="5399" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q213782" start="5505" end="5513" title="Putumayo River" label="Putumayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171840" start="5518" end="5525" title="Caquetá River" label="Caquetá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990714" start="5681" end="5703" title="Tacna–Arica compromise" label="Tacna–Arica compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5810" end="5826" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q128998" start="5980" end="6005" title="Luis Miguel Sánchez Cerro" label="Luis Miguel Sánchez Cerro"/>
<link wikidata="Q159273" start="6009" end="6017" title="Arequipa" label="Arequipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071330" start="6125" end="6143" title="Lima Penitentiary" label="Panopticon of Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650590" start="6304" end="6319" title="Hans Otto Storm" label="Hans Otto Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q653847" start="6344" end="6363" title="Richard Halliburton" label="Richard Halliburton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6423" end="6443" title="New World to Conquer" label="New World to Conquer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723063" wikidata="Q329904" url="?curid=723063" title="Gerome Ragni">
<text>Gerome Ragni (born Jerome Bernard Ragni; September 11, 1935 – July 10, 1991) was an American actor, singer, and songwriter, best known as one of the stars and co-writers of the 1967 musical &quot;Hair&quot;. On June 18, 2009, he was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame.

==Early life==
Born Jerome Bernard Ragni in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, he was one of ten Italian-American siblings. He attended suburban Scott Township High School, where he appeared in various school productions. He attended Georgetown University and The Catholic University of America. At Catholic University, he discovered an interest in theater, and began studying acting with Philip Burton. Ragni made his acting debut in Washington, D.C. in 1954, playing Father Corr in &quot;Shadow and Substance&quot;. He continued to act whenever he could find work. In 1963, he appeared in the New York production of &quot;War&quot; at the Village South Theatre, for which he won the Barter Theatre Award for Outstanding Actor.

==Career==
In 1954, Ragni made his professional stage debut in a Washington D.C. production, &quot;Shadow and Substance&quot;. In 1964, he was an understudy for the role of Horatio at the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre in the Broadway production of &quot;Hamlet&quot;, starring Richard Burton. He then appeared as the Messenger (uncredited) in &quot;Richard Burton&#x27;s Hamlet&quot;, the film version of the production, released by Warner Bros. in 1964.

That same year, Ragni made his first Off-Broadway appearance in New York City in the anti-capital punishment musical &quot;Hang Down Your Head and Die&quot; at the Mayfair Theatre on October 18 with James Rado, a fellow actor and friend who was studying with Lee Strasberg. &quot;Hang Down Your Head and Die&quot; was a success in London. It was first produced in the UK by the Oxford University Experimental Theatre Club in 1964; two cast members and writers were students Terry Jones and Michael Palin, who would later achieve fame as members of the Monty Python comedy troupe. It then moved from Oxford to the Comedy Theatre in London&#x27;s West End, was well-received and ran six weeks. But when it moved to New York the musical only had one performance, opening and closing on October 18, 1964. Theater critic Howard Taubman wrote in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;Death by hanging is swift, but &quot;Hang Down Your Head and Die&quot; makes a long evening of it... After a while, one feels as if one were being bludgeoned.&quot;

In 1965, Ragni performed in the role of Tom in &quot;The Knack&quot;, the play that opened at the New Theatre, and later appeared in the touring company along with Rado. During the show&#x27;s Chicago run at the Harper Theater, Rado and Ragni tried to revive &quot;Hang Down Your Head and Die&quot; with what they could remember from the script. They also planned to introduce new material in collaboration with Corky Siegel and Jim Schwall, of the Siegel-Schwall Band, whom they met playing in a beatnik coffee house off the Harper Street strip. They spent time writing ideas for the production, which was to be performed by Rado, Ragni, Schwall, and Siegel in a house on the South Side of Chicago and an apartment on Stony Island Avenue. Rado and Ragni rented the Harper Theatre to put on the production. After two weeks of working on the production, &quot;The Knack&quot; company went back to New York and Ragni and Rado had to abandon their plans to revive &quot;Hang Down Your Head and Die&quot; with Siegel and Schwall.

==&quot;Hair&quot;==

Ragni had been involved with The Open Theater since it was begun as part of the Living Theatre in 1962. In 1966, Open Theatre began rehearsals for the Megan Terry play &quot;Viet Rock&quot;. Ragni took a leading role in the show, which opened at the Martinique Theatre in New York and had a successful run.

&quot;Viet Rock&quot; and experimental theatre inspired Ragni to work with Rado on a musical about hippie culture. As research, they associated with a group of youths in the East Village who were dropping out and dodging the draft. They talked to people in the streets and people they knew, and read articles about hippie culture and youths being kicked out of school for growing their hair long. They wrote lyrics to thirteen songs (&quot;Ain&#x27;t Got No&quot;, &quot;I Got Life&quot;, &quot;Reading and Writing&quot;, &quot;Don&#x27;t Put It Down&quot;, &quot;Sodomy&quot;, &quot;Colored Spade&quot;, &quot;Manchester, England&quot;, &quot;Frank Mills&quot;, &quot;We Look at One Another&quot;, &quot;Hair&quot;, &quot;Aquarius&quot;, &quot;Easy to Be Hard&quot;, &quot;Good Morning Starshine&quot; and &quot;Where Do I Go?&quot;), and completed the first version of their musical, called &quot;Hair&quot;. Two of the thirteen songs were removed, many songs were revised, titles were changed, and more songs were written as they continued to work on the show.

Once they agreed on a draft, Ragni and Rado brought the idea to producer Nat Shapiro for consideration. He responded to the songs by asking, &quot;Where&#x27;s the music?&quot; Shapiro introduced Ragni and Rado to composer Galt MacDermot, who took the script and returned three weeks later with music for the songs Ragni and Rado had written. Their agent, Janet Roberts, tried to sell the show to Broadway producers, but it was rejected. Joseph Papp, of the New York Shakespeare Festival, called to say he wanted to produce it at his new theatre on Lafayette Street. Gerald Freedman was artistic director for the theater and signed on to direct the first production of &quot;Hair&quot;. On October 29, 1967, &quot;Hair&quot; opened at The Public Theater with Ragni as Berger, MacDermot as a cop who busts the show at the end of the first act, and Rado as Claude. Michael Butler attended the opening night and subsequent performances, and was dissatisfied when Rado did not regularly play Claude, as he felt Rado had a natural affinity for the part.

Butler became interested in moving the show to Broadway. He bought the rights from Papp for $50,000 and began planning a grander production directed by Tom O&#x27;Horgan, who Ragni knew from off-Broadway. In the meantime, the show moved to a nightclub in Midtown, called Cheetah, where it had a month-long run. When O&#x27;Horgan signed on, the show hired choreographer Julie Arenal, assistant to Anna Sokolow, who had choreographed the Public Theater run.

On April 29, 1968, the show re-opened in its revised form at the Biltmore Theatre on Broadway. Rado and Ragni reprised their roles from the off-Broadway production, and MacDermot was the musical director. The songs became hit singles for MacDermot, Liza Minnelli, Nelson Riddle, The Staples Singers, Quincy Jones, Three Dog Night, The Cowsills, Madeline Bell, Paul Jones, Sonja Kristina, The 5th Dimension, Oliver, Caterina Valente, and Barbra Streisand. The Broadway cast &quot;Hair&quot; album, released on RCA Records, topped the US billboard charts for a year. The 1970 album &quot;DisinHAIRited&quot; was then released with songs that were cut from the revised production.

The Broadway production was a traumatic experience for Ragni. He became wealthy, his marriage broke up, and he became disengaged from mainstream society. He joined a cult and contributed money to the Black Panther Party and the Yippies. Following the Broadway production, Ragni and Rado went to Los Angeles and played their original roles in a production of &quot;Hair&quot; for five months, making changes to the show as they performed. When they returned to the Broadway production, Ragni&#x27;s practice of spontaneously changing the show became a nuisance. In one incident, Ragni and Rado were arrested after walking nude down the aisle during a performance. At another time, there were guards outside the theatre who barred Ragni and Rado from entering. When the conflict was resolved, all Ragni&#x27;s changes were written into the script and Ragni and Rado rejoined the show. Soon afterwards, Ragni joined the touring company, playing Berger in many cities.

In 1969, shortly after &quot;Hair&quot;&#x27;s success, Ragni, Rado, and Viva, the Andy Warhol superstar, made the movie &quot;Lions Love&quot;, directed by Agnès Varda and made in Los Angeles. The film depicts the three stars, supposedly living together in Los Angeles while waiting for a film to start shooting. &quot;Lions Love&quot; is one of the best film records of Rado and Ragni. They did not appear in the 1979 film version of &quot;Hair&quot;, which was directed by Miloš Forman and starring Treat Williams as Berger. Neither Rado nor Ragni approved of the film, although it was well received by the public.

==&quot;Dude&quot;==

Ragni had been working on a musical called &quot;Dude (The Highway Life)&quot; ever since &quot;Hair&quot; had opened. He had bulging notebooks filled with scribbles of dialogue and lyrics written in between meals at Max&#x27;s Kansas City. Combined with it was a 2,000-page script. He wrote the music to 50 of the songs in the show. Producing the musical would entail having &quot;the interior of the [theater] scooped out and turned into a free-wheeling environmental theater in the round representing heaven and hell.&quot; According to The New York Times, &quot;[a]t the first run through, the stage, filled with two tons of top soil, filthied the actors and dumped dirt on everybody sitting in the first ten rows. People sneezed from the dust fumes; clouds of dirt rose into the air, making it difficult to see.&quot; The 2,000 pages were cut down to 200, a second act was written, more songs were added, and although in a constant state of change and plagued with backstage problems the show opened at The Broadway Theatre in October 1972. It was produced by Peter and Adela Holzer and starred Nell Carter, Rae Allen, Salome Bey, Ralph Carter, William Redfield, Nat Morris, and Allan Nicholls, and closed after 16 performances. Before the opening, MacDermot&#x27;s label Kilmarnock Records released an album of songs from the show sung by Salome Bey.

===Post-&quot;Dude&quot;===
In 1977 Ragni and Rado collaborated with Steve Margoshes on a new show called &quot;Jack Sound and His Dog Star Blowing His Final Trumpet on the Day of Doom&quot;, produced off-Broadway by the Ensemble Studio Theatre. It played a short run alongside an ill-fated Broadway revival of &quot;Hair&quot; that ran for forty-three performances and starred Ragni and Rado as the bogus cops who bust the show.

In the 1970s Ragni, Rado, MacDermot, and Margoshes collaborated on a new musical called &quot;Sun&quot;, also called &quot;YMCA&quot;, which ultimately was not produced. It was a 60-song, three-hour musical about &quot;evolution, with an Odyssey plot&quot;; an environmental musical about politics, pollution and the rain forests being cut down among other topics. &quot;Sun&quot; had been in development since the mid-1970s and an early version was staged for backers in 1976, directed by John Vaccaro of Theatre of the Ridiculous fame, with appearances by Ruby Lynn Reyner, Annie-Joe Edwards and Ellen Foley. Rado told &quot;New York&quot; Magazine that &quot;&quot;YMCA&quot; will do to the seventies what &quot;Hair&quot; did to the sixties,&quot; but the 1976 version never made it past rehearsals. A three-disc cast recording was made after a performance at Weill Hall at Carnegie Hall by independent company Rado Records.

==Death==
Ragni died of cancer in New York, aged 55, on July 10, 1991. At the time of his death, he and Rado were working on a sequel to &quot;Hair&quot;. He is interred in the Holy Souls Cemetery, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

==Personal life==
On May 18, 1963, Ragni married Stephanie Williams. The union ended in divorce in 1970. They have a son named Erick.

In a 2008 interview with &quot;The Advocate,&quot; 
Rado said that he and Ragni had been lovers, and described himself as omnisexual.

== References ==
==External links==
*Collection of articles on Gerome Ragni
*
*Gerome Ragni papers, 1952-1984, held by the Billy Rose Theatre Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts
*&quot;Dude&quot; Articles Index.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q329904" start="0" end="12" title="Gerome Ragni" label="Gerome Ragni"/>
<link wikidata="Q329904" start="19" end="39" title="Gerome Ragni" label="Jerome Bernard Ragni"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="112" end="122" title="songwriter" label="songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="182" end="189" title="musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="196" end="200" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="322" end="332" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="334" end="346" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="366" end="382" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="503" end="524" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="529" end="563" title="The Catholic University of America" label="The Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="704" end="720" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7460628" start="759" end="779" title="Shadow and Substance" label="Shadow and Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="864" end="872" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032335" start="910" end="931" title="Village South Theatre" label="Village South Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460628" start="1098" end="1118" title="Shadow and Substance" label="Shadow and Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634840" start="1187" end="1208" title="Lunt-Fontanne Theatre" label="Lunt-Fontanne Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1216" end="1224" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="1245" end="1251" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="1268" end="1282" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324476" start="1340" end="1368" title="Richard Burton&amp;#x27;s Hamlet" label="Richard Burton&amp;#x27;s Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="1424" end="1436" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="1484" end="1496" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1537" end="1555" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q330447" start="1646" end="1656" title="James Rado" label="James Rado"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="1706" end="1719" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="1921" end="1932" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="1937" end="1950" title="Michael Palin" label="Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="1999" end="2011" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q287829" start="2544" end="2553" title="Ann Jellicoe" label="The Knack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012091" start="2589" end="2600" title="New Theatre (New York City)" label="New Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2684" end="2691" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133030" start="2903" end="2915" title="Corky Siegel" label="Corky Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q426390" start="2920" end="2931" title="Jim Schwall" label="Jim Schwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603006" start="2940" end="2959" title="Siegel-Schwall Band" label="Siegel-Schwall Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q622408" start="2988" end="2995" title="beatnik" label="beatnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="2996" end="3008" title="coffee house" label="coffee house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413327" start="3168" end="3178" title="Neighborhoods of Chicago" label="South Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619569" start="3210" end="3229" title="Stony Island Avenue" label="Stony Island Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755192" start="3569" end="3585" title="The Open Theater" label="The Open Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202416" start="3620" end="3634" title="Living Theatre" label="Living Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485881" start="3691" end="3702" title="Megan Terry" label="Megan Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928446" start="3714" end="3723" title="Viet Rock" label="Viet Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3812" end="3820" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="3947" end="3961" title="hippie culture" label="hippie culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="4022" end="4034" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q780562" start="4044" end="4056" title="dropping out" label="dropping out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379902" start="4061" end="4078" title="Draft evasion" label="dodging the draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639479" start="4553" end="4557" title="Hair (Hair song)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q623177" start="4571" end="4579" title="Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966559" start="4593" end="4608" title="Easy to Be Hard" label="Easy to Be Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582793" start="4622" end="4644" title="Good Morning Starshine" label="Good Morning Starshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="4747" end="4751" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759246" start="4977" end="4985" title="theatre producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966089" start="4986" end="4997" title="Nat Shapiro" label="Nat Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346345" start="5136" end="5150" title="Galt MacDermot" label="Galt MacDermot"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="5310" end="5318" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480583" start="5351" end="5362" title="Joseph Papp" label="Joseph Papp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013975" start="5371" end="5400" title="New York Shakespeare Festival" label="New York Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="5443" end="5478" title="The Public Theater" label="his new theatre on Lafayette Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103875" start="5480" end="5495" title="Gerald Freedman" label="Gerald Freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="5648" end="5666" title="The Public Theater" label="The Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828977" start="5776" end="5790" title="Michael Butler (producer)" label="Michael Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807505" start="6115" end="6132" title="Tom O&amp;#x27;Horgan" label="Tom O&amp;#x27;Horgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="6154" end="6166" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="6205" end="6214" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="6218" end="6225" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089451" start="6234" end="6241" title="Cheetah (nightclub)" label="Cheetah"/>
<link wikidata="Q431404" start="6360" end="6372" title="Anna Sokolow" label="Anna Sokolow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="6400" end="6414" title="The Public Theater" label="Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935075" start="6486" end="6502" title="Samuel J. Friedman Theatre" label="Biltmore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="6670" end="6683" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q961851" start="6685" end="6698" title="Nelson Riddle" label="Nelson Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q935884" start="6700" end="6719" title="The Staples Singers" label="The Staples Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="6721" end="6733" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474254" start="6735" end="6750" title="Three Dog Night" label="Three Dog Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658371" start="6752" end="6764" title="The Cowsills" label="The Cowsills"/>
<link wikidata="Q462821" start="6766" end="6779" title="Madeline Bell" label="Madeline Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q123870" start="6781" end="6791" title="Paul Jones (singer)" label="Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q462732" start="6793" end="6807" title="Sonja Kristina" label="Sonja Kristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753111" start="6809" end="6826" title="The 5th Dimension" label="The 5th Dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q443281" start="6828" end="6834" title="Oliver (William Oliver Swofford)" label="Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q242535" start="6836" end="6852" title="Caterina Valente" label="Caterina Valente"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="6858" end="6874" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="6930" end="6941" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="6954" end="6973" title="Billboard charts" label="US billboard charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="7266" end="7270" title="cult (religion)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="7300" end="7319" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890424" start="7328" end="7334" title="Yippie" label="Yippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7395" end="7406" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q545396" start="8139" end="8143" title="Viva (actress)" label="Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308606" start="8149" end="8170" title="Warhol superstars" label="Andy Warhol superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241992" start="8193" end="8203" title="Lions Love" label="Lions Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q229990" start="8223" end="8234" title="Agnès Varda" label="Agnès Varda"/>
<link wikidata="Q757156" start="8486" end="8518" title="Hair (film)" label="film version of &amp;quot;Hair&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q51525" start="8542" end="8554" title="Miloš Forman" label="Miloš Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q352730" start="8568" end="8582" title="Treat Williams" label="Treat Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311690" start="8756" end="8779" title="Dude (musical)" label="Dude (The Highway Life)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458004" start="8924" end="8946" title="Max&amp;#x27;s Kansas City" label="Max&amp;#x27;s Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9247" end="9265" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925870" start="9715" end="9735" title="The Broadway Theatre" label="The Broadway Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q271840" start="9807" end="9818" title="Nell Carter" label="Nell Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255091" start="9820" end="9829" title="Rae Allen" label="Rae Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405612" start="9831" end="9841" title="Salome Bey" label="Salome Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287326" start="9843" end="9855" title="Ralph Carter" label="Ralph Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353606" start="9857" end="9873" title="William Redfield (actor)" label="William Redfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442268" start="9891" end="9905" title="Allan Nicholls" label="Allan Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706258" start="10286" end="10309" title="Ensemble Studio Theatre" label="Ensemble Studio Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777537" start="10986" end="10998" title="John Vaccaro" label="John Vaccaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777537" start="11002" end="11027" title="Theatre of the Ridiculous" label="Theatre of the Ridiculous"/>
<link wikidata="Q98380395" start="11054" end="11070" title="Ruby Lynn Reyner" label="Ruby Lynn Reyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q273509" start="11094" end="11105" title="Ellen Foley" label="Ellen Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="11117" end="11146" title="New York (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;New York&amp;quot; Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="11624" end="11648" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="11817" end="11829" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q271534" start="11908" end="11918" title="omnisexual" label="omnisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013890" start="12073" end="12120" title="New York Public Library for the Performing Arts" label="New York Public Library for the Performing Arts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723067" wikidata="Q2750657" url="?curid=723067" title="Detritivore">
<text>Detritivores (also known as detrivores, detritophages, detritus feeders or detritus eaters) are heterotrophs that obtain nutrients by consuming detritus (decomposing plant and animal parts as well as feces). There are many kinds of invertebrates, vertebrates, and plants that carry out coprophagy. By doing so, all these detritivores contribute to decomposition and the nutrient cycles. Detritivores should be distinguished from other decomposers, such as many species of bacteria, fungi and protists, which are unable to ingest discrete lumps of matter. Instead, these other decomposers live by absorbing and metabolizing on a molecular scale (saprotrophic nutrition). The terms &quot;detritivore&quot; and &quot;decomposer&quot; are often used interchangeably, but they describe different organisms. Detritivores are usually arthropods and help in the process of remineralization. Detritivores perform the first stage of remineralization, by fragmenting the dead plant matter, allowing decomposers to perform the second stage of remineralization. 

Plant tissues are made up of resilient molecules (e.g. cellulose, lignin, xylan) that decay at a much lower rate than other organic molecules. The activity of detritivores is the reason why there is not an accumulation of plant litter in nature.

Detritivores are an important aspect of many ecosystems. They can live on any type of soil with an organic component, including marine ecosystems, where they are termed interchangeably with bottom feeders. 

Typical detritivorous animals include millipedes, springtails, woodlice, dung flies, slugs, many worms, sea stars, sea cucumbers, fiddler crabs, and some sedentary marine Polychaetes such as worms of the family Terebellidae. 

Detritivores can be classified into more specific groups based on their size and biomes. Macrodetritivores are larger organisms such as millipedes, springtails, and woodlouse, while microdetritivores are smaller organisms such as bacteria.

Scavengers are not typically thought to be detritivores, as they generally eat large quantities of organic matter, but both detritivores and scavengers are the same type of cases of consumer-resource systems. The consumption of wood, whether alive or dead, is known as xylophagy. The activity of animals feeding only on dead wood is called -xylophagy and those animals, sapro-xylophagous.

==Ecology==

Detritivores play an important role as recyclers in the ecosystem&#x27;s energy flow and biogeochemical cycles. Alongside decomposers, they reintroduce vital elements such as carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, and potassium back into the soil, allowing plants to take in these elements and use them for growth. They shred the dead plant matter which releases the trapped nutrients in the plant tissues. An abundance of detritivores in the soil allows the ecosystem to efficiently recycle nutrients.

Many detritivores live in mature woodland, though the term can be applied to certain bottom-feeders in wet environments. These organisms play a crucial role in benthic ecosystems, forming essential food chains and participating in the nitrogen cycle. Detritivores and decomposers that reside in the desert live in burrows underground to avoid the hot surface since underground conditions provide favorable living conditions for them. Detritivores are the main organisms in clearing plant litter and recycling nutrients in the desert. Due to the limited vegetation available in the desert, desert detritivores adapted and evolved ways to feed in the extreme conditions of the desert. Detritivore feeding behaviour is affected by rainfall; moist soil increases detritivore feeding and excretion.

Fungi, acting as decomposers, are important in today&#x27;s terrestrial environment. During the Carboniferous period, fungi and bacteria had yet to evolve the capacity to digest lignin, and so large deposits of dead plant tissue accumulated during this period, later becoming the fossil fuels.

By feeding on sediments directly to extract the organic component, some detritivores incidentally concentrate toxic pollutants.

== See also ==
*Decomposer
*Saprotrophic nutrition
*&quot;Nepenthes ampullaria&quot;
*Consumer-resource systems

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="0" end="12" title="Detritivore" label="Detritivores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="28" end="38" title="Detritivore" label="detrivores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="40" end="53" title="Detritivore" label="detritophages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="55" end="71" title="Detritivore" label="detritus feeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="75" end="90" title="Detritivore" label="detritus eaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q159344" start="96" end="108" title="heterotroph" label="heterotrophs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="121" end="130" title="nutrient" label="nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q736879" start="144" end="152" title="detritus" label="detritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="200" end="205" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="232" end="245" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="247" end="258" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="264" end="270" title="plant" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q320011" start="286" end="296" title="coprophagia" label="coprophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="348" end="361" title="decomposition" label="decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070482" start="370" end="385" title="nutrient cycles" label="nutrient cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q842391" start="435" end="446" title="decomposer" label="decomposers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="472" end="480" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="482" end="487" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="492" end="500" title="protist" label="protists"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="645" end="667" title="saprotrophic nutrition" label="saprotrophic nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="827" end="837" title="Arthropod" label="arthropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311813" start="865" end="881" title="Remineralisation" label="remineralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="1106" end="1115" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="1117" end="1123" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419547" start="1125" end="1130" title="xylan" label="xylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="1343" end="1353" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304561" start="1426" end="1443" title="marine ecosystems" label="marine ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393858" start="1488" end="1502" title="bottom feeder" label="bottom feeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q167367" start="1544" end="1554" title="millipedes" label="millipedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190701" start="1556" end="1566" title="Collembola" label="springtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q216191" start="1569" end="1577" title="woodlice" label="woodlice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265791" start="1579" end="1589" title="Scathophagidae" label="dung flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953597" start="1591" end="1596" title="slugs" label="slugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47253" start="1603" end="1608" title="Worm" label="worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349" start="1610" end="1619" title="sea stars" label="sea stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q127470" start="1621" end="1634" title="sea cucumbers" label="sea cucumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329937" start="1636" end="1649" title="fiddler crabs" label="fiddler crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18952" start="1677" end="1687" title="Polychaete" label="Polychaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608334" start="1717" end="1729" title="Terebellidae" label="Terebellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="1974" end="1984" title="Scavengers" label="Scavengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164625" start="2156" end="2181" title="consumer-resource systems" label="consumer-resource systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851532" start="2243" end="2252" title="xylophagy" label="xylophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341307" start="2450" end="2461" title="energy flow (ecology)" label="energy flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q846303" start="2466" end="2487" title="Biogeochemical cycle" label="biogeochemical cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="2914" end="2922" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393858" start="2966" end="2979" title="bottom-feeder" label="bottom-feeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q182238" start="2984" end="3000" title="Benthos" label="wet environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="3041" end="3048" title="benthic" label="benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="3079" end="3089" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q82551" start="3116" end="3130" title="nitrogen cycle" label="nitrogen cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="3772" end="3792" title="Carboniferous period" label="Carboniferous period"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="3854" end="3860" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="3956" end="3967" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213449" start="3974" end="3981" title="feeding" label="feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="4081" end="4086" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829510" start="4087" end="4096" title="pollutant" label="pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q842391" start="4116" end="4126" title="Decomposer" label="Decomposer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="4128" end="4150" title="Saprotrophic nutrition" label="Saprotrophic nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q134453" start="4158" end="4178" title="Nepenthes ampullaria" label="Nepenthes ampullaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164625" start="4186" end="4211" title="Consumer-resource systems" label="Consumer-resource systems"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723087" wikidata="Q158340" url="?curid=723087" title="Mariss Jansons">
<text>Mariss Ivars Georgs Jansons (14 January 1943 – 1 December 2019) was a Latvian conductor, best known for his interpretations of Mahler, Strauss, and Russian composers such as Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninoff, and Shostakovich. During his lifetime he was often cited as among the world&#x27;s leading conductors; in a 2015 &quot;Bachtrack&quot; poll, he was ranked by music critics as the world&#x27;s third best living conductor. Jansons was long associated with the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BRSO; 2003–2019) and Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra (RCO; 2004–2015) as music director.

Born in Riga, Latvia, Jansons moved to Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg) in 1956, where he studied conducting, and he received further training in Austria. He first achieved prominence with the Oslo Philharmonic, where he served as music director from 1979 to 2000. Besides the BRSO and RCO, he also directed the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra from 1997 to 2004; he was a frequent guest conductor with the London Philharmonic Orchestra and London Symphony Orchestra. Jansons recorded prolifically, and was the recipient of numerous awards.

==Early life==
Jansons was born in Riga, Latvia—then under German occupation during the Second World War—to Iraida Jansons, the diva of the Riga Opera, and Arvīds Jansons, conductor of the opera orchestra. Iraida, who was Jewish, gave birth to her son in hiding after being smuggled out of the Riga Ghetto, where her father and brother were murdered by the Nazis. As a child, Jansons first studied violin with his father.

In 1956, Arvīds was appointed assistant conductor to Yevgeny Mravinsky at the Leningrad Philharmonic. Jansons joined his father in Leningrad, where he began to study conducting, and soon entered the Leningrad Conservatory. In 1968, Herbert von Karajan visited the Soviet Union, and he singled out Jansons and Dmitri Kitayenko from a group of young conductors. Karajan offered Jansons the opportunity to study with him in Berlin, but the Soviet authorities blocked the offer. In 1969, Jansons continued his training with Hans Swarowsky in Vienna, and then in Salzburg with Karajan. In 1971, Jansons won the second prize at the &quot;Herbert von Karajan&quot; International Conducting Competition. Karajan invited Jansons to be his assistant with the Berlin Philharmonic, but the Soviet authorities blocked Jansons from ever hearing about the offer. 

==Career==

In 1973, Jansons was appointed Associate Conductor of the Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra. In 1979, he was appointed Music Director of the Oslo Philharmonic, with which he performed, recorded and toured extensively. Jansons resigned his Oslo position in 2000 after disputes with the city over the acoustics of the Oslo Concert Hall.

In 1992, Jansons was named Principal Guest Conductor of the London Philharmonic Orchestra. He worked as a guest conductor with the London Symphony Orchestra and recorded Mahler&#x27;s Symphony No. 6 with them for the LSO Live label.

In 1997, Jansons became the Music Director of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra. His initial contract was for three years, but his subsequent contract renewals were evergreen contracts that required yearly renewal. In June 2002, he announced his resignation, which would become effective in 2004.

In April 1996, Jansons nearly died from a severe heart attack while conducting the final pages of &quot;La bohème&quot; in Oslo. He recuperated in Switzerland. Later, surgeons in Pittsburgh fitted an implanted defibrillator in his chest to give his heart an electric jolt if it failed. (Jansons&#x27;s father had died at a 1984 concert, conducting the Hallé Orchestra.) Jansons stated that he suffered from jet lag, and this was one reason that he left his American position.

At the start of the 2003-2004 season, Jansons began his tenure as Chief Conductor of the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BRSO), for an initial contract of three years. His commitment with the BRSO was for ten weeks per season. In September 2006, Jansons extended his initial BRSO contract to August 2009. In July 2007, he further extended his contract with the BRSO to August 2012. In April 2011, he extended his BRSO contract to August 2015 in Munich. In June 2013, the BRSO further extended Jansons&#x27;s contract through August 2018. In May 2015, the BRSO announced another extension of Jansons&#x27;s contract through 2021. In July 2018, the orchestra announced a further extension of his contract through 2024. He regularly campaigned for the construction of a new concert hall for the orchestra. On 8 November 2019, he conducted his final orchestral concert, at Carnegie Hall with the BRSO and Diana Damrau.

In October 2002, Jansons was named the sixth Chief Conductor of the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra (RCO) of Amsterdam, effective 1 September 2004, succeeding Riccardo Chailly. His initial Amsterdam contract was for three years, and his commitment in Amsterdam was for twelve weeks per season. In April 2014, the orchestra announced that Jansons was to stand down as chief conductor after the 2014–2015 season. He conducted his final concert as chief conductor of the RCO on 20 March 2015, in the presence of King Willem-Alexander and Queen Maxima. He subsequently held the title of conductor emeritus of the KCO until his death.

In 2006, Jansons conducted the Vienna Philharmonic New Year&#x27;s Concert for the first time. Also in January 2006, he was awarded MIDEM&#x27;s Artist of the Year Award in Cannes. In October 2007, Jansons (who was Lutheran) conducted Beethoven&#x27;s Ninth Symphony with the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra for Pope Benedict XVI and 7,000 other listeners in the papal audience hall (&quot;Auditorio Paul VI&quot;). Jansons conducted the Vienna New Year&#x27;s Concert for the second time in 2012, and for the third and final time in 2016.

==Personal life==
Jansons was married twice. He and his first wife, Ira, had a daughter, called Ilona, who became a pianist. The marriage ended during his tenure in Oslo. Jansons and his second wife Irina (née Outchitel), a former speech therapist, had a home in Saint Petersburg, where Jansons kept his collection of scores. He held both Latvian and Russian citizenship.

Jansons died during the night of 30 November 2019 / 1 December 2019 at his home in the Tolstoy House, Saint Petersburg, as a result of a longstanding heart condition, aged 76.

==Awards and recognition==
Jansons was awarded various international honours for his achievements, including Commander of the Royal Norwegian Order of Merit from King Harald of Norway and memberships in the Royal Academy of Music in London and the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde (Society of Music Friends) in Vienna. He was awarded the St. Hallvard Medal in 1986. In May 2006, he was awarded the Order of the Three Stars (2nd class or Grand Commander), Latvia&#x27;s highest state honour. He was awarded the Bavarian Order of Merit in 2007 and in 2010, the Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art. In 2008, Jansons received the Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art.

Jansons&#x27; recording of Shostakovich&#x27;s Symphony No. 13 with Sergey Aleksashkin (bass) and the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra and Chorus won the Grammy Award for Best Orchestral Performance at the 2006 Grammy Awards.

In January 2006 he was awarded a Midem, a Cannes Classical Award as Artist of the Year. In 2007 he was honoured by the German Phono Academy with the Echo Klassik as Conductor of the Year. In 2011, he was awarded the same title by the German journal &quot;Opernwelt&quot;.

Jansons won the Ernst von Siemens Music Prize in 2013. On 31 March 2013 Jansons was awarded a medal of honour &quot;For the Merits before St. Petersburg&quot;. On 4 October 2013, Jansons received the Grand Merit Cross with Star of the Federal Republic of Germany.

On 1 November 2013, Jansons was awarded Knight of the Order of the Netherlands Lion and received it from Dutch Minister of Education, Culture and Science Jet Bussemaker.

In November 2017, the Royal Philharmonic Society awarded Jansons the RPS Gold Medal, with Mitsuko Uchida presenting the medal to Jansons during a concert with the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (Symphonieorchester des Bayerischen Rundfunks) on 24 November 2017 at the Barbican Hall. Jansons was the 104th recipient of the RPS Gold Medal.

In 2018, Jansons was awarded Honorary Membership of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra, and in June 2018 of the Vienna Philharmonic.

On 14 April 2019, Jansons received the Herbert von Karajan Prize at the Salzburg Easter Festival. In 2019, he received the Opus Klassik award in the category &quot;Lifetime Achievement”.

In 2020, the BRSO posthumously awarded its Karl Amadeus Hartmann Medal to Jansons.

==Selected recordings==
Jansons is credited on over 190 orchestral recordings.
* Ludwig van Beethoven: The Symphonies and Reflections – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900119) 
* Hector Berlioz: &quot;Symphonie fantastique&quot; – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900121)
* Benjamin Britten: &quot;War Requiem&quot; – Emily Magee, Mark Padmore, Christian Gerhaher, Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900120)
* Anton Bruckner: Symphony No. 7 – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 403571900100)
* Antonín Dvořák: &quot;Stabat Mater&quot; – Erin Wall, Mihoko Fujimura, Christian Elsner, Liang Li, Chor des Bayerischen Rundfunks and Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900142) 
* Gustav Mahler: Symphony No. 5 – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900150)
* Gustav Mahler: Symphony No. 7 – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 403571900101) 
* Gustav Mahler: Symphony No. 9 – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900151)
* Dmitri Shostakovich: Symphony No. 5 – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900191)
* Dmitri Shostakovich: Symphony No. 7 – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900184)
* Dmitri Shostakovich: Symphony No. 10 – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900185)
* Dmitri Shostakovich: Symphony No. 13 – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (EMI)
* Richard Strauss: &quot;Eine Alpensinfonie&quot;/&quot;Tod und Verklärung&quot; – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900148) 
* Richard Strauss: &quot;Four Last Songs&quot;/&quot;Vier letzte Lieder&quot;, &quot;Rosenkavalier-Suite&quot;, &quot;Till Eulenspiegel&#x27;s Merry Pranks&quot;/&quot;Till Eulenspiegels lustige Streiche&quot; – Anja Harteros, Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900707)
* Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky: &quot;The Queen of Spades&quot; – Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BR-KLASSIK 900129)
* &quot;Mariss Jansons - His Last Concert: Live at Carnegie Hall&quot; (Richard Strauss, Brahms; BR-Klassik 900192)

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Gilbert Kaplan, &quot;Mad About Music: Mariss Jansons&quot;. WNYC-FM radio interview, 3 December 2006
*
*Interview with Mariss Jansons, 2 November 1987</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158340" start="0" end="27" title="Mariss Jansons" label="Mariss Ivars Georgs Jansons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="78" end="87" title="Conducting" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="127" end="133" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="135" end="142" title="Richard Strauss" label="Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="174" end="185" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="187" end="199" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="205" end="217" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604660" start="320" end="329" title="Bachtrack" label="Bachtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q636159" start="459" end="492" title="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q827768" start="515" end="544" title="Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra" label="Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="590" end="594" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="636" end="652" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063440" start="775" end="792" title="Oslo Philharmonic" label="Oslo Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q430642" start="894" end="923" title="Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra" label="Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q863397" start="986" end="1015" title="London Philharmonic Orchestra" label="London Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="1020" end="1045" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1055" end="1076" title="#Selected Recordings" label="recorded prolifically"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1103" end="1118" title="#Awards and recognition" label="numerous awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="1156" end="1160" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348117" start="1174" end="1197" title="German occupation of Latvia during World War II" label="under German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1209" end="1225" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q867132" start="1249" end="1253" title="diva" label="diva"/>
<link wikidata="Q555773" start="1261" end="1271" title="Latvian National Opera" label="Riga Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617057" start="1277" end="1291" title="Arvīds Jansons" label="Arvīds Jansons"/>
<link wikidata="Q698342" start="1415" end="1426" title="Riga Ghetto" label="Riga Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q320609" start="1597" end="1614" title="Yevgeny Mravinsky" label="Yevgeny Mravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373970" start="1622" end="1644" title="Saint Petersburg Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Leningrad Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178416" start="1743" end="1765" title="Saint Petersburg Conservatory" label="Leningrad Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q154895" start="1776" end="1795" title="Herbert von Karajan" label="Herbert von Karajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q664572" start="1853" end="1869" title="Dmitri Kitayenko" label="Dmitri Kitayenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q78721" start="2064" end="2078" title="Hans Swarowsky" label="Hans Swarowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2082" end="2088" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="2102" end="2110" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152222" start="2293" end="2312" title="Berlin Philharmonic" label="Berlin Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063440" start="2546" end="2563" title="Oslo Philharmonic" label="Oslo Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773297" start="2721" end="2738" title="Oslo Concert Hall" label="Oslo Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q863397" start="2801" end="2830" title="London Philharmonic Orchestra" label="London Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="2872" end="2897" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q246487" start="2911" end="2939" title="Symphony No. 6 (Mahler)" label="Mahler&amp;#x27;s Symphony No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q430642" start="3025" end="3054" title="Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra" label="Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q188621" start="3377" end="3386" title="La bohème" label="La bohème"/>
<link wikidata="Q594446" start="3473" end="3496" title="Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator" label="implanted defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q262431" start="3625" end="3640" title="The Hallé" label="Hallé Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q192579" start="3680" end="3687" title="jet lag" label="jet lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q636159" start="3839" end="3872" title="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="4622" end="4635" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q237965" start="4654" end="4666" title="Diana Damrau" label="Diana Damrau"/>
<link wikidata="Q827768" start="4737" end="4766" title="Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra" label="Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q371795" start="4826" end="4842" title="Riccardo Chailly" label="Riccardo Chailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q154952" start="5176" end="5197" title="Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands" label="King Willem-Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q460960" start="5202" end="5214" title="Queen Máxima of the Netherlands" label="Queen Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q154685" start="5329" end="5348" title="Vienna Philharmonic" label="Vienna Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339152" start="5349" end="5372" title="Vienna New Year&amp;#x27;s Concert" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931957" start="5430" end="5435" title="MIDEM" label="MIDEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="5513" end="5521" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q11989" start="5550" end="5564" title="Symphony No. 9 (Beethoven)" label="Ninth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="5612" end="5629" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q339152" start="5738" end="5768" title="Vienna New Year&amp;#x27;s Concert" label="Vienna New Year&amp;#x27;s Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="6072" end="6088" title="speech therapist" label="speech therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047908" start="6301" end="6314" title="Tolstoy House" label="Tolstoy House"/>
<link wikidata="Q94422" start="6517" end="6547" title="Royal Norwegian Order of Merit" label="Royal Norwegian Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="6553" end="6574" title="Harald V of Norway" label="King Harald of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="6598" end="6620" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q694323" start="6639" end="6668" title="Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde" label="Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779613" start="6726" end="6744" title="St. Hallvard Medal" label="St. Hallvard Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q913910" start="6786" end="6810" title="Order of the Three Stars" label="Order of the Three Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q672787" start="6898" end="6921" title="Bavarian Order of Merit" label="Bavarian Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q565030" start="6947" end="6992" title="Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art" label="Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q306590" start="7024" end="7068" title="Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art" label="Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="7098" end="7110" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q175557" start="7118" end="7133" title="Symphony No. 13 (Shostakovich)" label="Symphony No. 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q636159" start="7173" end="7206" title="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593848" start="7226" end="7270" title="Grammy Award for Best Orchestral Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Orchestral Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542334" start="7278" end="7296" title="2006 Grammy Awards" label="2006 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931957" start="7332" end="7337" title="Midem" label="Midem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274158" start="7448" end="7460" title="Echo Klassik" label="Echo Klassik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026695" start="7554" end="7563" title="Opernwelt" label="Opernwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q703298" start="7588" end="7617" title="Ernst von Siemens Music Prize" label="Ernst von Siemens Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="7772" end="7834" title="Grand Merit Cross with Star of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Grand Merit Cross with Star of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="7877" end="7883" title="Knight" label="Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471215" start="7891" end="7920" title="Order of the Netherlands Lion" label="Order of the Netherlands Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494309" start="7991" end="8005" title="Jet Bussemaker" label="Jet Bussemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292443" start="8030" end="8056" title="Royal Philharmonic Society" label="Royal Philharmonic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q238290" start="8098" end="8112" title="Mitsuko Uchida" label="Mitsuko Uchida"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="8279" end="8292" title="Barbican Centre" label="Barbican Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q154685" start="8461" end="8480" title="Vienna Philharmonic" label="Vienna Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279890" start="8522" end="8547" title="Herbert von Karajan Prize" label="Herbert von Karajan Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="8836" end="8856" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="8948" end="8962" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q462313" start="8970" end="8991" title="Symphonie fantastique" label="Symphonie fantastique"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="9056" end="9072" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889947" start="9080" end="9091" title="War Requiem" label="War Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831417" start="9100" end="9111" title="Emily Magee" label="Emily Magee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769146" start="9113" end="9125" title="Mark Padmore" label="Mark Padmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q96162" start="9127" end="9145" title="Christian Gerhaher" label="Christian Gerhaher"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="9203" end="9217" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q260988" start="9219" end="9233" title="Symphony No. 7 (Bruckner)" label="Symphony No. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q636159" start="9236" end="9269" title="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="9298" end="9312" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Antonín Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299142" start="9320" end="9332" title="Stabat Mater (Dvořák)" label="Stabat Mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389232" start="9341" end="9350" title="Erin Wall" label="Erin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120748" start="9352" end="9367" title="Mihoko Fujimura" label="Mihoko Fujimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q15437050" start="9369" end="9385" title="Christian Elsner" label="Christian Elsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="9489" end="9502" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q240240" start="9504" end="9518" title="Symphony No. 5 (Mahler)" label="Symphony No. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="9577" end="9590" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q261074" start="9592" end="9606" title="Symphony No. 7 (Mahler)" label="Symphony No. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="9672" end="9685" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q275858" start="9687" end="9701" title="Symphony No. 9 (Mahler)" label="Symphony No. 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="9760" end="9779" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q240279" start="9781" end="9795" title="Symphony No. 5 (Shostakovich)" label="Symphony No. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="9854" end="9873" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q261140" start="9875" end="9889" title="Symphony No. 7 (Shostakovich)" label="Symphony No. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="9948" end="9967" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q164652" start="9969" end="9984" title="Symphony No. 10 (Shostakovich)" label="Symphony No. 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="10043" end="10062" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q175557" start="10064" end="10079" title="Symphony No. 13 (Shostakovich)" label="Symphony No. 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="10124" end="10139" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q304423" start="10147" end="10165" title="Eine Alpensinfonie" label="Eine Alpensinfonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298455" start="10178" end="10196" title="Tod und Verklärung" label="Tod und Verklärung"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="10262" end="10277" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482285" start="10285" end="10300" title="Four Last Songs" label="Four Last Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q740088" start="10378" end="10415" title="Till Eulenspiegel&amp;#x27;s Merry Pranks" label="Till Eulenspiegel&amp;#x27;s Merry Pranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q71653" start="10472" end="10485" title="Anja Harteros" label="Anja Harteros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="10543" end="10567" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q221047" start="10575" end="10594" title="The Queen of Spades (opera)" label="The Queen of Spades"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723088" wikidata="Q2842936" url="?curid=723088" title="American Free Press">
<text>The American Free Press is a weekly newspaper published in the United States.

The newspaper&#x27;s direct ancestor was &quot;The Spotlight&quot;, which ceased publication in 2001 when its parent organization, Liberty Lobby, was forced into bankruptcy. One of the paper&#x27;s founders was Willis Carto, a white supremacist who promoted antisemitic conspiracy theories and Holocaust denial.

==History==
&quot;American Free Press&quot; was founded by Willis Carto. Carto was most politically involved in his career throughout the 1960s. He was known for his extremist ideologies in white supremacist and anti-semitic movements.

== Contributors ==

Writers for the newspaper included Michael Collins Piper, whose work has been characterized as anti-semitic and James P. Tucker, Jr., a longtime &quot;Spotlight&quot; reporter whose focus was the Bilderberg Group. Articles by Carto also appeared occasionally. James Edwards, host of &quot;The Political Cesspool&quot; (broadcast as a service of the neo-Nazi Stormfront), was also a former writer for the newspaper.

The newspaper also runs columns by Joe Sobran, James Traficant, Paul Craig Roberts, Ron Paul, and others. The newspaper&#x27;s podcast series has featured guests including Brian Baird, Philip Giraldi, Dean Baker, and others.

Attendees of the 2006 &quot;American Free Press&quot;/&quot;The Barnes Review&quot;, conference included Arthur J. Jones, former member Nationalist Socialist White People&#x27;s Party.

Some authors of the &quot;American Free Press&quot; such as Michael Collins Piper and Carto-affiliated institutions such as the Institute for Historical Review have published books which have been published in paper and electronic format on the America First Books website. William B. Fox is the publisher. It promotes nationalist viewpoints similar to those of the American Free Press and its authors.

Eustace Mullins was on the editorial staff of the &quot;American Free Press&quot;.

== Criticism ==
The Southern Poverty Law Center considers it, a hate group and says that it &quot;carries stories on Zionism, secret &#x27;New World Order&#x27; conspiracies, American Jews and Israel.&quot; One of the newspaper&#x27;s ex-contract reporters, Christopher Bollyn, has advocated on behalf of the 9/11 Truth Movement. The Anti-Defamation League has criticised the newspaper and, in particular, Bollyn for linking of prominent figures in the Jewish community with the events of September 11, 2001, and in September 2006 attacked the newspaper for disseminating &quot;antisemitic propaganda&quot;.

Pro-Israel conservative activists, such as Kenneth R. Timmerman, have criticized contributors to the &quot;American Free Press&quot;. In a May 2011 article, contributor Mark Dankof protested the British government&#x27;s attempt to shut down Press TV, blaming it on &quot;media outlets and correspondents with provable connections to the American Jewish lobby; Israeli intelligence; and Neo-Conservatives thirsting for a War of Civilizations with Iran specifically, and the Islamic world generally.&quot;

==See also==

*List of newspapers in the United States
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="36" end="45" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="63" end="76" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734599" start="126" end="139" title="The Spotlight" label="The Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541867" start="210" end="223" title="Liberty Lobby" label="Liberty Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="241" end="251" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975413" start="290" end="302" title="Willis Carto" label="Willis Carto"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="306" end="323" title="White supremacy" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="337" end="348" title="Antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="349" end="368" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="373" end="389" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975413" start="451" end="463" title="Willis Carto" label="Willis Carto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829391" start="684" end="705" title="Michael Collins Piper" label="Michael Collins Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198606" start="761" end="781" title="James P. Tucker, Jr." label="James P. Tucker, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q184937" start="845" end="861" title="Bilderberg Group" label="Bilderberg Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859942" start="909" end="922" title="James Edwards (radio host)" label="James Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859942" start="938" end="960" title="The Political Cesspool" label="The Political Cesspool"/>
<link wikidata="Q700773" start="1007" end="1017" title="Stormfront (website)" label="Stormfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287091" start="1100" end="1110" title="Joe Sobran" label="Joe Sobran"/>
<link wikidata="Q465728" start="1112" end="1127" title="James Traficant" label="James Traficant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987836" start="1129" end="1147" title="Paul Craig Roberts" label="Paul Craig Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="1149" end="1157" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="1192" end="1199" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q503548" start="1237" end="1248" title="Brian Baird" label="Brian Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183615" start="1250" end="1264" title="Philip Giraldi" label="Philip Giraldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q222122" start="1266" end="1276" title="Dean Baker" label="Dean Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q47836324" start="1396" end="1411" title="Arthur J. Jones" label="Arthur J. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829391" start="1537" end="1558" title="Michael Collins Piper" label="Michael Collins Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q699454" start="1605" end="1636" title="Institute for Historical Review" label="Institute for Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360344" start="1881" end="1896" title="Eustace Mullins" label="Eustace Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="1985" end="2012" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233801" start="2029" end="2039" title="hate group" label="hate group"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="2082" end="2089" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2223" end="2241" title="Christopher Bollyn" label="Christopher Bollyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265692" start="2274" end="2293" title="9/11 Truth Movement" label="9/11 Truth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="2299" end="2321" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="2555" end="2565" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="2585" end="2597" title="conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661997" start="2617" end="2637" title="Kenneth R. Timmerman" label="Kenneth R. Timmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q912429" start="2816" end="2824" title="Press TV" label="Press TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="2961" end="2978" title="neoconservatism" label="Neo-Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250630" start="3095" end="3134" title="List of newspapers in the United States" label="List of newspapers in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723100" wikidata="Q118574" url="?curid=723100" title="Altiplano">
<text>The Altiplano (Spanish for &quot;high plain&quot;), Collao (Quechua and Aymara: Qullaw, meaning &quot;place of the Qulla&quot;) or Andean Plateau, in west-central South America, is the most extensive high plateau on Earth outside Tibet. The plateau is located at the latitude of the widest part of the north–south-trending Andes. The bulk of the Altiplano lies in Bolivia, but its northern parts lie in Peru, and its southwestern fringes lie in Chile.

There are on the plateau many towns and several cities, including El Alto and Oruro in Bolivia, Juliaca and Puno in Peru. The northeastern part of the Altiplano is more humid than the southwestern part, which has several salares (salt flats), due to its aridity. At the Bolivia–Peru border lies Lake Titicaca, the largest lake in South America. Farther south, in Bolivia, there was until recently a lake, Lake Poopó, but by December 2015 it had completely dried up, and was declared defunct. It is unclear whether that lake, which had been the second-largest in Bolivia, can be restored.

The Altiplano was the site of several pre-Columbian cultures, including the Chiripa, Tiawanaku and the Inca Empire. Spain conquered the region in the 16th century.

Today, major economic activities in the Altiplano include mining, llama and vicuña herding, and services (in its cities). The area also attracts some international tourism.

== Geography ==
The Altiplano is an area of inland drainage (endorheism) lying in the central Andes, occupying parts of northern Chile, western Bolivia, southern Peru and northwest Argentina. Its height averages about 3,750 meters (12,300 feet), slightly less than that of the Tibetan Plateau. Unlike conditions in Tibet, the Altiplano is dominated by massive active volcanoes of the Central Volcanic Zone to the west, such as Ampato (6288 m), Tutupaca (5,816 m), Parinacota (6348 m), Guallatiri (6071 m), Paruma (5,728 m), Uturunku (6,008 m) and Licancabur (5,916 m), and the Cordillera Real in the north east with Illampu (6,368 m), Huayna Potosí (6,088 m), Janq&#x27;u Uma (6,427 m) and Illimani (6,438 m). The Atacama Desert, one of the driest areas on the planet, lies to the southwest of the Altiplano; to the east lies the humid Amazon rainforest.

The Altiplano is noted for hypoxic air caused by very high elevation. The communities that inhabit the Altiplano include Qulla, Uros, Quechua and Aymara.

== Geology ==
Several mechanisms have been put forth for the formation of the Altiplano plateau; hypotheses try to explain why the topography in the Andes incorporates this large area of low relief at high altitude (high plateau) within the orogen: 
# Existence of weaknesses in the Earth&#x27;s crust prior to tectonic shortening. Such weaknesses would cause the partition of tectonic deformation and uplift into the eastern and western &quot;cordillera&quot;, leaving the necessary space for the formation of the altiplano basin.
# Magmatic processes rooted in the asthenosphere might have contributed to uplift of the plateau.
# Climate has controlled the spatial distribution of erosion and sediment deposition, controlling the lubrication along the subducting Nazca Plate and hence influencing the transmission of tectonic forces into South America.
# Climate also determined the formation of internal drainage (endorheism) and sediment trapping within the Andes, potentially blocking tectonic deformation in the central area between the two cordilleras, and expelling deformation towards the flanks of the orogen.
# Convective removal of the dense lower lithosphere beneath the Altiplano caused that region to isostatically &#x27;float&#x27; higher.

At various times during the Pleistocene epoch, both the southern and northern Altiplano were covered by vast pluvial lakes. Remnants are Lake Titicaca, straddling the Peru–Bolivia border, and Poopó, a salt lake that extends south of Oruro, Bolivia. &quot;Salar de Uyuni&quot;, locally known as &quot;Salar de Tunupa&quot;, and &quot;Salar de Coipasa&quot; are two large dry salt flats formed after the Altiplano paleolakes dried out.

== Climate ==

The term Altiplano is sometimes used to identify the altitude zone and the type of climate that prevails within it: it is colder than that of the &quot;tierra fría&quot; but not as cold as that of the tierra helada. Scientists classify the latter as commencing at an elevation of approximately 4,500 meters (or about 15,000 feet). Alternate names used in place of &quot;altiplano&quot; in this context include &quot;puna&quot; and &quot;páramos&quot;.

In general the climate is cool and humid to semi-arid and even arid, with mean annual temperatures that vary from near the western mountain range to near Lake Titicaca; and total annual rainfall that ranges between less than to the south west to more than near and over Lake Titicaca. The diurnal cycle of temperature is very wide, with maximum temperatures in the order of and the minimum in the order of .

The coldest temperatures occur in the southwestern portion of the Altiplano during the winter months of June and July. The seasonal cycle of rainfall is marked, with the rainy season concentrated between December and March. The rest of the year tends to be very dry, cool, windy and sunny. Snowfall may happen between April and September, especially to the north, but it is not very common, occurring between one and five times a year.

== See also ==
* Lake Tauca
* Gran Chaco
* Guatemalan Highlands
* Mexican Plateau
* Puna de Atacama
* Yungas

==References==
==External links==
*Photo Gallery of Altiplano in Argentina, Bolivia and Chile
*Photo Gallery: Argentinian Puna
*Water resources of Chilean Altiplano</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q118574" start="4" end="13" title="Altiplano" label="Altiplano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="15" end="22" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q118574" start="52" end="58" title="Altiplano" label="Collao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="60" end="67" title="Quechuan languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627" start="72" end="78" title="Aymara language" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779257" start="115" end="120" title="Qulla people" label="Qulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q118574" start="131" end="145" title="Altiplano" label="Andean Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="163" end="176" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="205" end="212" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="230" end="235" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="323" end="328" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="364" end="371" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="403" end="407" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="445" end="450" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q30996" start="519" end="526" title="El Alto" label="El Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35246" start="531" end="536" title="Oruro, Bolivia" label="Oruro"/>
<link wikidata="Q696074" start="549" end="556" title="Juliaca" label="Juliaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q232842" start="561" end="565" title="Puno" label="Puno"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="674" end="681" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="salares"/>
<link wikidata="Q35342" start="748" end="761" title="Lake Titicaca" label="Lake Titicaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q464945" start="858" end="868" title="Lake Poopó" label="Lake Poopó"/>
<link wikidata="Q61750" start="1127" end="1136" title="Tiawanaku" label="Tiawanaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="1145" end="1156" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="1273" end="1278" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q125422609" start="1283" end="1289" title="vicuña" label="vicuña"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="1442" end="1452" title="Endorheic basin" label="endorheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="1475" end="1480" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1510" end="1515" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="1525" end="1532" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="1543" end="1547" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="1658" end="1673" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="1696" end="1701" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="1748" end="1755" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943879" start="1765" end="1786" title="Central Volcanic Zone" label="Central Volcanic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q474428" start="1808" end="1814" title="Ampato" label="Ampato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427739" start="1825" end="1833" title="Tutupaca" label="Tutupaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q255010" start="1845" end="1855" title="Parinacota (volcano)" label="Parinacota"/>
<link wikidata="Q252081" start="1866" end="1876" title="Guallatiri, Chile" label="Guallatiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077273" start="1887" end="1893" title="Paruma" label="Paruma"/>
<link wikidata="Q639727" start="1905" end="1913" title="Uturunku" label="Uturunku"/>
<link wikidata="Q422713" start="1928" end="1938" title="Licancabur" label="Licancabur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132302" start="1958" end="1973" title="Cordillera Real (Bolivia)" label="Cordillera Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139395" start="1997" end="2004" title="Illampu" label="Illampu"/>
<link wikidata="Q852849" start="2016" end="2029" title="Huayna Potosí" label="Huayna Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q33211" start="2041" end="2056" title="Janq&amp;#x27;u Uma" label="Janq&amp;#x27;u Uma"/>
<link wikidata="Q148521" start="2071" end="2079" title="Illimani" label="Illimani"/>
<link wikidata="Q47141" start="2095" end="2109" title="Atacama Desert" label="Atacama Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="2217" end="2234" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="2264" end="2271" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="2291" end="2305" title="high altitude" label="high elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779257" start="2358" end="2363" title="Qulla people" label="Qulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142249" start="2365" end="2369" title="Uros" label="Uros"/>
<link wikidata="Q134936" start="2371" end="2378" title="Quechua people" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q109402" start="2383" end="2389" title="Aymara people" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="2633" end="2639" title="Orogeny" label="orogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="2675" end="2693" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="2926" end="2931" title="Magma" label="Magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q166257" start="2959" end="2972" title="asthenosphere" label="asthenosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q538867" start="3157" end="3168" title="Nazca Plate" label="Nazca Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="3309" end="3319" title="Endorheic basin" label="endorheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="3552" end="3563" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="3677" end="3688" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205721" start="3758" end="3771" title="pluvial lakes" label="pluvial lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35342" start="3786" end="3799" title="Lake Titicaca" label="Lake Titicaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q464945" start="3841" end="3846" title="Poopó Lake" label="Poopó"/>
<link wikidata="Q188025" start="3850" end="3859" title="salt lake" label="salt lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q35246" start="3882" end="3896" title="Oruro, Bolivia" label="Oruro, Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76122" start="3904" end="3918" title="Salar de Uyuni" label="Salar de Uyuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057711" start="3982" end="3998" title="Coipasa Lake" label="Salar de Coipasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="4023" end="4033" title="Sink (geography)" label="salt flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354534" start="4251" end="4262" title="tierra fría" label="tierra fría"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492909" start="4300" end="4313" title="tierra helada" label="tierra helada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12717804" start="4515" end="4519" title="Puna (ecoregion)" label="puna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330709" start="4615" end="4619" title="arid" label="arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="5251" end="5255" title="Snow" label="Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q27941676" start="5415" end="5425" title="Lake Tauca" label="Lake Tauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q208347" start="5428" end="5438" title="Gran Chaco" label="Gran Chaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614263" start="5441" end="5461" title="Guatemalan Highlands" label="Guatemalan Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753873" start="5464" end="5479" title="Mexican Plateau" label="Mexican Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310805" start="5482" end="5497" title="Puna de Atacama" label="Puna de Atacama"/>
<link wikidata="Q743261" start="5500" end="5506" title="Yungas" label="Yungas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723104" wikidata="Q775382" url="?curid=723104" title="Harry F. Byrd">
<text>Harry Flood Byrd Sr. (June 10, 1887 – October 20, 1966) was an American newspaper publisher, politician, and leader of the Democratic Party in Virginia for four decades as head of a political faction that became known as the Byrd Organization. Byrd served as Virginia&#x27;s governor from 1926 until 1930, then represented the state as a U.S. senator from 1933 until 1965 and is the longest serving Senator from Virginia with his tenure lasting for over 32 years and 8 months.

He came to lead the conservative coalition in the Senate, and opposed President Franklin D. Roosevelt, largely blocking most liberal legislation after 1937. His son Harry Jr. succeeded him as U.S. senator, but ran as an Independent following the decline of the Byrd Organization.

Byrd succeeded to what had been the Virginia Democratic Party organization of U.S. senator Thomas Staples Martin, who died in 1919. Elected the 50th governor of Virginia in 1925, initially Byrd reorganized and modernized Virginia&#x27;s government. His political machine dominated state politics for much of the first half of the 20th century.

Byrd was vehemently opposed to racial desegregation of the public schools, and was the leader of massive resistance, a campaign of opposition to the U.S. Supreme Court decisions in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; that led to closure of some public schools in Virginia in the 1950s. Students who were denied their education in several Virginia counties became known as the &quot;lost generation&quot;. According to Clarence M. Dunnaville Jr., Byrd was a racist and avowed white separatist. Although Byrd paid his black and white workers similarly, he was vehemently opposed to racial desegregation even early in the New Deal, and later opposed Presidents Harry S. Truman and John F. Kennedy as well as losing presidential candidate Adlai Stevenson, despite their all being fellow Democrats, because unlike Byrd they opposed racial discrimination within the federal workforce. The Byrd Organization also benefited from limiting the political participation of blacks and poor whites in Virginia by means of poll taxes and literacy tests, but managed to defeat opposition ranging from New Deal governor James H. Price to gubernatorial and senatorial candidate Francis Pickens Miller.

Although Byrd never announced himself as a presidential candidate, he received votes in the 1956 presidential election and 15 electoral votes in the 1960 election.

==Early life and education==
Harry Flood Byrd was born in Martinsburg, West Virginia, in 1887 (just two weeks after future fellow U.S. senator Absalom Willis Robertson was born in the same community). His parents, Eleanor Bolling (Flood) and Richard Evelyn Byrd Sr., moved the young family to Winchester, Virginia, the same year.

Young Harry Byrd&#x27;s father became wealthy as an apple grower in the Shenandoah Valley, and publisher of the &quot;Winchester Star&quot; newspaper. He represented Winchester in the Virginia House of Delegates, and served as that body&#x27;s Speaker from 1908 until 1914. He was the United States Attorney for the Western District of Virginia from 1914 until 1920. Harry initially attended the public schools, but received most of his education from the private Shenandoah Valley Academy in Winchester.

===Genealogy and family relations===
Byrd&#x27;s ancestors included the First Families of Virginia. His paternal ancestors included Col Benjamin Harrison of Brandon Plantation, William Byrd II of Westover Plantation (who established Richmond) and Robert &quot;King&quot; Carter of Corotoman. His maternal ancestors included John Rolfe and Pocahontas. His ancestor William Byrd III squandered the Byrd family&#x27;s once vast fortune through gambling and bad investments.

One younger brother was Naval aviator and polar explorer Admiral Richard Evelyn Byrd (1888–1957). His other younger brother, Thomas Bolling Byrd (1890–1968), became an infantry captain during World War I. Their uncle Henry De La Warr Flood served in the House of Representatives of the U.S. Congress from Appomattox County from 1901 to 1921. Another uncle from Appomattox County, Joel West Flood, served as that county&#x27;s Commonwealth Attorney (1919 to 1932), in the U.S. Congress (beginning in 1932 to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Henry St. George Tucker), and as a state appellate Judge (of the Virginia Fifth Circuit, based in Richmond, from 1940 to 1964).

===Influence on character===
Born only twenty-two years after the end of the American Civil War, Byrd grew up in an era when &quot;the Shenandoah Valley was still a place of genteel poverty ... Harry Byrd never lacked food, but he had no money for luxuries. No one had any money. If a man got into debt, there was small chance of getting out of it.&quot;

Even worse in Byrd&#x27;s eyes was the dilemma of the state itself, which was also heavily in debt during Byrd&#x27;s youth. Before the Civil War, Virginia had taken on debt to help finance many internal public improvements (canals, turnpikes, and railroads) through the Virginia Board of Public Works. Most had been destroyed during the War, although the debt remained and the infrastructure needed to be rebuilt to get crops and goods to market. Virginia&#x27;s first postwar legislature had affirmed those debts at original terms (highly favorable to bondholders, which by then were mostly out-of-state purchasers at rates a small fraction of par value). Some related to improvements in the area that separated during the war to form the new State of West Virginia; those were litigated for decades until the United States Supreme Court ruled in 1915 that West Virginia owed Virginia $12,393,929.50. After the Reconstruction period, most of Virginia&#x27;s governors insisted upon paying state bondholders, rather than pay for public education (newly added in Virginia Constitution of 1869) or other government services. The Readjuster Party, which briefly challenged the Conservative Party of Virginia (the latter of which became the Virginia Democratic Party), advocated adjusting the terms of the prewar bonds, but had a relatively brief lifespan. Thus, the issue of Virginia&#x27;s public debt was far from resolved during Byrd&#x27;s formative years.

===Marriage and family===
Byrd married Anne Douglas Beverley, a childhood friend, on October 7, 1913. They lived with her parents in Winchester until 1916, when he built a log cabin, named Westwood, in Berryville at a family-owned orchard, and they moved there. The cabin was constructed from chestnut logs and remains one of the few examples of natural chestnut bark existing in the United States due to the chestnut blight. The Byrds had three sons: Harry F. Byrd Jr., Bradshaw Beverley Byrd, and Richard Byrd, and one daughter, Westwood Beverly Byrd. In 1926, Byrd purchased Rosemont Manor, an estate outside Berryville, adjacent to the family apple orchards. The family moved into the antebellum mansion in 1929, at the end of Byrd&#x27;s term as governor, after some renovations.

==Business career==
As a businessman, Byrd had several operations: publishing newspapers, running a local turnpike, and selling apples and apple products.

In 1903, Harry Byrd took over his father&#x27;s newspaper, the &quot;Winchester Star.&quot; Under his father&#x27;s ownership, it came to owe $2500 () to its newsprint supplier, the Antietam Paper Company. The company refused to ship more newsprint on credit, so Byrd cut a deal to make daily cash payments in return for ownership. As Byrd would later say, &quot;when you have to hunt for them that way, you get to know how many cents there really are in a dollar.&quot; He eventually bought the &quot;Harrisonburg Daily News-Record&quot; and several other papers in the Shenandoah Valley. His family operated these papers until April 1, 2018, when they were sold to the Ogden Newspapers Inc. of Wheeling, West Virginia.

Thus started what would become Byrd&#x27;s famous &quot;pay-as-you-go&quot; policy. He developed a lifelong aversion to borrowing money and any indebtedness. &quot;I stand for strict economy in governmental affairs,&quot; Byrd proclaimed. &quot;The State of Virginia is similar to a great business corporation ... and should be conducted with the same efficiency and economy as any private business.&quot; In a fifty-year political career, no statement of Byrd&#x27;s ever more succinctly spelled out his view of government.

In 1907, he founded &quot;The Evening Journal&quot; in nearby Martinsburg, West Virginia. He sold the paper in 1912 to associate Max von Schlegell.

In 1908, at the age of 21, he became president of The Valley Turnpike Company, overseeing the Valley Turnpike, a 93-mile (150-km) toll road between Winchester and Staunton. Earning $33 a month, he was required to drive the entire route at least twice a month to inspect it and arrange any repairs. As automobile traffic increased, he ensured road conditions were maintained within the available revenues. He held that office for seven years until his election to state office.

Byrd also owned extensive apple orchards in the Shenandoah Valley and an apple-packing operation which was among the largest on the East Coast. He later pointed out that he paid his African-American workers the same wages as his white farm workers.

In the 1950s, Edward P. Morgan&#x27;s assistant visited Byrd&#x27;s Northern Virginia farm during the apple harvest and was outraged by the living conditions of the migrant workers. This prompted Morgan to take up the issue of migrant labor in his CBS Radio Network commentaries. Producer Fred W. Friendly then prompted his close associate Edward R. Murrow to produce the television documentary &quot;Harvest of Shame&quot; on this issue.

==Virginia politics==
In 1915, while still heading the Valley Turnpike Company, at the age of 28, Byrd was elected to the Virginia Senate. That election was to begin his 50 years of service in various roles in the state and federal government.

At the Virginia State Capitol in Richmond, as a new state senator, Byrd was initially a progressive with an early interest in road improvements. He was a member of the Senate Committee on Roads, the Finance Committee, the Steering Committee, the Committee on Privileges and Elections, and the Committee of Schools and Colleges. He advocated a tax on gasoline as a fair method of raising revenue for road construction.

However, he first came to prominence in 1922, when he led a fight against using bonded indebtedness as a method to pay for new roads. He feared the state would sacrifice future flexibility by committing too many resources to paying off construction debt. In 1923, Byrd was sued by the Virginia Highway Contractors Association because he said their activities &quot;by combination and agreements may be very detrimental&quot; to the State. The court dismissed the suit, stating the criticism was legal, imposing all costs upon the association. The publicity helped him to be elected Governor of Virginia in November 1925, easily defeating Republican Samuel H. Hoge in the general election.

In 1923, he became a member of the Virginia Society of the Sons of the American Revolution.

As governor, serving a term from 1926 to 1930, Byrd pushed through constitutional amendments that streamlined the state government and allowed for more efficient use of tax dollars. He also made property taxes solely a county responsibility. When it was obvious that increased spending on road construction was not enough to &quot;get Virginia out of the mud,&quot; he pushed through a secondary roads bill that gave the state responsibility for maintaining county roads. These measures made Byrd seem like a New South progressive at first. However, many of his measures were more to the benefit of rural areas more interested in low taxes than better services. He instituted a &quot;pay as you go&quot; approach to spending, in which no state money was spent until enough taxes and fees came in to pay for it. Highways and tourism were his primary pursuits, says his biographer. &quot;He advocated building roads to state shrines such as Jamestown and Monticello and called for historical markers along roadways, the first of which appeared in Fredericksburg. He held regional meetings to bring about closer cooperation between state and county road officials, prophesying that the road system could be completed within ten years through such cooperation... A tour of the highway system convinced him of the progress being made in extending the arterial network. Indeed, over 2,000 miles would be added to the system during Byrd&#x27;s governorship, 1,787 of these miles in 1928. Road building was one way to keep the voters happy and prove the efficacy of pay-as-you-go.&quot;

While he was governor, Byrd built up contacts with the &quot;courthouse cliques&quot; in most of Virginia&#x27;s counties. He curried support from the five constitutional officers in those counties (sheriff, Commonwealth&#x27;s attorney, clerk of the court, county treasurer, and commissioner of revenue). This formed the basis of the Byrd Organization, which dominated Virginia politics well into the 1960s. They carefully vetted candidates for statewide office, and Byrd only made an endorsement, or &quot;nod,&quot; after consulting with them. Without his &quot;nod,&quot; no one could win statewide office in Virginia. While he was governor, he shortened the ballot so that only three officials ran statewide: the governor, lieutenant governor and attorney general. This limited opportunities to challenge the candidates that he wanted to run. His secondary roads bill in 1932, which became known as the Byrd Road Act, did not apply to the state&#x27;s independent cities.

Education was not on his agenda, and state spending for public schools remained very low until the late 1960s. Byrd became one of the most vocal proponents of maintaining policies of racial segregation. Byrd authored and signed the &quot;Southern Manifesto&quot; condemning the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court decision in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;. His call for &quot;massive resistance&quot; against desegregation of public schools led to many Virginia schools closing rather than be forced to integrate.

He helped draft a series of laws, known as the Stanley Plan, to implement his &quot;massive resistance&quot; policy. This led to closure of some public school systems in Virginia between 1959 and 1964, most notably a five-year gap in public education in Prince Edward County, Virginia.

==National politics==
In 1933 Byrd was appointed to fill a vacancy in the United States Senate; he won reelection as a Democrat in 1933, 1934, 1940, 1946, 1952, 1958, and 1964. Byrd and his colleague Carter Glass invoked senatorial courtesy to stop President Franklin Delano Roosevelt&#x27;s nomination of Floyd H. Roberts to a federal judgeship in Virginia in 1939. Byrd broke with Roosevelt and became an opponent of the New Deal, but he was an internationalist and strongly supported Roosevelt&#x27;s foreign policy. As war loomed in 1941 Congress approved his proposal for a joint House–Senate committee to look into ways of eliminating nonessential expenditures. By late September, the Joint Committee on Reduction of Non-essential Federal Expenditures was in operation with Senator Byrd as chairman; it built his national reputation as an economizer.

By the 1950s Byrd was one of the most influential senators, serving on the Armed Services Committee, and later as chairman of the Finance Committee. He often broke with the Democratic Party line, going so far as to refuse to endorse the re-election of liberal President Harry S. Truman in 1948. He also refused to endorse Adlai Stevenson in 1952. He voted against public works bills, including the Interstate Highway System, and played a key role in the passing of the 1964 Revenue Act. He had blocked the bill until President Lyndon Johnson agreed to decrease the total budget to under $100 billion. Subsequently, he helped push the Act through.

Byrd retired from the Senate for health reasons in November 1965. His son, Harry F. Byrd Jr., was appointed his successor.

==U.S. presidential candidate==
Having supported Al Smith, the Democratic governor of New York, in the 1928 U.S. presidential campaign, Byrd was selected by the Virginia Democratic Convention as a favorite son for the 1932 presidential nomination. According to the American political historian Steve Neal, at one point during the Democratic National Convention Byrd was offered the vice-presidential slot in exchange for instructing his 24 delegates to vote for Franklin D. Roosevelt, but declined because he believed he had a chance of winning the presidential nomination. Roosevelt won on the fourth ballot.

Although Byrd never again formally sought the presidency nor became his party&#x27;s candidate, Southern Democrats drafted him in several campaigns between 1944 and 1960. At the 1944 Democratic National Convention, Southern delegates opposed to Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal and racial policies nominated Byrd as the party&#x27;s presidential candidate. He was nominated by Ruth Nooney of Florida, who said she did so without his knowledge or consent. He won 89 delegate votes to Roosevelt&#x27;s 1,086 (James Farley of New York got one vote). All the convention delegates from Louisiana, Mississippi and Virginia, and 12 of the 36 delegates from Texas voted for Byrd. In 1952, both the Constitution Party and the America First Party nominated Byrd for vice president, and Douglas MacArthur for president, without the consent of either. The slate got 17,205 votes nationwide. In 1956, the year that Byrd initiated the &quot;massive resistance&quot; campaign, the States&#x27; Rights Party of Kentucky named Byrd as a presidential candidate. He received 2,657 votes in that state; in South Carolina, in the same election, he received 88,509 votes as the choice of an independent (i.e. unpledged) slate of electors with the endorsement of former governor James Byrnes and Senator Strom Thurmond.

In 1960, Byrd received 15 votes in the Electoral College: eight unpledged electors from Mississippi (all of that state&#x27;s electoral votes), six unpledged electors from Alabama (the other 5 electoral votes from that state went to John F. Kennedy), and a faithless elector from Oklahoma (the other 7 electoral votes from that state went to Richard Nixon).

==Death==
Shortly after leaving office, Byrd died in 1966 from a brain tumor; he had been in a coma for four months. He was 79 years of age and had been a senator for over 32 years. He was interred in Mount Hebron Cemetery in Winchester.

==Legacy==
Byrd worked in public service for almost fifty years, becoming an influential figure in U.S. politics, and through his Byrd machine, the most powerful force in Virginia politics for much of the 20th century. His leading role in defying the U.S. Supreme Court decision in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; (1954) by devising the massive resistance strategy has come to dominate public memory of his career, leading to a mixed legacy.

The author of the most comprehensive biography of Byrd (as of 2024), Dr. Ronald L. Heinemann, Squires Professor of History at Hampden-Sydney College from 1969 to 2007, assessed Byrd&#x27;s life and career in &quot;Harry Byrd of Virginia&quot; (published in 1996). Heinemann concluded that although Byrd was a greatly-talented and intelligent politician, one who came to dominate Virginia politics and substantially impact U.S. politics for decades, he frequently overlooked many other issues he could have helped address in favor of defending white supremacist policies and resisting the changing of the times, consequently squandering his long-term reputation on a doomed battle to preserve &quot;de jure&quot; racial segregation in the U.S.

A &quot;New York Times&quot; editorial following Byrd&#x27;s retirement from the U.S. Senate in 1965 gave a similar assessment: &quot;A talented man, Byrd chose to stand outside the broad currents of his time and to set his face against the future... He began as a force and ended as an anachronism.&quot;

Possibly Byrd&#x27;s greatest and most enduring achievement in public life was his strong advocacy for the creation of Shenandoah National Park, as well as the Skyline Drive, the Blue Ridge Parkway, and the Virginia state park system. Byrd&#x27;s influence kept Shenandoah National Park segregated during its construction by the CCC, at its initial establishment, and even a year after the Truman Administration mandated full desegregation in all National Parks. Shenandoah National Park&#x27;s main visitor center is named in his honor.

The Blue Ridge Parkway bridge over the James River in Big Island, Virginia was named and dedicated to him in 1985.

On November 26, 1968, the Virginia State Highway Commission named Virginia State Route 7, a historic road which travels from Alexandria past Berryville to Winchester, as &quot;Harry Flood Byrd Highway&quot; between Alexandria and Winchester. In 2021, the Loudoun County Board of Supervisors voted to rename Route 7 within the unincorporated areas of Loudoun County, &quot;Leesburg Pike&quot;. Byrd&#x27;s home from 1926 until his death, Rosemont Manor, still exists and is surrounded by about 60 acres. Although many acres of Byrd&#x27;s former orchards are now commercial and residential properties, Rosemont is now open to the public as a bed and breakfast, as well as event venue.

A statue of Byrd was installed in Richmond&#x27;s Capitol Square in 1976. The statue became controversial after Virginia began to reconsider its historical monuments, and the Byrd statue was subsequently removed in 2021.

In 2016, forty-five years after its 1971 founding, Harry F. Byrd Middle School, a National Blue Ribbon School in a suburb of Richmond, Virginia, was renamed to Quioccasin Middle School. In response to a campaign in the local community, the Henrico County School Board agreed that &quot;having a school named after a man who supported school segregation was inappropriate.&quot; &quot;Quioccasin&quot; is both the name of the road on which the school is located as well as the name of a black village that had once been located in the immediate vicinity.

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* Finley, Keith M. &quot;Delaying the Dream: Southern Senators and the Fight Against Civil Rights, 1938–1965&quot; (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2008).
* Hatch, Alden, &quot;The Byrds of Virginia: An American Dynasty, 1670 to the Present&quot; (1969)
* Key, V.O. &quot;Southern politics in state and nation&quot; (1949), Includes in-depth coverage of the Virginia political system
* Koeniger, A. Cash. &quot;The New Deal and the States: Roosevelt versus the Byrd Organization in Virginia.&quot; &quot;Journal of American History&quot; (1982): 876–896. in JSTOR
* Wilkinson, J. Harvie. &quot;Harry Byrd and the Changing Face of Virginia Politics 1945–1966&quot; (1968) 

==External links==
* Library of Virginia, Harry F. Byrd webpage
* Federal Highway Administration Byrd webpage
* Guide to the Papers of Harry F. Byrd at the University of Virginia Special Collections Library
* Collection of Harry F. Byrd&#x27;s works</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q775382" start="0" end="20" title="Harry F. Byrd" label="Harry Flood Byrd Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="123" end="139" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004227" start="225" end="242" title="Byrd Organization" label="Byrd Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="338" end="350" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163103" start="498" end="520" title="conservative coalition" label="conservative coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="558" end="579" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268711" start="643" end="652" title="Harry F. Byrd Jr." label="Harry Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5255726" start="795" end="820" title="Virginia Democratic Party" label="Virginia Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168633" start="850" end="871" title="Thomas Staples Martin" label="Thomas Staples Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="908" end="928" title="governor of Virginia" label="governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="1135" end="1155" title="racial desegregation" label="racial desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784808" start="1201" end="1219" title="massive resistance" label="massive resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="1291" end="1318" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765596" start="1526" end="1552" title="Clarence Dunnaville" label="Clarence M. Dunnaville Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="1565" end="1571" title="racist" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="1583" end="1599" title="white separatist" label="white separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="1727" end="1735" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="1766" end="1781" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="1786" end="1801" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="1843" end="1858" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="2116" end="2126" title="Poll taxes in the United States" label="poll taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="2131" end="2144" title="literacy test" label="literacy test"/>
<link wikidata="Q781787" start="2211" end="2225" title="James Hubert Price" label="James H. Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q29441098" start="2268" end="2290" title="Francis Pickens Miller" label="Francis Pickens Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q699567" start="2385" end="2411" title="1956 United States presidential election" label="1956 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="2442" end="2455" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010194" start="2516" end="2542" title="Martinsburg, West Virginia" label="Martinsburg, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q331714" start="2601" end="2625" title="Absalom Willis Robertson" label="Absalom Willis Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325555" start="2700" end="2723" title="Richard Evelyn Byrd Sr." label="Richard Evelyn Byrd Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q492355" start="2751" end="2771" title="Winchester, Virginia" label="Winchester, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="2861" end="2878" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023858" start="2907" end="2922" title="Winchester Star" label="Winchester Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="2973" end="3000" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="3074" end="3096" title="United States Attorney" label="United States Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494181" start="3253" end="3278" title="Shenandoah Valley Military Academy" label="Shenandoah Valley Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452987" start="3367" end="3393" title="First Families of Virginia" label="First Families of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872592" start="3452" end="3470" title="Lower Brandon Plantation" label="Brandon Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55022486" start="3472" end="3487" title="William Byrd II" label="William Byrd II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310858" start="3491" end="3510" title="Westover Plantation" label="Westover Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="3528" end="3536" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q648281" start="3542" end="3572" title="Robert Carter I" label="Robert &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172339" start="3576" end="3585" title="Corotoman" label="Corotoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q433948" start="3619" end="3629" title="John Rolfe" label="John Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193406" start="3634" end="3644" title="Pocahontas" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006241" start="3659" end="3675" title="William Byrd III" label="William Byrd III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3791" end="3796" title="U.S. Navy" label="Naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="3797" end="3804" title="aviator" label="aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q210268" start="3832" end="3851" title="Richard E. Byrd" label="Richard Evelyn Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3959" end="3970" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606646" start="3984" end="4006" title="Henry De La Warr Flood" label="Henry De La Warr Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4021" end="4045" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4053" end="4066" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q490325" start="4072" end="4089" title="Appomattox County, Virginia" label="Appomattox County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691757" start="4147" end="4162" title="Joel West Flood" label="Joel West Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266798" start="4314" end="4337" title="Henry St. George Tucker III" label="Henry St. George Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4520" end="4538" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q120643519" start="4617" end="4632" title="genteel poverty" label="genteel poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934154" start="5070" end="5100" title="Virginia Board of Public Works" label="Virginia Board of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="5544" end="5566" title="West Virginia" label="State of West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5611" end="5638" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="5712" end="5726" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995091" start="5862" end="5883" title="Virginia Constitution" label="Virginia Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134572" start="5927" end="5943" title="Readjuster Party" label="Readjuster Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163087" start="5974" end="6004" title="Conservative Party of Virginia (1867)" label="Conservative Party of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373729" start="6461" end="6471" title="Berryville, Virginia" label="Berryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010057" start="6668" end="6683" title="chestnut blight" label="chestnut blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268711" start="6711" end="6728" title="Harry F. Byrd Jr." label="Harry F. Byrd Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q571648" start="6948" end="6958" title="Antebellum architecture" label="antebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023858" start="7270" end="7285" title="The Winchester Star" label="Winchester Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="7350" end="7350" title="Inflation" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q187046" start="7359" end="7368" title="newsprint" label="newsprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732686" start="7383" end="7405" title="Alling and Cory" label="Antietam Paper Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q56237021" start="7703" end="7733" title="Harrisonburg Daily News-Record" label="Harrisonburg Daily News-Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079936" start="7872" end="7893" title="Ogden Newspapers Inc." label="Ogden Newspapers Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7743536" start="8475" end="8494" title="The Journal (West Virginia newspaper)" label="The Evening Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010194" start="8511" end="8537" title="Martinsburg, West Virginia" label="Martinsburg, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912166" start="8648" end="8675" title="Valley Pike" label="The Valley Turnpike Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="8728" end="8737" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q502250" start="8761" end="8769" title="Staunton, Virginia" label="Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344730" start="9340" end="9356" title="Edward P. Morgan" label="Edward P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="9491" end="9506" title="migrant workers" label="migrant workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="9574" end="9577" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q339631" start="9615" end="9631" title="Fred W. Friendly" label="Fred W. Friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q353935" start="9666" end="9682" title="Edward R. Murrow" label="Edward R. Murrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676899" start="9727" end="9743" title="Harvest of Shame" label="Harvest of Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="9888" end="9903" title="Senate of Virginia" label="Virginia Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537798" start="10018" end="10040" title="Virginia State Capitol" label="Virginia State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="10044" end="10052" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="11012" end="11032" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023625" start="11079" end="11093" title="Samuel H. Hoge" label="Samuel H. Hoge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072229" start="11179" end="11210" title="Sons of the American Revolution" label="Sons of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011590" start="11722" end="11731" title="New South" label="New South"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="12152" end="12161" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q199618" start="12166" end="12176" title="Monticello" label="Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="12258" end="12272" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004227" start="13128" end="13145" title="Byrd Organization" label="Byrd Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004230" start="13701" end="13714" title="Byrd Road Act" label="Byrd Road Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092400" start="13750" end="13768" title="independent city" label="independent cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="13954" end="13972" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232625" start="14009" end="14027" title="Southern Manifesto" label="Southern Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="14054" end="14072" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="14091" end="14118" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784808" start="14145" end="14163" title="massive resistance" label="massive resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600071" start="14331" end="14343" title="Stanley Plan" label="Stanley Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q505884" start="14538" end="14568" title="Prince Edward County, Virginia" label="Prince Edward County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="14645" end="14665" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045879" start="14771" end="14783" title="Carter Glass" label="Carter Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462441" start="14877" end="14893" title="Floyd H. Roberts" label="Floyd H. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="14994" end="15002" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q508577" start="15504" end="15528" title="United States Senate Committee on Armed Services" label="Armed Services Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985424" start="15559" end="15576" title="United States Senate Committee on Finance" label="Finance Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="15699" end="15714" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="15751" end="15766" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="15793" end="15805" title="public works" label="public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="15827" end="15852" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317989" start="15898" end="15914" title="Revenue Act of 1964" label="1964 Revenue Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="15956" end="15970" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268711" start="16152" end="16169" title="Harry F. Byrd Jr." label="Harry F. Byrd Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="16250" end="16258" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="16287" end="16295" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="16304" end="16335" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="1928 U.S. presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438638" start="16398" end="16410" title="favorite son" label="favorite son"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="16419" end="16423" title="1932 United States presidential election" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613454" start="16495" end="16505" title="Steve Neal (historian)" label="Steve Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152944" start="16531" end="16561" title="1932 Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="16663" end="16684" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565382" start="16990" end="17025" title="1944 Democratic National Convention" label="1944 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q954859" start="17312" end="17324" title="James Farley" label="James Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="17480" end="17484" title="1952 United States presidential election" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164109" start="17495" end="17513" title="Constitution Party (United States, 1952)" label="Constitution Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742759" start="17522" end="17541" title="America First Party (1944)" label="America First Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="17581" end="17598" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q699567" start="17687" end="17691" title="1956 United States presidential election" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897290" start="17992" end="18001" title="unpledged elector" label="unpledged"/>
<link wikidata="Q432726" start="18061" end="18073" title="James F. Byrnes" label="James Byrnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="18086" end="18100" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="18106" end="18110" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="18142" end="18159" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097598" start="18191" end="18202" title="1960 United States presidential election in Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100339" start="18275" end="18282" title="1960 United States presidential election in Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="18336" end="18351" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q795980" start="18360" end="18377" title="faithless elector" label="faithless elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643838" start="18383" end="18391" title="1960 United States presidential election in Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="18445" end="18458" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895462" start="18663" end="18684" title="Mount Hebron Cemetery and Gatehouse" label="Mount Hebron Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004227" start="18831" end="18843" title="Byrd machine" label="Byrd machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="18989" end="19016" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784808" start="19046" end="19064" title="massive resistance" label="massive resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137401" start="20322" end="20346" title="Shenandoah National Park" label="Shenandoah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q911052" start="20363" end="20376" title="Skyline Drive" label="Skyline Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q885856" start="20382" end="20400" title="Blue Ridge Parkway" label="Blue Ridge Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905877" start="20796" end="20816" title="Big Island, Virginia" label="Big Island, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934247" start="20884" end="20917" title="Virginia Department of Transportation" label="Virginia State Highway Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507607" start="20924" end="20946" title="Virginia State Route 7" label="Virginia State Route 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="20983" end="20993" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q107610348" start="21545" end="21559" title="Statue of Harry F. Byrd" label="statue of Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971043" start="21847" end="21874" title="National Blue Ribbon School" label="National Blue Ribbon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="21890" end="21908" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778310" start="21925" end="21949" title="Henrico County Public Schools" label="Quioccasin Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778310" start="22005" end="22032" title="Henrico County Public Schools" label="Henrico County School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q15512910" start="22923" end="22943" title="James Harvie Wilkinson III" label="Wilkinson, J. Harvie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723105" wikidata="Q4669959" url="?curid=723105" title="Abstract simplicial complex">
<text>In combinatorics, an abstract simplicial complex (ASC), often called an abstract complex or just a complex, is a family of sets that is closed under taking subsets, i.e., every subset of a set in the family is also in the family. It is a purely combinatorial description of the geometric notion of a simplicial complex. For example, in a 2-dimensional simplicial complex, the sets in the family are the triangles (sets of size 3), their edges (sets of size 2), and their vertices (sets of size 1).

In the context of matroids and greedoids, abstract simplicial complexes are also called [[independence system]]s.

An abstract simplex can be studied algebraically by forming its Stanley–Reisner ring; this sets up a powerful relation between combinatorics and commutative algebra.

==Definitions==
A collection of non-empty finite subsets of a set &quot;S&quot; is called a set-family.

A set-family is called an abstract simplicial complex if, for every set in , and every non-empty subset , the set also belongs to .

The finite sets that belong to are called faces of the complex, and a face is said to belong to another face if , so the definition of an abstract simplicial complex can be restated as saying that every face of a face of a complex is itself a face of . The vertex set of is defined as , the union of all faces of . The elements of the vertex set are called the vertices of the complex. For every vertex &quot;v&quot; of , the set {&quot;v&quot;} is a face of the complex, and every face of the complex is a finite subset of the vertex set.

The maximal faces of (i.e., faces that are not subsets of any other faces) are called facets of the complex. The dimension of a face in is defined as : faces consisting of a single element are zero-dimensional, faces consisting of two elements are one-dimensional, etc. The dimension of the complex is defined as the largest dimension of any of its faces, or infinity if there is no finite bound on the dimension of the faces.

The complex is said to be finite if it has finitely many faces, or equivalently if its vertex set is finite. Also, is said to be pure if it is finite-dimensional (but not necessarily finite) and every facet has the same dimension. In other words, is pure if is finite and every face is contained in a facet of dimension .

One-dimensional abstract simplicial complexes are mathematically equivalent to simple undirected graphs: the vertex set of the complex can be viewed as the vertex set of a graph, and the two-element facets of the complex correspond to undirected edges of a graph. In this view, one-element facets of a complex correspond to isolated vertices that do not have any incident edges.

A subcomplex of is an abstract simplicial complex &quot;L&quot; such that every face of &quot;L&quot; belongs to ; that is, and &quot;L&quot; is an abstract simplicial complex. A subcomplex that consists of all of the subsets of a single face of is often called a simplex of . (However, some authors use the term &quot;simplex&quot; for a face or, rather ambiguously, for both a face and the subcomplex associated with a face, by analogy with the non-abstract (geometric) simplicial complex terminology. To avoid ambiguity, we do not use in this article the term &quot;simplex&quot; for a face in the context of abstract complexes).

The &quot;d&quot;-skeleton of is the subcomplex of consisting of all of the faces of that have dimension at most &quot;d&quot;. In particular, the 1-skeleton is called the underlying graph of . The 0-skeleton of can be identified with its vertex set, although formally it is not quite the same thing (the vertex set is a single set of all of the vertices, while the 0-skeleton is a family of single-element sets).

The link of a face in , often denoted or , is the subcomplex of defined by

:formula_1

Note that the link of the empty set is itself.

=== Simplicial maps ===

Given two abstract simplicial complexes, and , a simplicial map is a function that maps the vertices of to the vertices of and that has the property that for any face of , the image is a face of . There is a category SCpx with abstract simplicial complexes as objects and simplicial maps as morphisms. This is equivalent to a suitable category defined using non-abstract simplicial complexes.

Moreover, the categorical point of view allows us to tighten the relation between the underlying set &quot;S&quot; of an abstract simplicial complex and the vertex set of : for the purposes of defining a category of abstract simplicial complexes, the elements of &quot;S&quot; not lying in are irrelevant. More precisely, SCpx is equivalent to the category where:
* an object is a set &quot;S&quot; equipped with a collection of non-empty finite subsets that contains all singletons and such that if is in and is non-empty, then also belongs to .
* a morphism from to is a function such that the image of any element of is an element of .

==Geometric realization==
We can associate to any abstract simplicial complex (ASC) &quot;K&quot; a topological space formula_2, called its geometric realization. There are several ways to define formula_2.

=== Geometric definition ===
Every geometric simplicial complex (GSC) determines an ASC:&quot;&quot; the vertices of the ASC are the vertices of the GSC, and the faces of the ASC are the vertex-sets of the faces of the GSC. For example, consider a GSC with 4 vertices {1,2,3,4}, where the maximal faces are the triangle between {1,2,3} and the lines between {2,4} and {3,4}. Then, the corresponding ASC contains the sets {1,2,3}, {2,4}, {3,4}, and all their subsets. We say that the GSC is the geometric realization of the ASC. 

Every ASC has a geometric realization. This is easy to see for a finite ASC.&quot;&quot; Let formula_4. Identify the vertices in formula_5 with the vertices of an (&quot;N-1&quot;)-dimensional simplex in formula_6. Construct the GSC {conv(F): F is a face in K}. Clearly, the ASC associated with this GSC is identical to &quot;K&quot;, so we have indeed constructed a geometric realization of &quot;K.&quot; In fact, an ASC can be realized using much fewer dimensions. If an ASC is &quot;d&quot;-dimensional (that is, the maximum cardinality of a simplex in it is &quot;d&quot;+1), then it has a geometric realization in formula_7, but might not have a geometric realization in formula_8 &quot;&quot; The special case &quot;d&quot;=1 corresponds to the well-known fact, that any graph can be plotted in formula_9 where the edges are straight lines that do not intersect each other except in common vertices, but not any graph can be plotted in formula_10 in this way. 

If &quot;K&quot; is the standard combinatorial &quot;n&quot;-simplex, then formula_2 can be naturally identified with .

Every two geometric realizations of the same ASC, even in Euclidean spaces of different dimensions, are homeomorphic.&quot;&quot; Therefore, given an ASC &quot;K,&quot; one can speak of &quot;the&quot; geometric realization of &quot;K&quot;.

=== Topological definition ===
The construction goes as follows. First, define formula_2 as a subset of formula_13 consisting of functions formula_14 satisfying the two conditions:
:formula_15
:formula_16
Now think of the set of elements of formula_13 with finite support as the direct limit of formula_18 where &quot;A&quot; ranges over finite subsets of &quot;S&quot;, and give that direct limit the induced topology. Now give formula_2 the subspace topology.

=== Categorical definition ===
Alternatively, let formula_20 denote the category whose objects are the faces of and whose morphisms are inclusions. Next choose a total order on the vertex set of and define a functor &quot;F&quot; from formula_20 to the category of topological spaces as follows. For any face &quot;X&quot; in &quot;K&quot; of dimension &quot;n&quot;, let be the standard &quot;n&quot;-simplex. The order on the vertex set then specifies a unique bijection between the elements of and vertices of , ordered in the usual way . If is a face of dimension , then this bijection specifies a unique &quot;m&quot;-dimensional face of . Define to be the unique affine linear embedding of as that distinguished face of , such that the map on vertices is order-preserving.

We can then define the geometric realization formula_2 as the colimit of the functor &quot;F&quot;. More specifically formula_2 is the quotient space of the disjoint union

:formula_24

by the equivalence relation that identifies a point with its image under the map , for every inclusion .

==Examples==
1. Let &quot;V&quot; be a finite set of cardinality . The combinatorial &quot;n&quot;-simplex with vertex-set &quot;V&quot; is an ASC whose faces are all nonempty subsets of &quot;V&quot; (i.e., it is the power set of &quot;V&quot;). If then this ASC is called the standard combinatorial &quot;n&quot;-simplex.

2. Let &quot;G&quot; be an undirected graph. The clique complex of &quot;G is an ASC whose faces are all cliques (complete subgraphs) of &quot;G&quot;. The independence complex of &quot;G is an ASC whose faces are all independent sets of &quot;G&quot; (it is the clique complex of the complement graph of G). Clique complexes are the prototypical example of flag complexes. A flag complex is a complex &quot;K&quot; with the property that every set, all of whose 2-element subsets are faces of &quot;K&quot;, is itself a face of &quot;K&quot;.

3. Let &quot;H&quot; be a hypergraph. A matching in &quot;H&quot; is a set of edges of &quot;H&quot;, in which every two edges are disjoint. The matching complex of &quot;H&quot; is an ASC whose faces are all matchings in &quot;H&quot;. It is the independence complex of the line graph of &quot;H&quot;.

4. Let &quot;P&quot; be a partially ordered set (poset). The order complex of &quot;P&quot; is an ASC whose faces are all finite chains in &quot;P&quot;. Its homology groups and other topological invariants contain important information about the poset &quot;P&quot;.

5. Let &quot;M&quot; be a metric space and &quot;δ&quot; a real number. The Vietoris–Rips complex is an ASC whose faces are the finite subsets of &quot;M&quot; with diameter at most &quot;δ&quot;. It has applications in homology theory, hyperbolic groups, image processing, and mobile ad hoc networking. It is another example of a flag complex.

6. Let formula_25 be a square-free monomial ideal in a polynomial ring formula_26 (that is, an ideal generated by products of subsets of variables). Then the exponent vectors of those square-free monomials of formula_27 that are not in formula_25 determine an abstract simplicial complex via the map formula_29. In fact, there is a bijection between (non-empty) abstract simplicial complexes on vertices and square-free monomial ideals in . If formula_30 is the square-free ideal corresponding to the simplicial complex formula_31 then the quotient formula_32 is known as the Stanley–Reisner ring of formula_33.

7. For any open covering &quot;C&quot; of a topological space, the nerve complex of &quot;C&quot; is an abstract simplicial complex containing the sub-families of &quot;C&quot; with a non-empty intersection.

==Enumeration==
The number of abstract simplicial complexes on up to &quot;n&quot; labeled elements (that is on a set &quot;S&quot; of size &quot;n&quot;) is one less than the &quot;n&quot;th Dedekind number. These numbers grow very rapidly, and are known only for ; the Dedekind numbers are (starting with &quot;n&quot; = 0):
:1, 2, 5, 19, 167, 7580, 7828353, 2414682040997, 56130437228687557907787, 286386577668298411128469151667598498812365 . This corresponds to the number of non-empty antichains of subsets of an set.

The number of abstract simplicial complexes whose vertices are exactly &quot;n&quot; labeled elements is given by the sequence &quot;1, 2, 9, 114, 6894, 7785062, 2414627396434, 56130437209370320359966, 286386577668298410623295216696338374471993&quot; , starting at &quot;n&quot; = 1. This corresponds to the number of antichain covers of a labeled &quot;n&quot;-set; there is a clear bijection between antichain covers of an &quot;n&quot;-set and simplicial complexes on &quot;n&quot; elements described in terms of their maximal faces.

The number of abstract simplicial complexes on exactly &quot;n&quot; unlabeled elements is given by the sequence &quot;1, 2, 5, 20, 180, 16143, 489996795, 1392195548399980210&quot; , starting at &quot;n&quot; = 1.

== Computational problems ==

The simplicial complex recognition problem is: given a finite ASC, decide whether its geometric realization is homeomorphic to a given geometric object. This problem is undecidable for any &quot;d&quot;-dimensional manifolds for &quot;d&quot; ≥ 5.

== Relation to other concepts ==
An abstract simplicial complex with an additional property called the augmentation property or the exchange property yields a matroid. The following expression shows the relations between the terms:

HYPERGRAPHS = SET-FAMILIES ⊃ INDEPENDENCE-SYSTEMS = ABSTRACT-SIMPLICIAL-COMPLEXES ⊃ MATROIDS.

==See also==
* Kruskal–Katona theorem
* Simplicial set

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="3" end="16" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669959" start="21" end="48" title="Abstract simplicial complex" label="abstract simplicial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669959" start="72" end="88" title="Abstract simplicial complex" label="abstract complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669959" start="99" end="106" title="Abstract simplicial complex" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="113" end="127" title="family of sets" label="family of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="156" end="162" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q994399" start="300" end="318" title="simplicial complex" label="simplicial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q898572" start="517" end="524" title="matroid" label="matroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q637575" start="530" end="538" title="greedoid" label="greedoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669959" start="587" end="611" title="Abstract simplicial complex" label="[[independence system]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600086" start="678" end="698" title="Stanley–Reisner ring" label="Stanley–Reisner ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="741" end="754" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q727659" start="759" end="778" title="commutative algebra" label="commutative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="843" end="846" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="2390" end="2396" title="simple graph" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="2397" end="2413" title="undirected graph" label="undirected graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q994399" start="3163" end="3181" title="simplicial complex" label="simplicial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154570" start="3329" end="3351" title="d-skeleton" label="&amp;quot;d&amp;quot;-skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154570" start="3472" end="3482" title="skeleton (topology)" label="1-skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17057096" start="3950" end="3964" title="simplicial map" label="simplicial map"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="3970" end="3978" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="4077" end="4082" title="Image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="4109" end="4117" title="Category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="4192" end="4200" title="morphism" label="morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q994399" start="4272" end="4292" title="simplicial complexes" label="simplicial complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="5035" end="5052" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q994399" start="5178" end="5206" title="geometric simplicial complex" label="geometric simplicial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138624" start="5907" end="5911" title="convex hull" label="conv"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="6451" end="6456" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="6592" end="6597" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="6867" end="6879" title="Homeomorphism" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q906015" start="7285" end="7297" title="direct limit" label="direct limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416138" start="7408" end="7424" title="final topology" label="induced topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="7449" end="7466" title="subspace topology" label="subspace topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="7631" end="7642" title="total order" label="total order"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="7677" end="7684" title="functor" label="functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="7932" end="7941" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="8138" end="8144" title="affine transformation" label="affine"/>
<link wikidata="Q980509" start="8152" end="8161" title="embedding" label="embedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322614" start="8311" end="8318" title="colimit" label="colimit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="8384" end="8398" title="Quotient space (topology)" label="quotient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q842620" start="8406" end="8420" title="disjoint union" label="disjoint union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="8442" end="8462" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="8594" end="8605" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="8759" end="8768" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134413" start="8915" end="8929" title="clique complex" label="clique complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q761631" start="8971" end="8978" title="Clique (graph theory)" label="cliques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060343" start="9084" end="9100" title="Independent set (graph theory)" label="independent sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q902252" start="9151" end="9167" title="complement graph" label="complement graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134413" start="9224" end="9236" title="flag complex" label="flag complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q840247" start="9437" end="9447" title="hypergraph" label="hypergraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359334" start="9451" end="9459" title="Matching in hypergraphs" label="matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="9542" end="9550" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359334" start="9620" end="9629" title="Matching in hypergraphs" label="matchings"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845680" start="9658" end="9678" title="independence complex" label="independence complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553253" start="9686" end="9696" title="Line graph of a hypergraph" label="line graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="9742" end="9763" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9845" end="9851" title="Total order#Chains" label="chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144780" start="9874" end="9882" title="Homology (mathematics)" label="homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q625948" start="9900" end="9922" title="Topological property" label="topological invariants"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="10011" end="10023" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928689" start="10061" end="10082" title="Vietoris–Rips complex" label="Vietoris–Rips complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144780" start="10205" end="10220" title="homology theory" label="homology theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q81194" start="10222" end="10238" title="hyperbolic group" label="hyperbolic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="10241" end="10257" title="image processing" label="image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085781" start="10263" end="10284" title="mobile ad hoc network" label="mobile ad hoc network"/>
<link wikidata="Q19369206" start="10366" end="10380" title="monomial ideal" label="monomial ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455652" start="10386" end="10401" title="polynomial ring" label="polynomial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q619436" start="10871" end="10879" title="Quotient ring" label="quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600086" start="10907" end="10927" title="Stanley–Reisner ring" label="Stanley–Reisner ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="10955" end="10968" title="open covering" label="open covering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424012" start="11011" end="11024" title="nerve complex" label="nerve complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141489" start="11138" end="11150" title="intersection" label="intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249753" start="11345" end="11360" title="Dedekind number" label="Dedekind number"/>
<link wikidata="Q431937" start="11643" end="11652" title="antichain" label="antichain"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804337" start="12464" end="12502" title="simplicial complex recognition problem" label="simplicial complex recognition problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="12629" end="12640" title="Undecidable problem" label="undecidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q898572" start="12868" end="12875" title="matroid" label="matroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527102" start="13052" end="13074" title="Kruskal–Katona theorem" label="Kruskal–Katona theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467124" start="13077" end="13091" title="Simplicial set" label="Simplicial set"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723106" wikidata="Q5667663" url="?curid=723106" title="Harry Byrd (disambiguation)">
<text>Harry Byrd may refer to:

*Harry F. Byrd (1887–1966), American politician
*Curley Byrd (Harry Clifton Byrd, 1889–1970), American politician, university president, multi-sport athlete and coach
*Harry F. Byrd Jr. (1914–2013), American politician, son of Harry F. Byrd Sr.
*Harry Byrd (baseball) (1925–1985), American Major League Baseball pitcher
*Harry Byrd of Virginia, a 1996 non-fiction book by Ronald L. Heinemann, concerning Harry F. Byrd

==See also==
* Professor Longhair, also known as Henry Byrd, American singer and pianist
* Henry Byrd (American football)
* Henry Bird (disambiguation)
* Dickie Bird (Harold Dennis Bird, born 1933), cricket umpire</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5667663" start="0" end="10" title="Harry Byrd (disambiguation)" label="Harry Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q775382" start="27" end="40" title="Harry F. Byrd" label="Harry F. Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194845" start="75" end="86" title="Curley Byrd" label="Curley Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268711" start="194" end="211" title="Harry F. Byrd Jr." label="Harry F. Byrd Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5667666" start="272" end="293" title="Harry Byrd (baseball)" label="Harry Byrd (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96380367" start="347" end="369" title="Harry Byrd of Virginia" label="Harry Byrd of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918447" start="460" end="478" title="Professor Longhair" label="Professor Longhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q125958152" start="536" end="566" title="Henry Byrd (American football)" label="Henry Byrd (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459368" start="569" end="596" title="Henry Bird (disambiguation)" label="Henry Bird (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345554" start="599" end="610" title="Dickie Bird" label="Dickie Bird"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723118" wikidata="Q7621257" url="?curid=723118" title="Strand underpass">
<text>The Strand underpass is a one-way road tunnel in central London connecting Waterloo Bridge to Kingsway near Holborn. Opened in 1964, it was built within the former Kingsway tramway subway, which closed in the 1950s. It is open to motor vehicles, pedestrians and horse riders but not cyclists as indicated on signs.

==History==
The underpass is built within part of the former Kingsway tramway subway, which was wide and allowed bi-directional flow because of the fixed rails and relatively narrow width of the trams. The new underpass was built by John Mowlem &amp; Co and opened on 21 January 1964. It is only wide and, as a result, it is normally one-way northbound because of the side clearances required. The headroom is only due to the tunnel having to pass beneath the bridge abutment by a 1:12 gradient. An electronic &#x27;eye&#x27; alerts drivers of tall vehicles and diverts them to an &#x27;escape route&#x27; to the left of the entrance. However, high vehicles do still try to pass through and so get stuck occasionally.
The underpass is a concrete box within the former tram subway, with the road surface at the original track level. At the northern end of the underpass the road rises to the surface on a new carriageway supported by metal pillars. This passes through the site of the former Aldwych tramway station; because of the greater width requirement, 27 trees and some pavement sections were removed for it to be constructed.

The tunnel was used by the 521 bus route northbound until it was withdrawn in April 2023. In 2012, the direction of traffic in the tunnel was temporarily reversed, so that it was in use by southbound traffic. This was to facilitate easier traffic flow during the 2012 Summer Olympics.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7621257" start="4" end="20" title="Strand underpass" label="Strand underpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="39" end="45" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="57" end="63" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q501003" start="75" end="90" title="Waterloo Bridge" label="Waterloo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q893261" start="94" end="102" title="Kingsway, London" label="Kingsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q123624" start="108" end="115" title="Holborn" label="Holborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061013" start="164" end="187" title="Kingsway tramway subway" label="Kingsway tramway subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061013" start="377" end="400" title="Kingsway tramway subway" label="Kingsway tramway subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13109143" start="549" end="569" title="Mowlem" label="John Mowlem &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452175" start="783" end="791" title="abutment" label="abutment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139344" start="802" end="810" title="Grade (slope)" label="gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714036" start="1307" end="1330" title="Aldwych tramway station" label="Aldwych tramway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961160" start="1477" end="1490" title="London Buses route 521" label="521 bus route"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="1713" end="1733" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723120" wikidata="Q4860221" url="?curid=723120" title="Bardsey Bird and Field Observatory">
<text>Bardsey Bird and Field Observatory is a bird observatory on Bardsey Island, off the Welsh coast.

It was founded in 1953 by a group of ornithologists from the West Midland Bird Club (who were represented on the observatory&#x27;s management committee), the West Wales Field Society, and local people. The West Midlands Bird club not only saw a possibility for a new bird observatory, but an opportunity for studying the complex ecology of a small island.

The observatory&#x27;s main objective is to monitor and census the breeding and migratory birds which use the island. Observatory staff undertake a daily census, with a log of the day&#x27;s sightings taken each evening. Spring and summer are particularly intensive times when the populations of breeding landbirds and seabirds are counted.

BBFO is one of two fully accredited observatory in Wales and is 1 of 20 accredited bird observatories around the coast of the UK and Ireland. It is recognised by the Bird Observatories Council. Bardsey Island or Ynys Enlli is of great conservation importance and is designated as a National Nature Reserve (NNR), Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Special Protection Area (SPA), Environmentally Sensitive Area (ESA), Llyn Peninsula Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. It is part of the Llyn Peninsula Heritage Coast.

Steven Stansfield is the current Warden and Director of Operations and has been resident on the island since January 1998 and is the longest serving member of staff at the Observatory.
Bardsey Bird Observatory and Field Centre is a registered charity.

==See also==
*Eifion Jones

==References==
==External links==
* Bardsey Lodge &amp; Bird Observatory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4860221" start="0" end="34" title="Bardsey Bird and Field Observatory" label="Bardsey Bird and Field Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365207" start="40" end="56" title="bird observatory" label="bird observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991483" start="60" end="74" title="Bardsey Island" label="Bardsey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="84" end="89" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="135" end="148" title="ornithologist" label="ornithologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q935628" start="159" end="181" title="West Midland Bird Club" label="West Midland Bird Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001329" start="257" end="281" title="West Wales Field Society" label="West Wales Field Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="964" end="990" title="Bird Observatories Council" label="Bird Observatories Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196958" start="1080" end="1103" title="National Nature Reserve" label="National Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="1111" end="1146" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463705" start="1155" end="1178" title="Special Protection Area" label="Special Protection Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381384" start="1186" end="1216" title="Environmentally Sensitive Area" label="Environmentally Sensitive Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1224" end="1267" title="Llyn Peninsula Special Area of Conservation" label="Llyn Peninsula Special Area of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174945" start="1278" end="1312" title="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1332" end="1361" title="Llyn Peninsula Heritage Coast" label="Llyn Peninsula Heritage Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="1596" end="1614" title="registered charity" label="registered charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348887" start="1631" end="1643" title="Eifion Jones" label="Eifion Jones"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723124" wikidata="Q1309953" url="?curid=723124" title="Portland Bill">
<text>Portland Bill is a narrow promontory (or bill) at the southern end of the Isle of Portland, and the southernmost point of Dorset, England. One of Portland&#x27;s most popular destinations is Portland Bill Lighthouse. Portland&#x27;s coast has been notorious for the number of shipwrecked vessels over the centuries. The dangerous coastline features shallow reefs and the Shambles sandbank, made more hazardous due to the strong Portland tidal race.

The Bill is an important way-point for coastal traffic, and three lighthouses have been built to protect shipping. The original two worked as a pair from 1716, and they were replaced in 1906 by the current one.

==History==
From Roman times, beacon fires were lit to warn ships of the danger of the Bill. A petition to Trinity House was put forward for a lighthouse in the early 18th century, but Trinity House opposed it. They later conceded that a lighthouse was needed and George I granted the patent on 26 May 1716. Trinity House issued a lease to William Barrett and Francis Browne to build and maintain one or more lighthouses.

One lighthouse was built at Branscombe Hill, while the other was situated on lower land nearer the coast. The two lighthouses were lit for the first time on 29 September 1716. The lights were poorly maintained, and Trinity House terminated the lease after an inspection in 1752. In 1789, the Old Lower Lighthouse was demolished and rebuilt. In 1844, Trinity House erected a stone obelisk at the southern tip of the Bill as a daymark, and the first lightship was placed at the Shambles sandbank in 1859. In 1869, Trinity House had both lighthouses rebuilt.

Pulpit Rock is an artificial stack of rock that was formed in the 1870s by quarrying operations at the Bill. At the turn of the 20th-century, Trinity House put forward plans for a new lighthouse which was completed in 1905 and first shone on 11 January 1906. The original two lighthouses were decommissioned and sold. The Old Lower Lighthouse later became a bird observatory in 1961. The Old Higher Lighthouse was owned by Marie Stopes from 1923 to 1958 and is now a holiday let. A proper road to Portland Bill was laid in 1922 and this helped the Bill become a tourist destination.

A coastguard lookout at Portland Bill was built in 1934. It closed in the 1990s but was taken over by the National Coastwatch Institution, which rebuilt the station in the 21st century. During the 1960s, the Ministry of Defence Magnetic Range was built at the Bill. Farther up the hill at Branscombe was a Royal Navy Wireless telegraphy station which was established in the early 20th century and closed in the 1990s. The Shambles lightship was permanently withdrawn in 1976 and replaced by automatic buoys. The current lighthouse was unmanned in 1996 and all monitoring and control transferred to the Trinity House Operations &amp; Planning Centre in Harwich. The lighthouse has a visitor centre, while tours are conducted to take visitors to the top of the lighthouse.

LB&amp;SCR H1 class 4-4-2 no. 38 (later no. B38, 2038, and 32038) was named &quot;Portland Bill&quot; after this landmark.

==Features==
The lighthouses, Pulpit Rock and the Trinity House Obelisk are Portland Bill&#x27;s key attractions. Close to the Ministry of Defence range at the Bill is Portland&#x27;s main Raised Beach, and close to the Old Higher Lighthouse is NCI Portland Bill, a National Coastwatch Institution lookout station.

A fishing crane, known as Red Crane, is situated on the cliff edge at Portland Bill. The area holds many beach huts. There are a few commercial businesses in the area, including a restaurant - The Lobster Pot - and a pub - The Pulpit Inn.

Portland Bill has a number of listed buildings. The current lighthouse, along with its boundary walls, is Grade II Listed. The Old Lower Lighthouse, including its boundary walls and coastguard house, is also Grade II Listed, as is the Old Higher Lighthouse, its four cottages and boundary walls. A 19th-century Fisherman&#x27;s hut is Grade II Listed, while Red Crane, part of a disused stone loading quay, which is protected as a scheduled monument.

The surrounding fields between the Bill and Southwell are made up of an ancient strip field system, once found all over the island, dating from Anglo-Saxon times. The nearby Culverwell Mesolithic Site is a Mesolithic settlement, located along the Portland Bill Road. The site is said to be circa 7500–8500 years old and has also become a scheduled monument. This includes surrounding fields, also relating to the Mesolithic period, and these fields lead across to the coastline.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Chesil Beach
* Jurassic Coast

==References==
== External links ==

* Portland Bill Lighthouse at Trinity House
* Portland Bill photographs 
* National Coastwatch Institution, Portland Bill
* Portland Bill Lighthouse
* Exploring Portland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1309953" start="0" end="13" title="Portland Bill" label="Portland Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="74" end="90" title="Isle of Portland" label="Isle of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="122" end="128" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753005" start="191" end="215" title="Portland Bill Lighthouse" label="Portland Bill Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q495844" start="437" end="447" title="tidal race" label="tidal race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570725" start="769" end="782" title="Trinity House" label="Trinity House"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="926" end="934" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259597" start="1642" end="1653" title="Pulpit Rock (Isle of Portland)" label="Pulpit Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q442231" start="2065" end="2077" title="Marie Stopes" label="Marie Stopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998464" start="2332" end="2363" title="National Coastwatch Institution" label="National Coastwatch Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895729" start="2383" end="2390" title="NCI Portland Bill" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253455" start="2434" end="2468" title="Ministry of Defence Magnetic Range, Portland" label="Ministry of Defence Magnetic Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="2543" end="2562" title="Wireless telegraphy" label="Wireless telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457256" start="2998" end="3017" title="LB&amp;amp;SCR H1 class" label="LB&amp;amp;SCR H1 class"/>
<link wikidata="Q756271" start="3018" end="3023" title="4-4-2 (locomotive)" label="4-4-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842857" start="3172" end="3193" title="Trinity House Obelisk" label="Trinity House Obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="3249" end="3268" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15267884" start="3311" end="3323" title="Portland Raised Beach" label="Raised Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084211" start="3342" end="3363" title="Old Higher Lighthouse" label="Old Higher Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895729" start="3367" end="3384" title="NCI Portland Bill" label="NCI Portland Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998464" start="3388" end="3419" title="National Coastwatch Institution" label="National Coastwatch Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899205" start="3464" end="3473" title="Red Crane, Portland" label="Red Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286379" start="3543" end="3552" title="beach hut" label="beach hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="3708" end="3724" title="Listed building" label="listed buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="4109" end="4127" title="scheduled monument" label="scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571189" start="4174" end="4183" title="Southwell, Dorset" label="Southwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="4274" end="4285" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070604" start="4637" end="4649" title="Chesil Beach" label="Chesil Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q575976" start="4652" end="4666" title="Jurassic Coast" label="Jurassic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570725" start="4735" end="4748" title="Trinity House" label="Trinity House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723125" wikidata="Q367329" url="?curid=723125" title="Incidence structure">
<text>In mathematics, an incidence structure is an abstract system consisting of two types of objects and a single relationship between these types of objects. Consider the points and lines of the Euclidean plane as the two types of objects and ignore all the properties of this geometry except for the relation of which points are incident on which lines for all points and lines. What is left is the incidence structure of the Euclidean plane.

Incidence structures are most often considered in the geometrical context where they are abstracted from, and hence generalize, planes (such as affine, projective, and Möbius planes), but the concept is very broad and not limited to geometric settings. Even in a geometric setting, incidence structures are not limited to just points and lines; higher-dimensional objects (planes, solids, -spaces, conics, etc.) can be used. The study of finite structures is sometimes called finite geometry.

==Formal definition and terminology==
An incidence structure is a triple () where is a set whose elements are called &quot;points&quot;, is a distinct set whose elements are called &quot;lines&quot; and is the incidence relation. The elements of are called flags. If () is in then one may say that point &quot;lies on&quot; line or that the line &quot;passes through&quot; point . A more &quot;symmetric&quot; terminology, to reflect the symmetric nature of this relation, is that &quot; is &quot;incident&quot; with &quot; or that &quot; is incident with &quot; and uses the notation synonymously with .

In some common situations may be a set of subsets of in which case incidence will be containment ( if and only if is a member of ). Incidence structures of this type are called &quot;set-theoretic&quot;. This is not always the case, for example, if is a set of vectors and a set of square matrices, we may define 
formula_1
This example also shows that while the geometric language of points and lines is used, the object types need not be these geometric objects.

==Examples==


An incidence structure is &quot;uniform&quot; if each line is incident with the same number of points. Each of these examples, except the second, is uniform with three points per line.

===Graphs===
Any graph (which need not be simple; loops and multiple edges are allowed) is a uniform incidence structure with two points per line. For these examples, the vertices of the graph form the point set, the edges of the graph form the line set, and incidence means that a vertex is an endpoint of an edge.

===Linear spaces===
Incidence structures are seldom studied in their full generality; it is typical to study incidence structures that satisfy some additional axioms. For instance, a &quot;partial linear space&quot; is an incidence structure that satisfies:
# Any two distinct points are incident with at most one common line, and
# Every line is incident with at least two points.
If the first axiom above is replaced by the stronger:
the incidence structure is called a &quot;linear space&quot;.

===Nets===
A more specialized example is a -net. This is an incidence structure in which the lines fall into parallel classes, so that two lines in the same parallel class have no common points, but two lines in different classes have exactly one common point, and each point belongs to exactly one line from each parallel class. An example of a -net is the set of points of an affine plane together with parallel classes of affine lines.

==Dual structure==

If we interchange the role of &quot;points&quot; and &quot;lines&quot; in
formula_2
we obtain the &quot;dual structure&quot;,
formula_3
where is the converse relation of . It follows immediately from the definition that:
formula_4

This is an abstract version of projective duality.

A structure that is isomorphic to its dual is called &quot;self-dual&quot;. The Fano plane above is a self-dual incidence structure.

== Other terminology ==

The concept of an incidence structure is very simple and has arisen in several disciplines, each introducing its own vocabulary and specifying the types of questions that are typically asked about these structures. Incidence structures use a geometric terminology, but in graph theoretic terms they are called hypergraphs and in design theoretic terms they are called block designs. They are also known as a &quot;set system&quot; or family of sets in a general context.

===Hypergraphs===
Each hypergraph or set system can be regarded as an incidence
structure in which the universal set plays the role of &quot;points&quot;, the corresponding family of subsets plays the role of &quot;lines&quot; and the incidence relation is set membership &quot;&quot;. Conversely, every incidence structure can be viewed as a hypergraph by identifying the lines with the sets of points that are incident with them.

===Block designs===

A (general) block design is a set together with a family of subsets of (repeated subsets are allowed). Normally a block design is required to satisfy numerical regularity conditions. As an incidence structure, is the set of points and is the set of lines, usually called &quot;blocks&quot; in this context (repeated blocks must have distinct names, so is actually a set and not a multiset). If all the subsets in have the same size, the block design is called &quot;uniform&quot;. If each element of appears in the same number of subsets, the block design is said to be &quot;regular&quot;. The dual of a uniform design is a regular design and vice versa.

====Example: Fano plane====
Consider the block design/hypergraph given by:
formula_5

This incidence structure is called the Fano plane. As a block design it is both uniform and regular.

In the labeling given, the lines are precisely the subsets of the points that consist of three points whose labels add up to zero using nim addition. Alternatively, each number, when written in binary, can be identified with a non-zero vector of length three over the binary field. Three vectors that generate a subspace form a line; in this case, that is equivalent to their vector sum being the zero vector.

==Representations==

Incidence structures may be represented in many ways. If the sets and are finite these representations can compactly encode all the relevant information concerning the structure.

===Incidence matrix===
The incidence matrix of a (finite) incidence structure is a (0,1) matrix that has its rows indexed by the points and columns indexed by the lines where the -th entry is a 1 if and 0 otherwise. An incidence matrix is not uniquely determined since it depends upon the arbitrary ordering of the points and the lines.

The non-uniform incidence structure pictured above (example number 2) is given by:
formula_6

An incidence matrix for this structure is:
formula_7
which corresponds to the incidence table:
If an incidence structure has an incidence matrix , then the dual structure has the transpose matrix T as its incidence matrix (and is defined by that matrix).

An incidence structure is self-dual if there exists an ordering of the points and lines so that the incidence matrix constructed with that ordering is a symmetric matrix.

With the labels as given in example number 1 above and with points ordered and lines ordered , the Fano plane has the incidence matrix:
formula_8
Since this is a symmetric matrix, the Fano plane is a self-dual incidence structure.

===Pictorial representations===
An incidence figure (that is, a depiction of an incidence structure), is constructed by representing the points by dots in a plane and having some visual means of joining the dots to correspond to lines. The dots may be placed in any manner, there are no restrictions on distances between points or any relationships between points. In an incidence structure there is no concept of a point being between two other points; the order of points on a line is undefined. Compare this with ordered geometry, which does have a notion of betweenness. The same statements can be made about the depictions of the lines. In particular, lines need not be depicted by &quot;straight line segments&quot; (see examples 1, 3 and 4 above). As with the pictorial representation of graphs, the crossing of two &quot;lines&quot; at any place other than a dot has no meaning in terms of the incidence structure; it is only an accident of the representation. These incidence figures may at times resemble graphs, but they aren&#x27;t graphs unless the incidence structure is a graph.

====Realizability====
Incidence structures can be modelled by points and curves in the Euclidean plane with the usual geometric meaning of incidence. Some incidence structures admit representation by points and (straight) lines. Structures that can be are called &quot;realizable&quot;. If no ambient space is mentioned then the Euclidean plane is assumed. The Fano plane (example 1 above) is not realizable since it needs at least one curve. The Möbius–Kantor configuration (example 4 above) is not realizable in the Euclidean plane, but it is realizable in the complex plane. On the other hand, examples 2 and 5 above are realizable and the incidence figures given there demonstrate this. Steinitz (1894) has shown that (incidence structures with points and lines, three points per line and three lines through each point) are either realizable or require the use of only one curved line in their representations. The Fano plane is the unique () and the Möbius–Kantor configuration is the unique ().

=== Incidence graph (Levi graph) ===

Each incidence structure corresponds to a bipartite graph called the Levi graph or incidence graph of the structure. As any bipartite graph is two-colorable, the Levi graph can be given a black and white vertex coloring, where black vertices correspond to points and white vertices correspond to lines of . The edges of this graph correspond to the flags (incident point/line pairs) of the incidence structure. The original Levi graph was the incidence graph of the generalized quadrangle of order two (example 3 above), but the term has been extended by H.S.M. Coxeter to refer to an incidence graph of any incidence structure.
====Levi graph examples ====

The Levi graph of the Fano plane is the Heawood graph. Since the Heawood graph is connected and vertex-transitive, there exists an automorphism (such as the one defined by a reflection about the vertical axis in the figure of the Heawood graph) interchanging black and white vertices. This, in turn, implies that the Fano plane is self-dual.

The specific representation, on the left, of the Levi graph of the Möbius–Kantor configuration (example 4 above) illustrates that a rotation of about the center (either clockwise or counterclockwise) of the diagram interchanges the blue and red vertices and maps edges to edges. That is to say that there exists a color interchanging automorphism of this graph. Consequently, the incidence structure known as the Möbius–Kantor configuration is self-dual.

==Generalization==
It is possible to generalize the notion of an incidence structure to include more than two types of objects. A structure with types of objects is called an &quot;incidence structure of rank&quot; or a &quot;rank&quot; &quot;geometry&quot;. Formally these are defined as tuples with and
formula_9

The Levi graph for these structures is defined as a multipartite graph with vertices corresponding to each type being colored the same.

==See also==

*Incidence (geometry)
*Incidence geometry
*Projective configuration
*Abstract polytope

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* CRC Press (2000). &quot;Handbook of discrete and combinatorial mathematics&quot;, (Chapter 12.2), 
* Harold L. Dorwart (1966) &quot;The Geometry of Incidence&quot;, Prentice Hall</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q367329" start="19" end="38" title="Incidence structure" label="incidence structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="167" end="172" title="Point (geometry)" label="point"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="178" end="182" title="Line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="191" end="206" title="Euclidean plane" label="Euclidean plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q130901" start="297" end="305" title="heterogeneous relation" label="relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671857" start="326" end="334" title="incident (geometry)" label="incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q382491" start="585" end="591" title="affine plane (incidence geometry)" label="affine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475760" start="593" end="603" title="projective plane" label="projective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392693" start="609" end="621" title="Möbius plane" label="Möbius plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="814" end="819" title="Plane (mathematics)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q207648" start="822" end="827" title="Solid geometry" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518149" start="839" end="845" title="Conical surface" label="conics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077896" start="917" end="932" title="finite geometry" label="finite geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671857" start="1145" end="1154" title="Incidence (geometry)" label="incidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q130901" start="1155" end="1163" title="heterogeneous relation" label="relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431134" start="1373" end="1382" title="Symmetry (mathematics)" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739329" start="1823" end="1838" title="square matrix" label="square matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="2225" end="2230" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="2250" end="2256" title="simple graph" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q512604" start="2258" end="2263" title="Loop (graph theory)" label="loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934937" start="2268" end="2282" title="multiple edges" label="multiple edges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140375" start="2714" end="2734" title="partial linear space" label="partial linear space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826459" start="3003" end="3015" title="linear space (geometry)" label="linear space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688946" start="3402" end="3414" title="affine plane" label="affine plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248241" start="3633" end="3650" title="converse relation" label="converse relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q735346" start="3747" end="3765" title="Duality (projective geometry)" label="projective duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="3788" end="3798" title="isomorphic" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="4199" end="4214" title="graph theory" label="graph theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840247" start="4237" end="4247" title="hypergraph" label="hypergraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q751484" start="4295" end="4307" title="block design" label="block design"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="4361" end="4375" title="family of sets" label="family of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q840247" start="4422" end="4432" title="hypergraph" label="hypergraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="4436" end="4446" title="set system" label="set system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378301" start="4502" end="4515" title="universal set" label="universal set"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="4572" end="4589" title="family of subsets" label="family of subsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="4656" end="4670" title="Element (mathematics)" label="set membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="4903" end="4920" title="Family of sets" label="family of subsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395814" start="5635" end="5645" title="Fano plane" label="Fano plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392819" start="5834" end="5846" title="nim addition" label="nim addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="5892" end="5898" title="binary number" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513324" start="5966" end="5978" title="GF(2)" label="binary field"/>
<link wikidata="Q728435" start="6010" end="6018" title="linear subspace" label="subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994977" start="6393" end="6405" title="(0,1) matrix" label="(0,1) matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="6921" end="6937" title="transpose matrix" label="transpose matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q339011" start="7151" end="7167" title="symmetric matrix" label="symmetric matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100712" start="7918" end="7934" title="ordered geometry" label="ordered geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="8197" end="8203" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="8584" end="8599" title="Euclidean plane" label="Euclidean plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="9060" end="9073" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q174733" start="9580" end="9595" title="bipartite graph" label="bipartite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535569" start="9607" end="9617" title="Levi graph" label="Levi graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q504843" start="9742" end="9757" title="graph coloring" label="vertex coloring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754558" start="10004" end="10026" title="generalized quadrangle" label="generalized quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129916" start="10093" end="10107" title="H.S.M. Coxeter" label="H.S.M. Coxeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395814" start="10219" end="10229" title="Fano plane" label="Fano plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046737" start="10237" end="10250" title="Heawood graph" label="Heawood graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q72897900" start="10279" end="10288" title="Connected graph" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071715" start="10293" end="10310" title="vertex-transitive" label="vertex-transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q782566" start="10328" end="10340" title="automorphism" label="automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718082" start="11364" end="11382" title="multipartite graph" label="multipartite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671857" start="11464" end="11484" title="Incidence (geometry)" label="Incidence (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582901" start="11486" end="11504" title="Incidence geometry" label="Incidence geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866689" start="11506" end="11530" title="Projective configuration" label="Projective configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669958" start="11532" end="11549" title="Abstract polytope" label="Abstract polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="11790" end="11803" title="Prentice Hall" label="Prentice Hall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723126" wikidata="Q41422" url="?curid=723126" title="Mark Ruffalo">
<text>Mark Alan Ruffalo (; born November 22, 1967) is an American actor. He began acting in the late 1980s and first gained recognition for his work in Kenneth Lonergan&#x27;s play &quot;This Is Our Youth&quot; (1996) and drama film &quot;You Can Count on Me&quot; (2000). He went on to star in the romantic comedies &quot;13 Going on 30&quot; (2004) and &quot;Just like Heaven&quot; (2005), and the thrillers &quot;In the Cut&quot; (2003), &quot;Zodiac&quot; (2007), and &quot;Shutter Island&quot; (2010). He received a Tony Award nomination for his supporting role in the Broadway revival of &quot;Awake and Sing!&quot; in 2006. Ruffalo has gained international recognition for playing Bruce Banner / The Hulk since 2012 in the superhero franchise of the Marvel Cinematic Universe.

Ruffalo earned a record-tying four nominations for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for playing a sperm donor in the comedy-drama &quot;The Kids Are All Right&quot; (2010), Dave Schultz in the biopic &quot;Foxcatcher&quot; (2014), Michael Rezendes in the drama &quot;Spotlight&quot; (2015), and a debauched lawyer in the comic fantasy &quot;Poor Things&quot; (2023). He won a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor for playing a gay activist in the television drama film &quot;The Normal Heart&quot; (2015), and a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor for his dual role as identical twins in the miniseries &quot;I Know This Much Is True&quot; (2020).

== Early life ==
Mark Alan Ruffalo was born on November 22, 1967, in Kenosha, Wisconsin. His mother, Marie Rose (), is a hairdresser and stylist, while his father, Frank Lawrence Ruffalo Jr., worked as a construction painter. He has two sisters, Tanya Marie (died 2023) and Nicole, and a brother, Scott (died 2008). His father is of Italian descent, from Girifalco, Calabria, and his mother is of French Canadian and Italian ancestry. His father was a Bahai, while his mother was Christian. &quot;I grew up in a household that had three religions in it, (born-again) Christianity, Catholicism and Bahai&#x27;ism, so there were different viewpoints and a lot of debate about that, and I immediately began to understand that all these people that I loved very much had very strong feelings about faith, but all of them were valid to me. I felt that none of them, my grandmother, my father or my mother, was better or worse than the other.&quot;

Ruffalo attended both Catholic and progressive schools throughout his education. Ruffalo has described himself as having been a &quot;happy kid&quot;, although he struggled with undiagnosed dyslexia and ADHD as a child and a young adult.

Ruffalo spent his teen years in Virginia Beach, Virginia, where his father worked. He competed in wrestling in junior high and high school in Wisconsin and Virginia. Ruffalo graduated from First Colonial High School in Virginia Beach in 1986, where he acted for the Patriot Playhouse. He moved with his family to San Diego, California, and later to Los Angeles, where he took classes at the Stella Adler Conservatory and co-founded the Orpheus Theatre Company. With the theater company, he wrote, directed, and starred in a number of plays. He also spent close to a decade working as a bartender.

==Career==
=== 1989–2002: Early roles and theatre debut ===
He made his screen debut in an episode of &quot;CBS Summer Playhouse&quot; (1989), followed by minor film roles. Ruffalo played &#x27;Vinnie Webber&#x27;, a minor character in Series 1 Episode 9 of &quot;Due South&quot;, first broadcast in Canada in 1994. During this time he made his film debut in the horror film &quot;Mirror, Mirror II: Raven Dance&quot; (1994) followed by &quot;Mirror, Mirror III: The Voyeur&quot; (1995). He starred as Warren Straub in the original cast of the Kenneth Lonergan play &quot;This Is Our Youth&quot; (1996) off-Broadway. Lonergan was a founding member of Naked Angels, a theater company that Ruffalo also belonged to. Ruffalo acted opposite Josh Hamilton and Missy Yager. Ruffalo had minor roles in films including &quot;The Dentist&quot; (1996), the low-key crime comedy &quot;Safe Men&quot; (1998), and Ang Lee&#x27;s Civil War western &quot;Ride with the Devil&quot; (1999).

Ruffalo reunited with Kenneth Lonergan acting in his film &quot;You Can Count on Me&quot; (2000). Ruffalo portrayed Laura Linney&#x27;s character&#x27;s brother. The film received critical acclaim and two Academy Award nominations. He received favorable reviews for his performance in this film, often earning comparisons to the young Marlon Brando, and won awards from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association and Montreal World Film Festival. His next role was in 2001 in Rod Lurie&#x27;s &quot;The Last Castle&quot; playing a bookie in a military prison alongside Robert Redford. It led to other supporting roles, including the films &quot;XX/XY&quot; (2002), Isabel Coixet&#x27;s &quot;My Life Without Me&quot;, John Woo&#x27;s &quot;Windtalkers&quot; (2003), Jane Campion&#x27;s &quot;In the Cut&quot; (2003) and &quot;We Don&#x27;t Live Here Anymore&quot; (2004).

=== 2003–2009: Established actor ===

In the mid-2000s, Ruffalo appeared as a romantic lead in numerous romantic comedies starting with &quot;View from the Top&quot; (2003) starring Gwyneth Paltrow. He then starred opposite Jennifer Garner in &quot;13 Going on 30&quot; (2004) which has since become a cult classic. That same year he also acted in Michel Gondry&#x27;s romantic fantasy drama &quot;Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind&quot; (2004) starring Kate Winslet and Jim Carrey. In the film Ruffalo plays a supporting role as Stan who is a technician in charge of erasing people&#x27;s memories of each other. That same year he acted opposite Jamie Foxx and Tom Cruise as a narcotics detective in Michael Mann&#x27;s crime thriller &quot;Collateral&quot; (2004). Todd McCarthy of &quot;Variety&quot; praised Ruffalo writing, &quot; [He] provides an extra dimension of intelligence to what initially looks like a stock cop role.&quot; He starred in &quot;Just Like Heaven&quot; (2005) with Reese Witherspoon which was adapted from the French novel by Marc Levy entitled &quot;If Only It Were True&quot;. That same year he acted in the Rob Reiner romantic comedy &quot;Rumor Has It&quot; (2005) starring Jennifer Aniston, Kevin Costner and Shirley MacLaine.

In 2006 he starred in the political drama remake &quot;All the King&#x27;s Men&quot; acting opposite Sean Penn, Kate Winslet, Jude Law, and Anthony Hopkins. The film was adapted by Steven Zaillian based on the Robert Penn Warren 1946 novel of the same name. Also in 2006, Ruffalo made his Broadway debut starring as Moe Axelrod in Clifford Odets&#x27;s &quot;Awake and Sing!&quot; at the Belasco Theatre in New York. Ruffalo acted alongside Lauren Ambrose, Pablo Schreiber and Zoe Wanamaker. Charles Isherwood of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote of his performance, &quot;Nobody slings it with more panache than Mark Ruffalo, the soulful movie and stage actor making his Broadway debut here.&quot; David Rooney of &quot;Variety&quot; wrote &quot;The most arresting work onstage comes from Ruffalo, channeling prickly charm into a proud man who uses glib aggression to camouflage his frustration. Ruffalo’s scenes with Ambrose are the drama’s most electric moments&quot;. The role earned him a nomination for Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play.

In March 2007, he appeared in David Fincher&#x27;s crime thriller &quot;Zodiac&quot; as SFPD homicide inspector Dave Toschi, who ran the investigation to find and apprehend the Zodiac killer from 1969 through most of the 1970s. Ruffalo acted opposite Jake Gyllenhaal and Robert Downey Jr.. Critic Roger Ebert described Ruffalo&#x27;s performance writing, &quot;Ruffalo plays him not as a hotshot but as a dogged officer who does things by the book because he believes in the book&quot;. Toschi was role model for the Clint Eastwood film &quot;Dirty Harry&quot;. That same year, Ruffalo played divorced lawyer Dwight Arno, who accidentally kills a child and speeds away, in Terry George&#x27;s film &quot;Reservation Road&quot;, based on the novel by John Burnham Schwartz. In 2008, Ruffalo starred as a con man in &quot;The Brothers Bloom&quot; with Adrien Brody and Rachel Weisz and co-starred with Julianne Moore in &quot;Blindness&quot;. 2008 also saw Ruffalo in Brian Goodman&#x27;s &quot;What Doesn&#x27;t Kill You&quot; with Ethan Hawke and Amanda Peet, which was shown at the Toronto International Film Festival. In 2009, he played a brief role in the film &quot;Where the Wild Things Are&quot; as Max&#x27;s mother&#x27;s boyfriend.

=== 2010–2019: Acclaim and &quot;Marvel&quot; films ===

Ruffalo directed a number of plays during his time at the Orpheus Theatre Company, and made his feature film directorial debut with 2010 indie film &quot;Sympathy for Delicious&quot; starring Juliette Lewis, Laura Linney and Ruffalo, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival and won the Special Jury Prize. In March 2010, Ruffalo signed with the Creative Artists Agency (CAA); in June 2010, he signed on with the United Talent Agency (UTA).

In 2010, he co-starred in the Martin Scorsese thriller &quot;Shutter Island&quot; as U.S. Marshal Chuck Aule, the partner of Leonardo DiCaprio&#x27;s character Teddy Daniels. Also in 2010, he starred in Lisa Cholodenko&#x27;s &quot;The Kids Are All Right&quot;, with Annette Bening and Julianne Moore. Ruffalo stated in an interview that he approached Cholodenko after watching &quot;High Art&quot; and said he would love to work with her. Years later, she called Ruffalo and said she wrote a script and had him in mind for the part. Justin Lowe of &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; praised all three leads for their chemistry and performances writing, &quot;Moore, Bening and Ruffalo all deliver endearingly quirky comic performances&quot;. His role earned him an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor.
Ruffalo starred in &quot;The Avengers&quot; (2012), the sixth installment of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, replacing Edward Norton as Dr. Bruce Banner / The Hulk. Peter Bradshaw of &quot;The Guardian&quot; praised Ruffalo&#x27;s work writing, &quot;Ruffalo actually makes Bruce and Hulk interesting, even droll characters (he also plays the monster in mo-cap), superior to the Eric Bana and Edward Norton incarnations, and his version ingeniously locates the big green monster&#x27;s secret not in the over-rehearsed subject of &quot;anger management&quot; but depression and self-hate.&quot; He reprised the role again in &quot;Iron Man 3&quot; (2013), and in &quot;&quot; (2015).

In 2013, he starred in the romantic comedy &quot;Begin Again&quot; acting alongside Keira Knightley. The film received positive reviews and was a financial success. The following year, Ruffalo starred as Ned Weeks in the HBO television adaptation of Larry Kramer&#x27;s AIDS-era play, &quot;The Normal Heart&quot; (2014), his performance earned him an Emmy nomination. He says he has had an outpouring of support for his performance: 

Also in 2014, Ruffalo received his second Academy Award nomination for his portrayal of wrestler Dave Schultz in the biographical drama &quot;Foxcatcher&quot; directed by Bennett Miller. Ruffalo co-starred alongside Steve Carell, Channing Tatum, and Vanessa Redgrave. Peter Bradshaw of &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote of their performances, &quot;Tatum and Ruffalo, as Mark and Dave, have outdone themselves. These actors give what seems to me the most compelling portrayal of brothers since Joe Pesci and Robert De Niro in Scorsese’s &quot;Raging Bull&quot;.&quot; The next year in 2015, he starred as a father of two with bipolar disorder in the independent comedy film &quot;Infinitely Polar Bear&quot;, for which he earned a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy nomination.

Also in 2015, he portrayed journalist Michael Rezendes in the drama film &quot;Spotlight&quot;, for which he earned his third Academy Award nomination and a BAFTA Award nomination. Ruffalo acted opposite Michael Keaton, Rachel McAdams, John Slattery, and Liev Schreiber. Ruffalo told &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; that he met with Rezendes and studied him as research for the film saying, &quot;I spent a lot of time with the real journalist, I had meals with him. I talked with him for hours. I sat next to him at work, I watched him work the phones. I watched him write his stories. I talked to him about his life and his family. I had him give me tours of Boston. As much as I could soak him up seemed to be the most important part.&quot;.

The following year he portrayed Agent Dylan Rhoades in &quot;Now You See Me 2&quot; (2016) and executive produced the romantic drama &quot;Anything&quot; (2017). He returned to Broadway in the revival of the Arthur Miller play &quot;The Price&quot; (2017) at the American Airlines Theatre. Ruffalo acted opposite Danny DeVito and Tony Shalhoub. Marilyn Stasio of &quot;Variety&quot; wrote, &quot;Ruffalo and DeVito clearly get a kick out of the buying and selling rituals of Victor and Solomon. There is warmth in their tones and mutual respect in their exchange of confidences&quot;.

In 2019, he starred as Robert Bilott in the Todd Haynes directed legal thriller &quot;Dark Waters&quot; which he also produced. The film co-starred Anne Hathaway, Tim Robbins, Bill Pullman, and Victor Garber. During this time he reprised his role of Bruce Banner in &quot;&quot; (2017), &quot;&quot; (2018), &quot;Captain Marvel&quot; (2019), and &quot;&quot; (2019). He has been noted for spoiling the endings of &quot;Avengers: Infinity War&quot; a year ahead of theatrical release, as well as &quot;Avengers: Endgame&quot; a few weeks ahead of release.

=== 2020–present ===
In 2020, Ruffalo portrayed dual roles of Dominick Birdsey / Thomas Birdsey in the HBO limited series &quot;I Know This Much Is True&quot; where he also served as an executive producer. Daniel D&#x27;Addario of &quot;Variety&quot; wrote, &quot;Ruffalo’s performances carry the series. This is his two-man show, with supporting characters glimmering in and out&quot;. For his role he earned the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie. Ruffalo has continued to appear as Bruce Banner / The Hulk in &quot;Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings&quot; (2021) and in the Disney+ series &quot;She-Hulk: Attorney at Law&quot; (2022). In 2022 he acted in the Netflix science fiction action comedy &quot;The Adam Project&quot; opposite Ryan Reynolds, Jennifer Garner, and Zoe Saldana.

In 2023, he starred in the Yorgos Lanthimos directed black comedy fantasy film &quot;Poor Things&quot; starring Emma Stone and Willem Dafoe. The film premiered at the Venice International Film Festival where it received the Golden Lion. Maureen Lee Lenker of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; wrote, &quot;Ruffalo appears to be having the time of his life, chewing the scenery with a manic glee. He&#x27;s built a career playing solid, decent men, and what fun it is to watch him play a reprobate cad [and] a puffed-up vainglorious peacock, a man whose ego is the size of an entire continent&quot;. He received Critics&#x27; Choice, Golden Globe, and Academy Award nominations for his performance. The same year, he played Daniel LeBlanc in the Netflix miniseries &quot;All the Light We Cannot See&quot; (2023). The series is based on Anthony Doerr&#x27;s Pulitzer Prize winning novel of the same name and was released November 2, 2023.

In 2025, he is set to portray Hieronymous Marshall in the Bong Joon-ho directed science fiction film &quot;Mickey 17&quot;. Ruffalo will act opposite Robert Pattinson, Steven Yeun, and Toni Collette. The film is based on the novel &quot;Mickey7&quot; by Edward Ashton.

==Personal life==
Ruffalo married Sunrise Coigney in 2000. They have three children.

After completing work on the film &quot;The Last Castle&quot;, Ruffalo was diagnosed with a vestibular schwannoma, a type of brain tumor also known as an acoustic neuroma. The tumor was found to be benign; however, the surgery to remove the mass resulted in partial facial paralysis and affected his hearing. The paralysis subsided after a year, but Ruffalo remains deaf in his left ear.

On December 1, 2008, Ruffalo&#x27;s younger brother, Scott, was found outside his home on North Palm Drive in Beverly Hills with an execution-style bullet wound to the head. Scott was taken to a hospital, but died the following week. The case remains unsolved.

Ruffalo and his family live in Sullivan County, New York, and he describes the Catskills as his &quot;home&quot;. Ruffalo also owns two apartments in New York City, one for business and another as an investment. Ruffalo&#x27;s mother and stepfather live in Boothbay Harbor, Maine, where he and his family occasionally spend their summers.

In May 2022, Ruffalo was sued by residents of Ellenville, New York, for not cleaning up a fire that broke out on the set of a car dealership that was used as a location for &quot;I Know This Much Is True&quot;. The lawsuit claims that the residents suffered physical and emotional injuries and added that the fire caused damage to their homes and exposed them to toxic fumes.

== Activism and political views ==
===Politics===
In the 2016 election, Ruffalo supported Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders. While on &quot;The Late Show with Stephen Colbert&quot;, Ruffalo endorsed Senator Bernie Sanders for president in the 2020 United States presidential election, stating &quot;you know when he gets in the office, he is going to be fighting for us&quot;. In June 2017, Ruffalo posted a petition on Twitter urging NBC to stop hiring white conservative commentators.

Ruffalo endorsed Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn in the 2017 UK general election. He tweeted: &quot;Because @jeremycorbyn offers people an alternative to the Corporate status quo, which never ends well for them, I humbly endorse Corbyn.&quot; Ruffalo signed a letter supporting Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn, which described him as &quot;a beacon of hope in the struggle against emergent far-right nationalism, xenophobia and racism in much of the democratic world&quot; and endorsed him for in the 2019 UK general election.

In November 2021, Ruffalo criticized the not-guilty ruling in the case of Kyle Rittenhouse in his hometown of Kenosha, Wisconsin, and said the people shot by Rittenhouse were murdered. In April 2022, Ruffalo urged voters to check voter ID requirements in their states through posts to his social media. Ruffalo cited VoteRiders as a source of assistance for voter ID requirements across the United States.

In 2024, Ruffalo endorsed the Green Party of British Columbia in the provincial elections.

===Environmentalism===
In 2008, Ruffalo expressed concern that gas companies were eyeing his family&#x27;s land in Callicoon, New York. &quot;New York&quot; magazine wrote that Ruffalo, after doing his own investigation, became &quot;anti-fracking&#x27;s first famous face&quot;. On October 4, 2010, Ruffalo appeared on &quot;The Rachel Maddow Show&quot; to discuss hydraulic fracturing and the FRAC Act of 2009. He claimed in the December 2010 issue of &quot;GQ&quot; that after he organized screenings in Pennsylvania of a documentary about natural-gas drilling called &quot;Gasland&quot;, he was placed on a terror advisory list. The Pennsylvania Governor&#x27;s Office of Homeland Security denied the claim.

In March 2016, Ruffalo narrated and produced &quot;Dear President Obama: The Clean Energy Revolution Is Now&quot;, a documentary by director Jon Bowermaster which looks at President Barack Obama&#x27;s environmental tenure and legacy concerning the massive expansion of oil and natural-gas drilling. In October 2017, Ruffalo actively supported the Standing Rock Indian Reservation in their opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline project.

In 2019, Ruffalo starred in and co-produced &quot;Dark Waters&quot;, which spotlighted another one of his environmental concerns with its true-life depiction of a corporate lawyer&#x27;s relentless pursuit of justice to expose poisonous pollution by chemical behemoth DuPont. In June 2020, Ruffalo appeared in a webinar conference for the Irish Green Party to encourage members to accept the recently negotiated programme for government, agreed between the party, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil.

In 2020, Ruffalo praised the closure of the Indian Point Nuclear Power Plant, and called for the closure of additional nuclear power plants.

===Anti-war activism===
In October 2019, Ruffalo tweeted that &quot;until George W. Bush is brought to justice for the crimes of the Iraq War, (including American-led torture, Iraqi deaths &amp; displacement, and the deep scars—emotional &amp; otherwise—inflicted on our military that served his folly), we can&#x27;t even begin to talk about kindness.&quot;

In October 2020, speaking to Mehdi Hasan, Ruffalo condemned what he called Israel&#x27;s &quot;asymmetrical warfare&quot; against the Palestinians, stating, &quot;There is no reason that an ally of America should not be held to the same standards as any other nation in the world.&quot; Ruffalo also related that he had been called an antisemite for his views, saying, &quot;[It&#x27;s] really tough to hear. And the fact that so many people will take it to that extreme, when you&#x27;re talking about that kind of inequality, that kind of oppression, that kind of apartheid.&quot;

While Ruffalo posted numerous tweets critical of Israel during the 11-day conflict between it and Hamas in May 2021, he ultimately tweeted an apology for suggesting Israel was committing genocide, stating, &quot;It’s not accurate, it’s inflammatory, disrespectful &amp; is being used to justify antisemitism here &amp; abroad.&quot;

Ruffalo signed an October 2023 open letter of Artists4Ceasefire during the Israeli bombardment of Gaza. In November 2023, Ruffalo criticized the prime minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, for describing the civilian deaths during the Israeli attacks on Gaza as &quot;collateral damage&quot;. At the 96th Academy Awards, Ruffalo was one of several celebrities wearing an &quot;Artists Call for Ceasefire Now&quot; pin on his lapel, which Seth Mandel, writing in &quot;Commentary&quot;, said was meant to valorize the murderers of Jews. Ruffalo called out in support of protestors blocking the red carpet at the Awards.

In September 2024, Mark Ruffalo, alongside Susan Sarandon, Cynthia Nixon, and Rosie O&#x27;Donnell, signed an open letter from SAG-AFTRA and Sister Guild Members calling for a ceasefire and condemning the “industry&#x27;s McCarthyist repression of members who acknowledge Palestinian suffering.” This letter followed the firing of Melissa Barrera from the &quot;Scream&quot; franchise in November, due to her comments on the Israel–Hamas War, in which she expressed support for Palestine.

===Civil rights===
Ruffalo is pro-choice. He has explained his opinion by saying: &quot;I don&#x27;t want to turn back the hands of time to when women shuttled across state lines in the thick of night to resolve an unwanted pregnancy, in a cheap hotel room.&quot; Ruffalo has called for an economic revolution, saying that &quot;capitalism today is failing us, killing us, and robbing from our children&#x27;s future.&quot;

He has shown support for the LGBT community; however, he has received backlash from the transgender community for supporting the casting of Matt Bomer, a cisgender man, to play a trans woman in the film &quot;Anything&quot;, on which Ruffalo was an executive producer.

In 2015, Ruffalo supported the &quot;Education Is Not a Crime&quot; campaign alongside other artists and intellectuals, including Nazanin Boniadi, Abbas Milani, Mohsen Makhmalbaf, Azar Nafisi, Omid Djalili, Eva LaRue, Mohammad Maleki (former president of the University of Tehran), and Nobel Peace laureates such as Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Shirin Ebadi, Tawakkol Karman, Jody Williams, and Mairead Maguire, to draw attention to the Iranian government&#x27;s systematic denial of university education to young Baha&#x27;is.

===Historic preservation===
In 2023, Ruffalo sought to block the sale of the West Park Presbyterian Church, a city landmark built in the 1880s, to prevent its demolition and construction of housing in its place. The congregation said it could not afford the cost of maintaining the deteriorating church building and wanted to use the proceeds of the sale for charity work. He lives in the church neighborhood and has started a campaign to raise money for the building.

===Conspiracy theories===
In 2007, Ruffalo expressed views in line with the 9/11 truth movement when he stated: &quot;I&#x27;m baffled by the way all three buildings came down. My first reaction was that buildings don&#x27;t fall down like that.&quot;

February 2016, Ruffalo tweeted a &quot;Tech Times&quot; article in which a group of Argentinian doctors attributed the cause of a microcephaly outbreak in Brazil to the use of a larvicide chemical added to reservoirs of drinking water to combat dengue fever, rather than the Zika virus. &quot;The New York Times&quot; described the claim as &quot;dubious&quot; and stated that those &quot;sounding the alarm&quot;, did not mention that the larvicide did not work through the central nervous system and that it has been approved by the World Health Organization.

==Acting credits and awards==
Ruffalo has had a range of credits on screen and stage, including several performances of varying genresmostly as a supporting actor. With nominations for the Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony, Ruffalo is one of a selected few performers to be nominated for the four major entertainment awards in the US (EGOT).

=== Awards ===
His EGOT recognitions are:

*Emmy Awards 3 nominations, 2 wins
**2014 Outstanding Television Movie &quot;The Normal Heart&quot; (win)
**2014 Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie &quot;The Normal Heart&quot; (nomination)
**2020 Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie &quot;I Know This Much Is True&quot; (win)
*Grammy Awards 1 nomination
**2018 Best Spoken Word Album &quot;Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In&quot; (nomination)
*Academy Awards (Oscar) 4 nominations
**2011 Best Supporting Actor &quot;The Kids Are All Right&quot; (nomination)
**2015 Best Supporting Actor &quot;Foxcatcher&quot; (nomination)
**2016 Best Supporting Actor &quot;Spotlight&quot; (nomination)
**2024 Best Supporting Actor &quot;Poor Things&quot; (nomination)
*Tony Awards 1 nomination
**2006 Best Featured Actor in a Play &quot;Awake and Sing!&quot; (nomination)

==== Credits ====
On February 8, 2024, accompanied by his wife Sunrise Coigney as well as the two elder of his three children, Ruffalo received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

== Audiobook ==
* 2016: &quot;Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In&quot; (together with Bernie Sanders, the author), Macmillan Audio, 

==See also==
*List of actors with Academy Award nominations
*List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Mark Ruffalo – People in Film at Focus Features
* Mark Ruffalo interview clips on Inside the Actors Studio
* Mark Ruffalo producer profile for The 1 Second Film</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41422" start="0" end="17" title="Mark Ruffalo" label="Mark Alan Ruffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q968840" start="146" end="162" title="Kenneth Lonergan" label="Kenneth Lonergan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524766" start="181" end="198" title="This Is Our Youth" label="This Is Our Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300341" start="233" end="252" title="You Can Count on Me" label="You Can Count on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q224187" start="317" end="331" title="13 Going on 30" label="13 Going on 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q75539" start="355" end="371" title="Just like Heaven (2005 film)" label="Just like Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q59572" start="410" end="420" title="In the Cut (film)" label="In the Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q218172" start="441" end="447" title="Zodiac (film)" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q210364" start="472" end="486" title="Shutter Island (film)" label="Shutter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474410" start="515" end="525" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="568" end="576" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829711" start="594" end="609" title="Awake and Sing!" label="Awake and Sing!"/>
<link wikidata="Q24050117" start="682" end="705" title="Bruce Banner (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Bruce Banner / The Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="751" end="776" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="834" end="873" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q380841" start="926" end="948" title="The Kids Are All Right (film)" label="The Kids Are All Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q713802" start="963" end="975" title="Dave Schultz (amateur wrestling)" label="Dave Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477105" start="996" end="1006" title="Foxcatcher" label="Foxcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833826" start="1021" end="1037" title="Michael Rezendes" label="Michael Rezendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154496" start="1057" end="1066" title="Spotlight (film)" label="Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760382" start="1131" end="1142" title="Poor Things (film)" label="Poor Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665878" start="1166" end="1206" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039861" start="1269" end="1285" title="The Normal Heart (film)" label="The Normal Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548735" start="1306" end="1353" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749344" start="1415" end="1439" title="I Know This Much Is True (miniseries)" label="I Know This Much Is True"/>
<link wikidata="Q462161" start="1524" end="1542" title="Kenosha, Wisconsin" label="Kenosha, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="1788" end="1795" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q53528" start="1810" end="1819" title="Girifalco" label="Girifalco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="1821" end="1829" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="1852" end="1867" title="French Canadians" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="1907" end="1912" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Bahai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="2421" end="2429" title="Catholic school" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q834933" start="2434" end="2445" title="Progressive education" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="2589" end="2597" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993146" start="2602" end="2606" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder predominantly inattentive" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="2670" end="2694" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452754" start="2827" end="2853" title="First Colonial High School" label="First Colonial High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="2951" end="2960" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2987" end="2998" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607037" start="3029" end="3054" title="Stella Adler Conservatory" label="Stella Adler Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q808266" start="3224" end="3233" title="bartender" label="bartender"/>
<link wikidata="Q860038" start="3344" end="3364" title="CBS Summer Playhouse" label="CBS Summer Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q24620" start="3500" end="3509" title="Due South" label="Due South"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3617" end="3647" title="Mirror, Mirror II: Raven Dance" label="Mirror, Mirror II: Raven Dance"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3679" end="3709" title="Mirror, Mirror III: The Voyeur" label="Mirror, Mirror III: The Voyeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q968840" start="3780" end="3796" title="Kenneth Lonergan" label="Kenneth Lonergan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524766" start="3808" end="3825" title="This Is Our Youth" label="This Is Our Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960439" start="3887" end="3899" title="Naked Angels (theater company)" label="Naked Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q641352" start="3973" end="3986" title="Josh Hamilton (actor)" label="Josh Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q601947" start="4053" end="4064" title="The Dentist" label="The Dentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398493" start="4110" end="4118" title="Safe Men" label="Safe Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q160726" start="4137" end="4144" title="Ang Lee" label="Ang Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4152" end="4161" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="4162" end="4169" title="Western (genre)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q669578" start="4176" end="4195" title="Ride with the Devil (film)" label="Ride with the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300341" start="4275" end="4294" title="You Can Count on Me" label="You Can Count on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q223281" start="4327" end="4339" title="Laura Linney" label="Laura Linney"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="4416" end="4429" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="4546" end="4559" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638418" start="4585" end="4621" title="Los Angeles Film Critics Association" label="Los Angeles Film Critics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q326220" start="4626" end="4654" title="Montreal World Film Festival" label="Montreal World Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q432655" start="4685" end="4694" title="Rod Lurie" label="Rod Lurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218847" start="4708" end="4723" title="The Last Castle" label="The Last Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q59215" start="4778" end="4792" title="Robert Redford" label="Robert Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053346" start="4854" end="4859" title="XX/XY" label="XX/XY"/>
<link wikidata="Q232273" start="4874" end="4887" title="Isabel Coixet" label="Isabel Coixet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83630" start="4901" end="4919" title="My Life Without Me" label="My Life Without Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432" start="4927" end="4935" title="John Woo" label="John Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145275" start="4949" end="4960" title="Windtalkers" label="Windtalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q230448" start="4975" end="4987" title="Jane Campion" label="Jane Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q59572" start="5001" end="5011" title="In the Cut (film)" label="In the Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604555" start="5035" end="5066" title="We Don&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore" label="We Don&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q645169" start="5224" end="5241" title="View from the Top" label="View from the Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="5264" end="5279" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172044" start="5306" end="5321" title="Jennifer Garner" label="Jennifer Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q224187" start="5331" end="5345" title="13 Going on 30" label="13 Going on 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="5384" end="5396" title="cult classic" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q126098" start="5430" end="5443" title="Michel Gondry" label="Michel Gondry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208269" start="5480" end="5517" title="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" label="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="5540" end="5552" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="5557" end="5567" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="5733" end="5743" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="5748" end="5758" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q270097" start="5787" end="5799" title="Michael Mann (film director)" label="Michael Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q110203" start="5828" end="5838" title="Collateral (film)" label="Collateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="5876" end="5883" title="Variety (website)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q75539" start="6044" end="6060" title="Just like Heaven (2005 film)" label="Just Like Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q44063" start="6079" end="6096" title="Reese Witherspoon" label="Reese Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q176246" start="6140" end="6149" title="Marc Levy" label="Marc Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064945" start="6165" end="6185" title="If Only It Were True" label="If Only It Were True"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="6224" end="6234" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330571" start="6257" end="6269" title="Rumor Has It (film)" label="Rumor Has It"/>
<link wikidata="Q32522" start="6292" end="6308" title="Jennifer Aniston" label="Jennifer Aniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11930" start="6310" end="6323" title="Kevin Costner" label="Kevin Costner"/>
<link wikidata="Q95026" start="6328" end="6344" title="Shirley MacLaine" label="Shirley MacLaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q581964" start="6402" end="6425" title="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men (2006 film)" label="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="6448" end="6457" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="6459" end="6471" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="6473" end="6481" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="6487" end="6502" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q291141" start="6528" end="6543" title="Steven Zaillian" label="Steven Zaillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q312720" start="6557" end="6575" title="Robert Penn Warren" label="Robert Penn Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978467" start="6576" end="6603" title="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men" label="1946 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="6636" end="6644" title="Broadway (theatre)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q734944" start="6678" end="6692" title="Clifford Odets" label="Clifford Odets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829711" start="6706" end="6721" title="Awake and Sing!" label="Awake and Sing!"/>
<link wikidata="Q815278" start="6735" end="6750" title="Belasco Theatre" label="Belasco Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q232098" start="6788" end="6802" title="Lauren Ambrose" label="Lauren Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q26173" start="6804" end="6819" title="Pablo Schreiber" label="Pablo Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q227142" start="6824" end="6837" title="Zoe Wanamaker" label="Zoe Wanamaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079309" start="6839" end="6856" title="Charles Isherwood" label="Charles Isherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6866" end="6884" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="7071" end="7078" title="Variety (website)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474410" start="7359" end="7403" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="7436" end="7449" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q218172" start="7478" end="7484" title="Zodiac (film)" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296847" start="7518" end="7529" title="Dave Toschi" label="Dave Toschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218148" start="7583" end="7596" title="Zodiac killer" label="Zodiac killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q133313" start="7657" end="7672" title="Jake Gyllenhaal" label="Jake Gyllenhaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="7677" end="7694" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="7703" end="7714" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="7923" end="7937" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q110206" start="7949" end="7960" title="Dirty Harry" label="Dirty Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392079" start="8079" end="8091" title="Terry George" label="Terry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q782734" start="8110" end="8126" title="Reservation Road" label="Reservation Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136311" start="8156" end="8177" title="John Burnham Schwartz" label="John Burnham Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q990840" start="8226" end="8244" title="The Brothers Bloom" label="The Brothers Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104514" start="8256" end="8268" title="Adrien Brody" label="Adrien Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q134077" start="8273" end="8285" title="Rachel Weisz" label="Rachel Weisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80405" start="8306" end="8320" title="Julianne Moore" label="Julianne Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q838405" start="8330" end="8339" title="Blindness (2008 film)" label="Blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963861" start="8372" end="8385" title="Brian Goodman" label="Brian Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q598262" start="8399" end="8425" title="What Doesn&amp;#x27;t Kill You (film)" label="What Doesn&amp;#x27;t Kill You"/>
<link wikidata="Q484615" start="8437" end="8448" title="Ethan Hawke" label="Ethan Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131332" start="8453" end="8464" title="Amanda Peet" label="Amanda Peet"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="8489" end="8524" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q622742" start="8576" end="8601" title="Where the Wild Things Are (film)" label="Where the Wild Things Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="8842" end="8852" title="indie film" label="indie film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507578" start="8859" end="8881" title="Sympathy for Delicious" label="Sympathy for Delicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q230523" start="8897" end="8911" title="Juliette Lewis" label="Juliette Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223281" start="8913" end="8925" title="Laura Linney" label="Laura Linney"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="8962" end="8984" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002407" start="9056" end="9079" title="Creative Artists Agency" label="Creative Artists Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893586" start="9123" end="9143" title="United Talent Agency" label="United Talent Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="9182" end="9197" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q210364" start="9213" end="9227" title="Shutter Island (film)" label="Shutter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="9277" end="9294" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q258525" start="9355" end="9370" title="Lisa Cholodenko" label="Lisa Cholodenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q380841" start="9384" end="9406" title="The Kids Are All Right (film)" label="The Kids Are All Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q190602" start="9419" end="9433" title="Annette Bening" label="Annette Bening"/>
<link wikidata="Q80405" start="9438" end="9452" title="Julianne Moore" label="Julianne Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617727" start="9536" end="9544" title="High Art" label="High Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="9707" end="9729" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="9918" end="9931" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="9947" end="9968" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182218" start="9995" end="10007" title="The Avengers (2012 film)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="10051" end="10076" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q125904" start="10088" end="10101" title="Edward Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24050117" start="10109" end="10132" title="Bruce Banner (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Bruce Banner / The Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376474" start="10134" end="10148" title="Peter Bradshaw" label="Peter Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10158" end="10170" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440" start="10348" end="10357" title="Eric Bana" label="Eric Bana"/>
<link wikidata="Q209538" start="10600" end="10610" title="Iron Man 3" label="Iron Man 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935739" start="10703" end="10714" title="Begin Again (film)" label="Begin Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="10738" end="10753" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="10875" end="10878" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q653366" start="10904" end="10916" title="Larry Kramer" label="Larry Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="10924" end="10928" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039861" start="10945" end="10961" title="The Normal Heart (film)" label="The Normal Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q713802" start="11187" end="11199" title="Dave Schultz (amateur wrestler)" label="Dave Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477105" start="11232" end="11242" title="Foxcatcher" label="Foxcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q817863" start="11261" end="11275" title="Bennett Miller" label="Bennett Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="11306" end="11318" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q212064" start="11320" end="11334" title="Channing Tatum" label="Channing Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q347879" start="11340" end="11356" title="Vanessa Redgrave" label="Vanessa Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11382" end="11394" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20178" start="11581" end="11590" title="Joe Pesci" label="Joe Pesci"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="11595" end="11609" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="11613" end="11621" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q220780" start="11630" end="11641" title="Raging Bull" label="Raging Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="11713" end="11729" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q14369796" start="11767" end="11788" title="Infinitely Polar Bear" label="Infinitely Polar Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="11818" end="11886" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833826" start="11938" end="11954" title="Michael Rezendes" label="Michael Rezendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154496" start="11979" end="11988" title="Spotlight (film)" label="Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="12026" end="12039" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="12057" end="12068" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="12104" end="12118" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q190386" start="12120" end="12134" title="Rachel McAdams" label="Rachel McAdams"/>
<link wikidata="Q374346" start="12136" end="12149" title="John Slattery" label="John Slattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q298368" start="12155" end="12169" title="Liev Schreiber" label="Liev Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="12190" end="12212" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18703028" start="12710" end="12726" title="Now You See Me 2" label="Now You See Me 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q31202693" start="12788" end="12796" title="Anything (film)" label="Anything"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="12857" end="12870" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758127" start="12882" end="12891" title="The Price (play)" label="The Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742962" start="12912" end="12937" title="American Airlines Theatre" label="American Airlines Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806" start="12962" end="12974" title="Danny DeVito" label="Danny DeVito"/>
<link wikidata="Q107249" start="12979" end="12992" title="Tony Shalhoub" label="Tony Shalhoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="13018" end="13025" title="Variety (website)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q42393850" start="13258" end="13271" title="Robert Bilott" label="Robert Bilott"/>
<link wikidata="Q446580" start="13279" end="13290" title="Todd Haynes" label="Todd Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60617937" start="13321" end="13332" title="Dark Waters (2019 film)" label="Dark Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q36301" start="13383" end="13396" title="Anne Hathaway" label="Anne Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q95048" start="13398" end="13409" title="Tim Robbins" label="Tim Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q315763" start="13411" end="13423" title="Bill Pullman" label="Bill Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q270664" start="13429" end="13442" title="Victor Garber" label="Victor Garber"/>
<link wikidata="Q23781129" start="13549" end="13563" title="Captain Marvel (film)" label="Captain Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="13895" end="13898" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749344" start="13920" end="13944" title="I Know This Much Is True (miniseries)" label="I Know This Much Is True"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548735" start="14206" end="14295" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65768589" start="14365" end="14406" title="Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings" label="Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="14431" end="14438" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14452" end="14477" title="She-Hulk: Attorney at Law" label="She-Hulk: Attorney at Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="14516" end="14523" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q104033835" start="14560" end="14576" title="The Adam Project" label="The Adam Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="14592" end="14605" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q172044" start="14607" end="14622" title="Jennifer Garner" label="Jennifer Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190162" start="14628" end="14639" title="Zoe Saldana" label="Zoe Saldana"/>
<link wikidata="Q975410" start="14669" end="14685" title="Yorgos Lanthimos" label="Yorgos Lanthimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760382" start="14727" end="14738" title="Poor Things (film)" label="Poor Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q147077" start="14754" end="14764" title="Emma Stone" label="Emma Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188772" start="14769" end="14781" title="Willem Dafoe" label="Willem Dafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="14809" end="14843" title="Venice International Film Festival" label="Venice International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q209459" start="14866" end="14877" title="Golden Lion" label="Golden Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="14907" end="14927" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q922348" start="15252" end="15272" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q723830" start="15274" end="15286" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="15292" end="15305" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="15386" end="15393" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q110602969" start="15411" end="15438" title="All the Light We Cannot See (TV series)" label="All the Light We Cannot See"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754186" start="15476" end="15489" title="Anthony Doerr" label="Anthony Doerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="15497" end="15511" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109559" start="15520" end="15542" title="All the Light We Cannot See" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q495980" start="15637" end="15649" title="Bong Joon-ho" label="Bong Joon-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q112977213" start="15686" end="15695" title="Mickey 17" label="Mickey 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q36767" start="15729" end="15745" title="Robert Pattinson" label="Robert Pattinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q552176" start="15747" end="15758" title="Steven Yeun" label="Steven Yeun"/>
<link wikidata="Q229291" start="15764" end="15777" title="Toni Collette" label="Toni Collette"/>
<link wikidata="Q113520957" start="15816" end="15823" title="Mickey7" label="Mickey7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218847" start="15975" end="15990" title="The Last Castle" label="The Last Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q423965" start="16027" end="16048" title="vestibular schwannoma" label="vestibular schwannoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="16060" end="16071" title="brain tumor" label="brain tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562539" start="16201" end="16217" title="Facial nerve paralysis" label="facial paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="16434" end="16447" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q70979" start="16617" end="16642" title="Sullivan County, New York" label="Sullivan County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q630566" start="16665" end="16674" title="Catskills" label="Catskills"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="16736" end="16749" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461567" start="16843" end="16865" title="Boothbay Harbor, Maine" label="Boothbay Harbor, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453189" start="16972" end="16992" title="Ellenville, New York" label="Ellenville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749344" start="17105" end="17129" title="I Know This Much Is True (miniseries)" label="I Know This Much Is True"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004294" start="17360" end="17373" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 2016" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="17393" end="17403" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="17414" end="17428" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151598" start="17445" end="17479" title="The Late Show with Stephen Colbert" label="The Late Show with Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="17512" end="17526" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="17548" end="17588" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="17725" end="17732" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="17740" end="17743" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="17765" end="17777" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="17810" end="17822" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="17830" end="17843" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="17851" end="17875" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 UK general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="17880" end="17887" title="Twitter" label="tweeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="18187" end="18196" title="far-right" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="18210" end="18220" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="18298" end="18322" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 UK general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104215553" start="18391" end="18395" title="Kenosha unrest shooting" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q98663135" start="18399" end="18415" title="Kyle Rittenhouse" label="Kyle Rittenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q462161" start="18435" end="18453" title="Kenosha, Wisconsin" label="Kenosha, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942109" start="18642" end="18652" title="VoteRiders" label="VoteRiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366818" start="18762" end="18793" title="Green Party of British Columbia" label="Green Party of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104873510" start="18801" end="18821" title="2024 British Columbia general election" label="provincial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022038" start="18939" end="18958" title="Callicoon, New York" label="Callicoon, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="18960" end="18989" title="New York (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;New York&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012682" start="19058" end="19071" title="anti-fracking" label="anti-fracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522402" start="19150" end="19172" title="The Rachel Maddow Show (TV series)" label="The Rachel Maddow Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="19190" end="19210" title="hydraulic fracturing" label="hydraulic fracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080311" start="19219" end="19235" title="Fracturing Responsibility and Awareness of Chemicals Act" label="FRAC Act of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="19284" end="19286" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="19331" end="19343" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495207" start="19401" end="19408" title="Gasland" label="Gasland"/>
<link wikidata="Q879318" start="19461" end="19482" title="Pennsylvania Governor" label="Pennsylvania Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270430" start="19678" end="19693" title="Jon Bowermaster" label="Jon Bowermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="19719" end="19731" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028848" start="19885" end="19917" title="Standing Rock Indian Reservation" label="Standing Rock Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619061" start="19945" end="19967" title="Dakota Access Pipeline" label="Dakota Access Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q60617937" start="20028" end="20039" title="Dark Waters (2019 film)" label="Dark Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="20246" end="20252" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543677" start="20290" end="20297" title="webinar" label="webinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q831015" start="20317" end="20334" title="Green Party (Ireland)" label="Irish Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="20442" end="20451" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="20456" end="20467" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516614" start="20514" end="20546" title="Indian Point Energy Center" label="Indian Point Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="20686" end="20700" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="20745" end="20753" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516835" start="20779" end="20786" title="Enhanced interrogation techniques" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809310" start="21001" end="21012" title="Mehdi Hasan" label="Mehdi Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="21307" end="21317" title="antisemite" label="antisemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630220" start="21525" end="21547" title="Israel and apartheid" label="that kind of apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106775117" start="21623" end="21671" title="2021 Israel–Palestine crisis" label="11-day conflict between it and Hamas in May 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q124822494" start="21936" end="21953" title="Artists4Ceasefire" label="Artists4Ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="21988" end="21992" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="22061" end="22079" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="22127" end="22150" title="2023 Israel-Hamas War" label="Israeli attacks on Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="22197" end="22211" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q56798481" start="22330" end="22341" title="Seth Mandel" label="Seth Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115290" start="22360" end="22370" title="Commentary (magazine)" label="Commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="22555" end="22569" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q228725" start="22571" end="22584" title="Cynthia Nixon" label="Cynthia Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272929" start="22590" end="22610" title="Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16781948" start="22639" end="22648" title="SAG-AFTRA" label="SAG-AFTRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q20810462" start="22843" end="22858" title="Melissa Barrera" label="Melissa Barrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="22937" end="22953" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="23032" end="23042" title="pro-choice" label="pro-choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="23331" end="23341" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="23456" end="23470" title="LGBT community" label="LGBT community"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="23515" end="23536" title="transgender community" label="transgender community"/>
<link wikidata="Q315340" start="23567" end="23577" title="Matt Bomer" label="Matt Bomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093205" start="23581" end="23590" title="cisgender" label="cisgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="23606" end="23617" title="trans woman" label="trans woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q31202693" start="23636" end="23644" title="Anything (film)" label="Anything"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189102" start="23827" end="23842" title="Nazanin Boniadi" label="Nazanin Boniadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118422" start="23844" end="23856" title="Abbas Milani" label="Abbas Milani"/>
<link wikidata="Q55211" start="23858" end="23875" title="Mohsen Makhmalbaf" label="Mohsen Makhmalbaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q258753" start="23877" end="23888" title="Azar Nafisi" label="Azar Nafisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468241" start="23890" end="23902" title="Omid Djalili" label="Omid Djalili"/>
<link wikidata="Q231749" start="23904" end="23913" title="Eva LaRue" label="Eva LaRue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6892168" start="23915" end="23930" title="Mohammad Maleki" label="Mohammad Maleki"/>
<link wikidata="Q737835" start="23956" end="23976" title="University of Tehran" label="University of Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="24013" end="24036" title="Archbishop Desmond Tutu" label="Archbishop Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131152" start="24038" end="24050" title="Shirin Ebadi" label="Shirin Ebadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q104622" start="24052" end="24067" title="Tawakkol Karman" label="Tawakkol Karman"/>
<link wikidata="Q211239" start="24069" end="24082" title="Jody Williams" label="Jody Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q157655" start="24088" end="24103" title="Mairead Maguire" label="Mairead Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="24207" end="24219" title="Baha&amp;#x27;is" label="Baha&amp;#x27;is"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377798" start="24299" end="24328" title="West-Park Presbyterian Church" label="West Park Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265692" start="24768" end="24787" title="9/11 truth movement" label="9/11 truth movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="25075" end="25087" title="microcephaly" label="microcephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q30953" start="25190" end="25202" title="dengue fever" label="dengue fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q202864" start="25220" end="25230" title="Zika virus" label="Zika virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="25420" end="25442" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="25480" end="25505" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807923" start="25565" end="25592" title="Mark Ruffalo on screen and stage" label="credits on screen and stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416106" start="25654" end="25670" title="supporting actor" label="supporting actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="25697" end="25701" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="25703" end="25709" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="25711" end="25716" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="25722" end="25726" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25772" end="25787" title="List of EGOT winners#Four nominations" label="to be nominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q79227539" start="25839" end="25843" title="List of EGOT winners" label="EGOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="25891" end="25902" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16395511" start="25927" end="25931" title="66th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243506" start="25932" end="25960" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Television Movie" label="Outstanding Television Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039861" start="25967" end="25983" title="The Normal Heart (film)" label="The Normal Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548735" start="26003" end="26054" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q85738592" start="26099" end="26103" title="72nd Primetime Emmy Awards" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749344" start="26162" end="26186" title="I Know This Much Is True (miniseries)" label="I Know This Much Is True"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="26200" end="26213" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q30303319" start="26229" end="26233" title="60th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593890" start="26234" end="26256" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album" label="Best Spoken Word Album"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26263" end="26301" title="Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In" label="Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="26322" end="26336" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q183355" start="26361" end="26365" title="83rd Academy Awards" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="26366" end="26387" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q380841" start="26394" end="26416" title="The Kids Are All Right (film)" label="The Kids Are All Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q16773560" start="26438" end="26442" title="87th Academy Awards" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477105" start="26471" end="26481" title="Foxcatcher" label="Foxcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q20022969" start="26503" end="26507" title="88th Academy Awards" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154496" start="26536" end="26545" title="Spotlight (film)" label="Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q85314819" start="26567" end="26571" title="96th Academy Awards" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760382" start="26600" end="26611" title="Poor Things (film)" label="Poor Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="26632" end="26643" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817936" start="26659" end="26663" title="60th Tony Awards" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474410" start="26664" end="26693" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play" label="Best Featured Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829711" start="26700" end="26715" title="Awake and Sing!" label="Awake and Sing!"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="26894" end="26916" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q24063766" start="27071" end="27116" title="List of actors with Academy Award nominations" label="List of actors with Academy Award nominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151712" start="27118" end="27196" title="List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories" label="List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723129" wikidata="Q614851" url="?curid=723129" title="Eric Braeden">
<text>Eric Braeden (born Hans-Jörg Gudegast; April 3, 1941) is a German-American film and television actor, known for his roles as Victor Newman on the CBS soap opera &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;, as Hans Dietrich in the 1960s TV series &quot;The Rat Patrol&quot;, Dr. Charles Forbin in &quot;&quot;, as Dr. Otto Hasslein in &quot;Escape from the Planet of the Apes&quot;, and as John Jacob Astor IV in the 1997 film &quot;Titanic&quot;. He won a Daytime Emmy Award in 1998 for Lead Actor in a Drama Series for the role of Victor Newman on &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;.

==Early life==
Braeden was born Hans-Jörg Gudegast on April 3, 1941 in Bredenbek, Germany (near Kiel), a small village in northern Germany where his father was once mayor.

==Career==
Braeden accumulated many TV and film credits during his first two decades in America, and guest-starred in 120 roles. His earliest credits were all under his birth name, Hans Gudegast.

During the 1960s, he appeared in several episodes of TV&#x27;s longest-running World War II drama (1962–1967) &quot;Combat!&quot;, always playing a German soldier. In 1965, he appeared in a film called &quot;Morituri&quot; starring Marlon Brando and Yul Brynner, and guest-starred in &quot;The Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot; as T.H.R.U.S.H. agent Mr. Oakes in &quot;The Discotheque Affair&quot;, season two, episode five.
In 1966, he guest-starred as Luftwaffe Major Bentz in episode 28, &quot;Day of Reckoning&quot;, of season two of the TV series &quot;Twelve O&#x27;Clock High&quot; (a series which was very loosely based on the classic 1949 war film with the same name) and also appeared in an episode of the 1966 espionage drama series &quot;Blue Light&quot;. His main character for the next two years was his regular starring role playing German &quot;Hauptmann&quot; (Captain) Hans Dietrich on the TV series &quot;The Rat Patrol&quot; (1966–1968),

He starred in the 1969 Western &quot;100 Rifles&quot; with Raquel Welch, Burt Reynolds, and Jim Brown (noted for the first big-screen interracial love scene between Welch and Brown), once again playing a villainous German military officer opposite Fernando Lamas. This was his last credit under his birth name.

His starring role in the movie &quot;&quot; (1970), was when he first took the stage name of Eric Braeden. Lew Wasserman of Universal Pictures told him that no one would be allowed to star in an American film if he or she had a German name. After much thought, he took the name Braeden from his hometown of Bredenbek.

His other movie appearances in the 1970s included the role of Dr. Otto Hasslein in &quot;Escape from the Planet of the Apes&quot; (1971), and that of the arrogant but formidable race-car driver, Bruno von Stickle, in Walt Disney&#x27;s 1977 &quot;Herbie Goes to Monte Carlo&quot;. Throughout the 1970s, he also guest-starred in a variety of television shows, including &quot;The Six Million Dollar Man&quot;, &quot;Wonder Woman&quot;, and &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot;, and also appeared in several episodes of the long-running CBS Western series &quot;Gunsmoke&quot;.

In addition to many episodic roles, Braeden also appeared as Colonel John Jacob Astor IV in the 1997 blockbuster film &quot;Titanic&quot;. Braeden told Cindy Elavsky that filming the scene in &quot;Titanic&quot;, in which his character drowned, &quot;was one of the scariest moments in this business for me.&quot;

=== Victor Newman ===
In 1980, he was offered the role of self-made business magnate Victor Newman on the daytime soap opera &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;. Initially, the role was for a 26-week run. His character imprisoned his wife&#x27;s lover, and became so popular the character became a &quot;love-to-hate&quot; villain, and his contract was extended.

Braeden won a Daytime Emmy for his work in 1998. In February 2017 he celebrated his 37th anniversary with the show. In 2020, the show marked Braeden&#x27;s 40th anniversary as Victor onscreen.

In October 2009, Braeden and &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; came to an impasse regarding contract negotiations, and press reports indicated he might leave the show. CBS later announced, though, that Braeden had inked a new three-year deal and would remain with the show, agreeing to a reduction in salary, which was the original issue.

==Personal life==
In 1958, Braeden, under his birth name Hans-Jörg Gudegast, won the Germany National Team Championship in track and field (discus, shot put, and javelin) with the Rendsburger TSV. Braeden later went on to win the 1973 National Challenge Cup as a fullback with the Jewish American soccer club Maccabi Los Angeles, scoring the winning goal in the semifinal game and a penalty kick in the championship game against Chicago Croatian. In the 1970s/80s, he could often be seen boxing at the Hoover Street and Broadway gyms in Los Angeles. He was a tennis player and has participated in many celebrity events.

He married his college sweetheart Dale Russell in 1966. His son, Christian, is a director who created the film &quot;Den of Thieves&quot;, starring Gerard Butler.

===Health===
In April 2023, Braeden announced he was diagnosed with &quot;high-grade&quot; bladder cancer. He discovered his cancer diagnosis while recovering from knee-replacement surgery and while undergoing prostate-related treatment. In August 2023, Braeden revealed he was now cancer-free.

==Filmography==
==Awards and nominations==
==See also==
*Victor Newman and Nikki Reed
*Supercouple
*Distinguished German-American of the Year

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Interview with Eric Braeden. Accessed February 11, 2017</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q614851" start="0" end="12" title="Eric Braeden" label="Eric Braeden"/>
<link wikidata="Q614851" start="19" end="37" title="Eric Braeden" label="Hans-Jörg Gudegast"/>
<link wikidata="Q760823" start="125" end="138" title="Victor Newman (fictional character)" label="Victor Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="146" end="149" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="150" end="160" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="167" end="193" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056783" start="247" end="261" title="The Rat Patrol" label="The Rat Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q469639" start="335" end="369" title="Escape from the Planet of the Apes" label="Escape from the Planet of the Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q430672" start="384" end="403" title="John Jacob Astor IV" label="John Jacob Astor IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="427" end="434" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="451" end="469" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019364" start="482" end="510" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series" label="Lead Actor in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q641700" start="656" end="665" title="Bredenbek" label="Bredenbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="681" end="685" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247850" start="1071" end="1078" title="Combat!" label="Combat!"/>
<link wikidata="Q541414" start="1163" end="1171" title="Morituri (1965 film)" label="Morituri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="1187" end="1200" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q102813" start="1205" end="1216" title="Yul Brynner" label="Yul Brynner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264983" start="1245" end="1268" title="The Man from U.N.C.L.E." label="The Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="1401" end="1410" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857634" start="1505" end="1529" title="Twelve O&amp;#x27;Clock High (TV series)" label="Twelve O&amp;#x27;Clock High"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194888" start="1590" end="1622" title="Twelve O&amp;#x27;Clock High" label="1949 war film with the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110648" start="1697" end="1707" title="Blue Light (TV series)" label="Blue Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366972" start="1808" end="1817" title="Hauptmann" label="Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056783" start="1871" end="1885" title="The Rat Patrol" label="The Rat Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q165164" start="1943" end="1953" title="100 Rifles" label="100 Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q229545" start="1965" end="1977" title="Raquel Welch" label="Raquel Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="1979" end="1992" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q927916" start="1998" end="2007" title="Jim Brown" label="Jim Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146217" start="2154" end="2168" title="Fernando Lamas" label="Fernando Lamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361763" start="2325" end="2338" title="Lew Wasserman" label="Lew Wasserman"/>
<link wikidata="Q469639" start="2626" end="2660" title="Escape from the Planet of the Apes" label="Escape from the Planet of the Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199687" start="2784" end="2810" title="Herbie Goes to Monte Carlo" label="Herbie Goes to Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196836" start="2912" end="2938" title="The Six Million Dollar Man" label="The Six Million Dollar Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247495" start="2952" end="2964" title="Wonder Woman (TV series)" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="2982" end="3007" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3073" end="3076" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="3098" end="3106" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q430672" start="3184" end="3203" title="John Jacob Astor IV" label="John Jacob Astor IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="3216" end="3227" title="blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="3239" end="3246" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005727" start="3267" end="3280" title="Cindy Elavsky" label="Cindy Elavsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q760823" start="3515" end="3528" title="Victor Newman (fictional character)" label="Victor Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="3811" end="3823" title="Daytime Emmy" label="Daytime Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575638" start="4566" end="4593" title="1973 National Challenge Cup" label="1973 National Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="4617" end="4632" title="Jewish American" label="Jewish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978470" start="4645" end="4664" title="Maccabi Los Angeles" label="Maccabi Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="4719" end="4731" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095562" start="4765" end="4781" title="Chicago Croatian" label="Chicago Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109654" start="5022" end="5031" title="Christian Gudegast" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28860130" start="5074" end="5088" title="Den of Thieves (film)" label="Den of Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q169982" start="5105" end="5118" title="Gerard Butler" label="Gerard Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="5212" end="5226" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="5331" end="5339" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926188" start="5474" end="5502" title="Victor Newman and Nikki Reed" label="Victor Newman and Nikki Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274180" start="5504" end="5515" title="Supercouple" label="Supercouple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371460" start="5517" end="5558" title="Distinguished German-American of the Year" label="Distinguished German-American of the Year"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723131" wikidata="Q7064016" url="?curid=723131" title="Nova Almeida">
<text>Nova Almeida is a neighbourhood (&quot;bairro&quot; in Portuguese) in the municipality of Serra, in the State of Espírito Santo, Brazil. The town is located about north of the state capital, Vitória. It has a population of around 266,800.

==History==
Nova Almeida was founded in 1556 by Jesuit priests who wanted to spread the Christian faith amongst native Amerindians. First founded under the name &quot;Reis Magos&quot; (now the name of the river at whose mouth it rests), it was then known as &quot;Aldeia Nova&quot; (taking that name from neighbouring Aldeia Nova, which today is Santa Cruz). It later changed to its current name, Nova Almeida. Around 1760, there were about 3000 Tupiniquim Amerindians living here, forming the bulk of Nova Almeida&#x27;s population.

==Geography==
Nova Almeida&#x27;s area is , and it lies on the coast at sea level. It is now considered part of the Greater Vitória metropolitan area, since it lies within Serra.

==Economy==
This town has undergone great transformation in the last 30 years or so; from a typical rural area, it has become an international hub for commerce and industry. Today, it has two large-scale ports as part of its infrastructure and a number of industrial enterprises.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7064016" start="0" end="12" title="Nova Almeida" label="Nova Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="55" end="65" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="74" end="86" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q927537" start="90" end="95" title="Serra, Espírito Santo" label="Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q43233" start="113" end="127" title="Espírito Santo" label="Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="129" end="135" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q168376" start="191" end="198" title="Vitória, Brazil" label="Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="288" end="294" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="328" end="343" title="Christianity" label="Christian faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="359" end="370" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261742" start="686" end="696" title="Tupiniquim" label="Tupiniquim"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="838" end="843" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163503" start="891" end="906" title="Greater Vitória" label="Greater Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="1106" end="1114" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="1119" end="1127" title="Industrial sector" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="1159" end="1163" title="port" label="port"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723135" wikidata="Q1365207" url="?curid=723135" title="Bird observatory">
<text>A bird observatory is a centre for the study of bird migration and bird populations. They are usually focused on local birds, but may also include interest in far-flung areas. Most bird observatories are small operations with a limited staff, many volunteers and a not-for-profit educational status. Many bird observatories conduct bird ringing or bird banding (term in the United States).

==Australia==
*Barren Grounds Bird Observatory, New South Wales
*Broome Bird Observatory, Western Australia
*Eyre Bird Observatory, Western Australia
*Rotamah Island Bird Observatory, Victoria

== Brazil ==
* Mantiqueira Bird Observatory (Observatório de Aves da Mantiqueira)

==Britain and Ireland==
The United Kingdom&#x27;s first bird observatory was established in 1933 by Ronald Lockley in the Welsh island of Skokholm. This is a list of members of the Bird Observatories Council of Britain and Ireland.
*Alderney Bird Observatory, Alderney
*Bardsey Bird and Field Observatory, Bardsey Island
*Calf of Man Bird Observatory, Calf of Man
*Cape Clear Bird Observatory, Cape Clear
*Copeland Bird Observatory, Copeland
*Dungeness Bird Observatory, Dungeness
*Fair Isle Bird Observatory, Fair Isle
*Filey Bird Observatory, Filey
*Flamborough Bird Observatory, Flamborough Head
*Gibraltar Point Bird Observatory, Gibraltar Point
*Hilbre Bird Observatory, Hilbre Islands
*Holme Bird Observatory, Holme next the Sea
*Isle of May Bird Observatory &amp; Field Station, Isle of May
*Landguard Bird Observatory, Landguard
*North Ronaldsay Bird Observatory, North Ronaldsay
*Portland Bird Observatory and Field Centre, Portland
*SBBOT Field Centre, Sandwich Bay
*Skokholm Bird Observatory, Skokholm
*Spurn Bird Observatory, Spurn
*Walney Bird Observatory, Walney Island

==Canada==
Observatories belonging to the Canadian Migration Monitoring Network:

* Holiday Beach Migration Observatory
* Rocky Point Bird Observatory
* Vaseux Lake Bird Observatory
* Mackenzie, British Columbia|Mackenzie Nature Observatory (www.MackenzieNatureObservatory.ca)
* Lesser Slave Lake Bird Observatory
* Beaverhill Bird Observatory
* Inglewood Bird Sanctuary
* Last Mountain Bird Observatory
* Delta Marsh Bird Observatory
* Thunder Cape Bird Observatory
* Whitefish Point Bird Observatory
* Long Point Bird Observatory
* Haldimand County, Ontario|Haldimand Bird Observatory
* Toronto Bird Observatory
* Prince Edward Point Bird Observatory
* Innis Point Bird Observatory
* Observatoire d&#x27;oiseaux de Tadoussac
* Point Lepreau
* Brier Island Bird Migration Research Station
* Atlantic Bird Observatory
* Gros Morne National Migration Monitoring Station
* Bruce Peninsula Bird Observatory
* St. Andrews Banding Station
* McGill Bird Observatory / Observatoire d&#x27;Oiseaux de McGill

==Colombia==
* Chocó Bird Observatory

==Costa Rica==
* Costa Rica Bird Observatories

==Czech Republic==
*Červenohorské sedlo in Hrubý Jeseník

==Estonia==
* Kabli Bird Observatory
* Vaibla Bird Observatory

==France==
* Ligue pour la Protection des Oiseaux

==Germany==
* Randecker Maar Observatory for Bird and Insect Migration, Swabian Jura, Baden-Württemberg
* Heligoland Bird Observatory
* Rossitten Bird Observatory (the world&#x27;s first, now in Russia&#x27;s Kaliningrad Oblast)

==Greece==
* Antikythira Bird Observatory

==Hungary==
* Ócsa Bird Ringing Station

==Israel==
* Jerusalem Bird Observatory

==Jordan==
* Aqaba Bird Observatory

==México==
* Yucatán Bird Observatory

==Nepal==
* Kosi Bird Observatory

==Peru==
* Manu Bird Observatory

==Sweden==
* Falsterbo Bird Observatory
* Ottenby Bird Observatory

==Switzerland==
* Swiss Ornithological Institute

==United States==
*Alaska Bird Observatory, Alaska
*Biocore Prairie Bird Observatory, Wisconsin
*Black Swamp Bird Observatory, Ohio
*Braddock Bay Bird Observatory, New York
* Cape Fear Bird Observatory, North Carolina
*Cape May Bird Observatory, New Jersey
*Cape Romain Bird Observatory, South Carolina
*Chipper Woods Bird Observatory, Indiana
*Coastal Virginia Wildlife Observatory, Virginia
*Derby Hill Bird Observatory, New York
*Golden Gate Raptor Observatory, California
*Great Basin Bird Observatory, Nevada
*Gulf Coast Bird Observatory, Texas
*Hawk Mountain Sanctuary, Pennsylvania
*Hawk Ridge Bird Observatory, Minnesota
*Hornsby Bend Bird Observatory, Texas
*Humboldt Bay Bird Observatory, California
*Intermountain Bird Observatory(formerly Idaho Bird Observatory), Idaho
*Klamath Bird Observatory, Oregon
*Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences, Massachusetts
*Missouri River Bird Observatory, Missouri
*Norman Bird Sanctuary, Rhode Island
*Audubon Society of Rhode Island, Rhode Island
*Point Reyes Bird Observatory, California
*Powdermill Avian Research Center, Pennsylvania
*Rio Grande Valley Bird Observatory, Texas
*Rocky Mountain Bird Observatory, Colorado
*Rouge River Bird Observatory, Michigan
*San Francisco Bay Bird Observatory, California
*Sand Bluff Bird Observatory, Illinois
*Sandy Hook Bird Observatory, New Jersey
*Southeastern Arizona Bird Observatory, Arizona
*The Institute for Bird Populations, California
*Whitefish Point Bird Observatory, Michigan

==References==
==External links==
* Canadian Migration Monitoring Network
* The Bird Observatories Council of Britain and Ireland
* Neotropical Bird Observatory Network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1365207" start="2" end="18" title="Bird observatory" label="bird observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="48" end="62" title="bird migration" label="bird migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="67" end="71" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="72" end="82" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q319436" start="332" end="344" title="bird ringing" label="bird ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863366" start="406" end="437" title="Barren Grounds Bird Observatory" label="Barren Grounds Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975270" start="456" end="479" title="Broome Bird Observatory" label="Broome Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422982" start="500" end="521" title="Eyre Bird Observatory" label="Eyre Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370220" start="542" end="573" title="Rotamah Island Bird Observatory" label="Rotamah Island Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130916" start="768" end="782" title="Ronald Lockley" label="Ronald Lockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142330" start="806" end="814" title="Skokholm" label="Skokholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q179313" start="928" end="936" title="Alderney" label="Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860221" start="938" end="972" title="Bardsey Bird and Field Observatory" label="Bardsey Bird and Field Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q125389" start="1020" end="1031" title="Calf of Man" label="Calf of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034392" start="1062" end="1072" title="Cape Clear Island" label="Cape Clear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361819" start="1101" end="1109" title="Copeland Islands" label="Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q911577" start="1139" end="1148" title="Dungeness (headland)" label="Dungeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q762752" start="1178" end="1187" title="Fair Isle" label="Fair Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q82334" start="1213" end="1218" title="Filey" label="Filey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073271" start="1250" end="1266" title="Flamborough Head" label="Flamborough Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559190" start="1302" end="1317" title="Gibraltar Point, Lincolnshire" label="Gibraltar Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021601" start="1344" end="1358" title="Hilbre Islands" label="Hilbre Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883361" start="1360" end="1382" title="Holme Bird Observatory" label="Holme Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883354" start="1384" end="1402" title="Holme next the Sea" label="Holme next the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575611" start="1454" end="1465" title="Isle of May" label="Isle of May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000656" start="1495" end="1504" title="Felixstowe" label="Landguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265993" start="1540" end="1555" title="North Ronaldsay" label="North Ronaldsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="1601" end="1609" title="Isle of Portland" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370771" start="1631" end="1643" title="Sandwich Bay, Kent" label="Sandwich Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142330" start="1672" end="1680" title="Skokholm" label="Skokholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q542839" start="1706" end="1711" title="Spurn" label="Spurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161850" start="1713" end="1736" title="South Walney" label="Walney Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q494853" start="1738" end="1751" title="Walney Island" label="Walney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457301" start="2369" end="2405" title="Prince Edward Point Bird Observatory" label="Prince Edward Point Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2439" end="2479" title="Observatoire d&amp;#x27;oiseaux de Tadoussac" label="Observatoire d&amp;#x27;oiseaux de Tadoussac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2810" end="2839" title="Costa Rica Bird Observatories" label="Costa Rica Bird Observatories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2861" end="2880" title="Červenohorské sedlo" label="Červenohorské sedlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q280987" start="2884" end="2897" title="Hrubý Jeseník" label="Hrubý Jeseník"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2938" end="2961" title="Vaibla Bird Observatory" label="Vaibla Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2976" end="3012" title=":fr:Ligue pour la protection des oiseaux" label="Ligue pour la Protection des Oiseaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438132" start="3028" end="3084" title="Randecker Maar Observatory for Bird and Insect Migration" label="Randecker Maar Observatory for Bird and Insect Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q159589" start="3086" end="3098" title="Swabian Jura" label="Swabian Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="3100" end="3117" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q879943" start="3120" end="3147" title="Heligoland Bird Observatory" label="Heligoland Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545575" start="3150" end="3176" title="Rossitten Bird Observatory" label="Rossitten Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3209" end="3215" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749" start="3223" end="3241" title="Kaliningrad Oblast" label="Kaliningrad Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774877" start="3257" end="3285" title="Antikythira Bird Observatory" label="Antikythira Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3301" end="3326" title="Ócsa Bird Ringing Station" label="Ócsa Bird Ringing Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895560" start="3341" end="3367" title="Jerusalem Bird Observatory" label="Jerusalem Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3382" end="3404" title="Aqaba Bird Observatory" label="Aqaba Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q24947863" start="3457" end="3478" title="Kosi Bird Observatory" label="Kosi Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q663638" start="3600" end="3630" title="Sempach Bird Observatory" label="Swiss Ornithological Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3651" end="3674" title="Alaska Bird Observatory" label="Alaska Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3684" end="3716" title="Biocore Prairie Bird Observatory" label="Biocore Prairie Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3729" end="3757" title="Black Swamp Bird Observatory" label="Black Swamp Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3765" end="3794" title="Braddock Bay Bird Observatory" label="Braddock Bay Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3806" end="3833" title=" Cape Fear Bird Observatory" label=" Cape Fear Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034927" start="3851" end="3876" title="Cape May Bird Observatory" label="Cape May Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3890" end="3918" title="Cape Romain Bird Observatory" label="Cape Romain Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3936" end="3966" title="Chipper Woods Bird Observatory" label="Chipper Woods Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3977" end="4014" title="Coastal Virginia Wildlife Observatory" label="Coastal Virginia Wildlife Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4026" end="4053" title="Derby Hill Bird Observatory" label="Derby Hill Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579461" start="4065" end="4095" title="Golden Gate Raptor Observatory" label="Golden Gate Raptor Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598714" start="4109" end="4137" title="Great Basin Bird Observatory" label="Great Basin Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4147" end="4174" title="Gulf Coast Bird Observatory" label="Gulf Coast Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684842" start="4183" end="4206" title="Hawk Mountain Sanctuary" label="Hawk Mountain Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765960" start="4222" end="4249" title="Hawk Ridge Bird Observatory" label="Hawk Ridge Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4262" end="4291" title="Hornsby Bend Bird Observatory" label="Hornsby Bend Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4300" end="4329" title="Humboldt Bay Bird Observatory" label="Humboldt Bay Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4343" end="4373" title="Intermountain Bird Observatory" label="Intermountain Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4415" end="4439" title="Klamath Bird Observatory" label="Klamath Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751256" start="4449" end="4489" title="Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences" label="Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4506" end="4537" title="Missouri River Bird Observatory" label="Missouri River Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408867" start="4549" end="4570" title="Norman Bird Sanctuary" label="Norman Bird Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4586" end="4617" title="Audubon Society of Rhode Island" label="Audubon Society of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120255" start="4633" end="4661" title="Point Reyes Bird Observatory" label="Point Reyes Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4675" end="4707" title="Powdermill Avian Research Center" label="Powdermill Avian Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4723" end="4757" title="Rio Grande Valley Bird Observatory" label="Rio Grande Valley Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355877" start="4766" end="4797" title="Rocky Mountain Bird Observatory" label="Rocky Mountain Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4809" end="4837" title="Rouge River Bird Observatory" label="Rouge River Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4849" end="4883" title="San Francisco Bay Bird Observatory" label="San Francisco Bay Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4897" end="4924" title="Sand Bluff Bird Observatory" label="Sand Bluff Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4936" end="4963" title="Sandy Hook Bird Observatory" label="Sandy Hook Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569413" start="4977" end="5014" title="Southeastern Arizona Bird Observatory" label="Southeastern Arizona Bird Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742176" start="5025" end="5059" title="The Institute for Bird Populations" label="The Institute for Bird Populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995886" start="5073" end="5105" title="Whitefish Point Bird Observatory" label="Whitefish Point Bird Observatory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723143" wikidata="Q564418" url="?curid=723143" title="UEN">
<text>UEN may refer to:

* Ueno Station, JR East station code
* Union for Environment and Nature
* Union for Europe of the Nations
* Urban East Norwegian
* Utah Education Network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q801551" start="21" end="33" title="Ueno Station" label="Ueno Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58" end="90" title="Union for Environment and Nature" label="Union for Environment and Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q835545" start="93" end="124" title="Union for Europe of the Nations" label="Union for Europe of the Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457972" start="127" end="147" title="Urban East Norwegian" label="Urban East Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902357" start="150" end="172" title="Utah Education Network" label="Utah Education Network"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723148" wikidata="Q256808" url="?curid=723148" title="EPP">
<text>EPP or Epp may refer to:
==Organisations==
* European People&#x27;s Party, a pan-European centre-right conservative and Christian democratic political party
** European People&#x27;s Party Group, the centre-right political group formed in European parliament by members of the above party
* Engineering and Public Policy, an academic department at Carnegie Mellon University
* Equal Parenting Party, a Canadian political party
* European Public Prosecutor, a proposed EU agency
* Paraguayan People&#x27;s Army ()

==Science and technology==
* Encrypting PIN pad, a component of an automated teller machine
* End-plate potential, a neuroscience term*
* Endpoint protection platform, in computer security
* Enhanced Parallel Port, a specification of the IEEE 1284 computer peripheral communication standard
* Enhanced Performance Profiles, a PC memory specification
* Erythropoietic protoporphyria, a genetic disorder
* Expanded polypropylene, a flexible and versatile plastic foam
* Extended projection principle, a linguistic theory
* Extended Power Profile, a 15 W version of the Qi charging standard
* Extensible Provisioning Protocol, an Internet protocol for domain registration

==People==
* Epp (given name), a feminine given name (including a list of people with the name) 
* Epp (surname), a surname (including a list of people with the name)
* Epp Kaidu, pseudonym of Estonian theatre director and actress Leida Ird (1915–1976)
* Elwood Epp Sell (1897–1961), American Major League Baseball pitcher

==Arts==
* &quot;Epp&quot;, a novel by Axel Jensen, published in 1965

==Other uses==
* &quot;Élan Power Products&quot;, a subsidiary of Élan Motorsport Technologies
* Enrich Professional Publishing, a publishing house
* Enterprise Platform Programme, an Irish business incubator programme
* Epping railway station, Melbourne
*&quot;European Pallet Pool&quot;, for eligible pallets conforming to EUR-pallet
* Export parity price, in economics </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256808" start="0" end="3" title="EPP" label="EPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q256808" start="7" end="10" title="EPP" label="Epp"/>
<link wikidata="Q208242" start="45" end="73" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q635616" start="160" end="194" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party Group" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q99290738" start="291" end="320" title="Engineering and Public Policy" label="Engineering and Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604389" start="377" end="398" title="Equal Parenting Party" label="Equal Parenting Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413070" start="429" end="455" title="European Public Prosecutor" label="European Public Prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862960" start="480" end="509" title="Paraguayan People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Paraguayan People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375613" start="543" end="561" title="Encrypting PIN pad" label="Encrypting PIN pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375772" start="608" end="627" title="End-plate potential" label="End-plate potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052933" start="652" end="671" title="Endpoint protection" label="Endpoint protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q763131" start="705" end="727" title="Enhanced Parallel Port" label="Enhanced Parallel Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548452" start="807" end="836" title="Enhanced Performance Profiles" label="Enhanced Performance Profiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759600" start="866" end="895" title="Erythropoietic protoporphyria" label="Erythropoietic protoporphyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q146174" start="927" end="940" title="polypropylene" label="polypropylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q335772" start="982" end="1011" title="Extended projection principle" label="Extended projection principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357469" start="1081" end="1101" title="Qi (standard)" label="Qi charging standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q197876" start="1104" end="1136" title="Extensible Provisioning Protocol" label="Extensible Provisioning Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q45144664" start="1197" end="1213" title="Epp (given name)" label="Epp (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383833" start="1283" end="1296" title="Epp (surname)" label="Epp (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16405572" start="1353" end="1362" title="Epp Kaidu" label="Epp Kaidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383834" start="1446" end="1454" title="Epp Sell" label="Epp Sell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369836" start="1547" end="1558" title="Axel Jensen" label="Axel Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155444" start="1645" end="1673" title="Élan Motorsport Technologies" label="Élan Motorsport Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379512" start="1676" end="1706" title="Enrich Professional Publishing" label="Enrich Professional Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380326" start="1729" end="1758" title="Enterprise Platform Programme" label="Enterprise Platform Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383900" start="1800" end="1833" title="Epping railway station, Melbourne" label="Epping railway station, Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281598" start="1904" end="1914" title="EUR-pallet" label="EUR-pallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421563" start="1917" end="1936" title="Export parity price" label="Export parity price"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723149" wikidata="Q5520148" url="?curid=723149" title="Gamete intrafallopian transfer">
<text>Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) is a tool of assisted reproductive technology against infertility. Eggs are removed from a woman&#x27;s ovaries, and placed in one of the fallopian tubes, along with the man&#x27;s sperm. The technique, first attempted by Steptoe and Edwards and later pioneered by endocrinologist Ricardo Asch, allows fertilization to take place inside the woman&#x27;s uterus.

With the advances in IVF the GIFT procedure is used less as pregnancy rates in IVF tend to be equal or better and do not require laparoscopy when the egg is put back.

==Method==
It takes, on average, four to six weeks to complete a cycle of GIFT. First, the woman must take a fertility drug to stimulate egg production in the ovaries. The doctor will monitor the growth of the ovarian follicles, and once they are mature, the woman will be injected with human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). The eggs will be harvested approximately 36 hours later, mixed with the man&#x27;s sperm, and placed back into the woman&#x27;s fallopian tubes using a laparoscope.

==Indications==
A woman must have at least one normal fallopian tube in order for GIFT to be suitable. It is used in instances where the fertility problem relates to sperm dysfunction, and where the couple has idiopathic (unknown cause) infertility. Some patients may prefer the procedure to IVF for ethical reasons, since the fertilization takes place inside the body. This is a semi invasive procedure and requires laparoscopy.

==Success rate==
As with most fertility procedures, success depends on the couple&#x27;s age and the woman&#x27;s egg quality. It is estimated that approximately 25–30% of GIFT cycles result in pregnancy, with a third of those being twins or triplets, etc.
The First GIFT baby in the UK was Todd Holden born in October 1986. The first application of this method in Latin America was held in Argentina on 13 May 1986, and was led by Dr. Ricardo Asch, the treatment was successfully completed with the birth of Manuel Campo Lopez.
In Venezuela, the first GIFT babies were Luis Hernández, Rosa Helena Hernández and Luisa Hernández, who were born on 24 June 1987 and were also the first triplets to be born using the GIFT method.

==Bioethical issues==
Gamete intrafallopian transfer is not technically &quot;in vitro&quot; fertilisation because with GIFT, fertilisation takes place inside the body, not on a petri dish. Some Catholic moral theologians are nevertheless concerned with it because they &quot;consider this to be a replacement of the marital act, and therefore immoral.&quot;

== See also ==
*Zygote intrafallopian transfer

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5520148" start="0" end="30" title="Gamete intrafallopian transfer" label="Gamete intrafallopian transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520148" start="32" end="36" title="Gamete intrafallopian transfer" label="GIFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q25862" start="51" end="83" title="assisted reproductive technology" label="assisted reproductive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="92" end="103" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233836" start="176" end="190" title="fallopian tube" label="fallopian tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q669426" start="260" end="267" title="Patrick Steptoe" label="Steptoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104913" start="272" end="279" title="Robert Edwards (physiologist)" label="Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410870" start="319" end="331" title="Ricardo Asch" label="Ricardo Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="480" end="483" title="IVF" label="IVF"/>
<link wikidata="Q675754" start="530" end="541" title="laparoscopy" label="laparoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="728" end="735" title="ovary" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q407172" start="856" end="884" title="human chorionic gonadotropin" label="human chorionic gonadotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233836" start="1020" end="1035" title="fallopian tubes" label="fallopian tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q675754" start="1044" end="1055" title="laparoscope" label="laparoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="1350" end="1353" title="IVF" label="IVF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075903" start="2592" end="2622" title="Zygote intrafallopian transfer" label="Zygote intrafallopian transfer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723151" wikidata="Q5323275" url="?curid=723151" title="ELDR">
<text>Eldr is a men’s wear brand from Aarhus, Denmark specializing in functional apparel inspired by outdoor and workwear.

ELDR may refer to:

* European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party, the former name of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party
* European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party (European Parliament group), from 1994 to 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25079" start="207" end="258" title="Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party" label="Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671234" start="261" end="331" title="European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party (European Parliament group)" label="European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party (European Parliament group)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723157" wikidata="Q784112" url="?curid=723157" title="1st Canadian Parliament">
<text>The 1st Canadian Parliament was in session from November 6, 1867, until July 8, 1872. The membership was set by the 1867 federal election from August 7 to September 20, 1867. It was prorogued prior to the 1872 election.

It was controlled by a majority coalition between the Conservative Party and the Liberal-Conservative Party under Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald and the 1st Canadian Ministry. The Official Opposition was the Liberal Party, led by Edward Blake from 1869 to 1871, followed by a vacancy in the Liberal leadership.

The Speaker was James Cockburn. See also List of Canadian electoral districts (1867–1871) for a list of the ridings in this parliament.

==Members of Parliament==

Following is a full list of members of the first parliament by province. Cabinet members are bolded.

Electoral districts denoted by an asterisk (*) indicates that district was represented by two members.

===Nova Scotia===

Note:

1 – The Anti-Confederate Party dissolved after failing to secure Nova Scotia&#x27;s secession from Confederation. In 1869 its members joined other parties, or in one case sat as an independent.

===New Brunswick===

===Quebec===
Four Quebec members recontested their seats in byelections, and were re-elected:

2 – John Rose was reelected in Huntingdon on November 28, 1867, after being named Minister of Finance.

3 – Barthélemy Pouliot was unseated on petition, but was reelected in L&#x27;Islet on July 14, 1869.

4 – Christopher Dunkin was reelected in Brome on November 29, 1869, after being named Minister of Agriculture.

5 – John Henry Pope was reelected in Compton on November 11, 1871, after being named Minister of Agriculture following Dunkin&#x27;s resignation from Parliament.

===Ontario===
Note:

6 – One Ontario MP, Alexander Morris, recontested his seat in a byelection. He was reelected in Lanark South on November 29, 1869, after being appointed Minister of Inland Revenue.

===Manitoba===
Manitoba joined Confederation in 1870. Byelections to choose Manitoba&#x27;s representatives were held on March 2 and March 3, 1871.

===British Columbia===
British Columbia joined Confederation in 1871. Byelections to choose the province&#x27;s representatives were held in November and December of that year.


==Pre-Confederation predecessors==
==By-elections==

==Throne Speeches==

===1st Session===

On Thursday November 7, 1867. The 1st session of the 1st parliament of the Dominion of Canada opened with a speech from the throne by the governor general, Charles Stanley Monck (The Viscount Monck).

In the speech, the governor general remarks the creation of the Dominion of Canada itself and the future expansion of the country from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific. Some notable objectives for this first government would be to determine &quot;Currency, Customs, Excise, and Revenue generally,-for the adoption of a uniform Postal System,-for the proper management and maintenance of the Public Works and Properties of the Dominion,-for the adoption of a well considered scheme of Militia Organization
and Defence, for the proper administration of Indian affairs,-for the introduction of uniform Laws respecting Patents of Invention and Discovery,-the naturalization of Aliens,-and :the assimilation of the Criminal Law, and the Laws relating to Bankruptcy and Insolvency.&quot; He also notes the imperative immediate construction of the intercolonial railway. As well as the protection and development of Fisheries and Marine Interests. Finally, he speaks on the necessity to establish uniform laws regarding elections.

===2nd Session===

On Thursday April 15, 1869. The 2nd session of the 1st parliament of the Dominion of Canada opened with a speech from the throne by the governor general, John Young (The Lord Lisgar).

In the speech, the governor general speaks on confederation and the initiatives to bring parts of the Hudson Bay Company (The Northwest Territory) and Newfoundland into the union. He also speaks on the assimilation of provincial criminal laws into federal criminal laws. He also touches on future bills focusing on Elections, Bankruptcy and Insolvency, and Patents of invention and discovery.

===3rd Session===

On Tuesday February 15, 1870. The 3rd session of the 1st parliament of the Dominion of Canada opened with a speech from the throne by the governor general, John Young (The Lord Lisgar).

In the speech, he remarks the growing economy of the Dominion - specifically noting the fisheries. He also speaks on the difficulties faced in acquiring the Northwest Territory and the desire to go through with the assimilation. He continues in speaking on making the election process uniform among the country. He also notes the necessity to create a Court of Appeal as well as the need to prepare for the upcoming 1871 census.

=== 4th Session===

On Wednesday February 15, 1871. The 4th session of the 1st parliament of the Dominion of Canada opened with a speech from the throne by the governor general, John Young (The Lord Lisgar).

In the speech, he highlights the menace of invasion from the United States. He also celebrates the creation of the province of Manitoba and looks forward to the same from British Columbia. On that topic, he speaks on the importance of the interoceanic railway to be created. He encourages more immigration to these new territories. He recommends the swift standardization of currency to not fall into the divisiveness seen in Europe. He says the census will occur on April 3, 1971. He briefly touches on some future bills pertaining to Parliamentary Elections, Weights and Measures, Insurance Companies, Savings Banks, and for the Consolidation and amendment of the Inspection Laws.

=== 5th Session===

On Thursday April 11, 1872. The 5th session of the 1st parliament of the Dominion of Canada opened with a speech from the throne by the governor general, John Young (The Lord Lisgar).

In the speech, he highlights the threat of invasion of Manitoba from the United States. He remarks on a conference held in Ottawa in September 1871 on the subject of immigration. He recognizes the adoption of British Columbia into the union and the continuation of the railway project. He encourages the development of canals and a direct water communication between the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Bay of Fundy. He notes that the census has taken place. He briefly mentions future bills pertaining to Judges of Superior Courts-to the regulation and management of the Public Lands and Mines of the Dominion in Manitoba and the North West Territories, aid for the amendment of the laws relating to the Public Health.

== References ==
== Works cited ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Seating plan for the House of Commons, 1867
* 1867 Orders-in-Council
* 1868 Orders-in-Council
* 1869 Orders-in-Council
* 1870 Orders-in-Council
* 1871 Orders-in-Council
* 1872 Orders-in-Council
* 1873 Orders-in-Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q784112" start="4" end="27" title="1st Canadian Parliament" label="1st Canadian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q909849" start="116" end="137" title="1867 Canadian federal election" label="1867 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q909878" start="205" end="218" title="1872 Canadian federal election" label="1872 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="275" end="293" title="Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538184" start="302" end="328" title="Liberal-Conservative Party" label="Liberal-Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="335" end="349" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="354" end="371" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q162832" start="380" end="401" title="1st Canadian Ministry" label="1st Canadian Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015173" start="407" end="426" title="Official Opposition (Canada)" label="Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="435" end="448" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q333003" start="457" end="469" title="Edward Blake" label="Edward Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506685" start="543" end="550" title="Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q519090" start="555" end="569" title="James Cockburn (Ontario politician)" label="James Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565782" start="580" end="628" title="List of Canadian electoral districts (1867–1871)" label="List of Canadian electoral districts (1867–1871)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="776" end="783" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q574591" start="943" end="959" title="Anti-Confederate" label="Anti-Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10669858" start="1901" end="1927" title="Minister of Inland Revenue" label="Minister of Inland Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="1945" end="1953" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="2102" end="2118" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="2459" end="2481" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q333233" start="2507" end="2549" title="Charles Monck, 4th Viscount Monck" label="Charles Stanley Monck (The Viscount Monck)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="3394" end="3415" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="intercolonial railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="3703" end="3725" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q334392" start="3751" end="3779" title="John Young, 1st Baron Lisgar" label="John Young (The Lord Lisgar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="4303" end="4325" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q334392" start="4351" end="4379" title="John Young, 1st Baron Lisgar" label="John Young (The Lord Lisgar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="4942" end="4964" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q334392" start="4990" end="5018" title="John Young, 1st Baron Lisgar" label="John Young (The Lord Lisgar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="5831" end="5853" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q334392" start="5879" end="5907" title="John Young, 1st Baron Lisgar" label="John Young (The Lord Lisgar)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723162" wikidata="Q9138333" url="?curid=723162" title="Abortion in Sweden">
<text>Abortion in Sweden was first legislated by the Abortion Act of 1938. This stated that an abortion could be legally performed in Sweden upon medical, humanitarian, or eugenical grounds. That is, if the pregnancy constituted a serious threat to the woman&#x27;s life, if she had been impregnated by rape, or if there was a considerable chance that any serious condition might be inherited by her child, she could request an abortion. The law was later augmented in 1946 to include socio-medical grounds and again in 1963 to include the risk of serious fetal damage. A committee investigated whether these conditions were met in each individual case and, as a result of this prolonged process, abortion was often not granted until the middle of the second . As such, a new law was created in 1974, stating that the choice of an abortion is entirely up to the woman until the end of the 18th week.

==Legislation==
===Current===
The current legislation is the Abortion Act of 1974 (SFS 1974:595). This states that up until the end of the eighteenth week of the pregnancy, the choice of an abortion is entirely up to the woman, for any reason whatsoever. After the 18th, a woman needs a permission from the National Board of Health and Welfare (&quot;Socialstyrelsen&quot;) to have an abortion. Permission for these late abortions is usually granted for cases in which the fetus or mother are unhealthy. Abortion is not allowed if the fetus is viable, which generally means that abortions after the 22nd week are not allowed. However, abortions after the 22nd week may be allowed in the rare cases where the fetus can not survive outside the womb even if it is carried to term.

The issue is largely settled in Sweden, and the question of the legality of abortion is not a highly controversial political issue.

Consensus in Sweden is in favour of preventing unwanted pregnancies by the use of birth control and the primary goal is not to lower the number of abortions, but rather the goal is that all children that are born should be wanted. The number of abortions statistically follows the number of pregnancies. In comparison with the other nordic countries, Sweden ranks high in number of abortions, and low in number of young parents, while the number of pregnancies in relation to total population is largely the same in all Nordic countries.

===History===

The Civil Code of 1734 formally introduced the death penalty for abortion, but there is no confirmed case in which this sentence was actually carried out: the attention was focused on infanticide rather than abortion, and the court cases were few. The reformed law of 1864 abolished the death penalty for abortion and replaced it with between two and six years of penal labour for both the patient who received the abortion, as well as for the abortion provider.

During the second half of the 19th century, abortion court cases became more common and the issue became a part of public debate. A reform in 1921 replaced the penal labour with fines or a shorter prison term without penal labour for the patient, but kept the original penalty for the abortion service provider. 
Between 1929 and 1933, around 21 patients annually were sentenced for abortion, and the vast majority was given suspended sentences.

The first law on legal abortions was passed in Sweden in 1938 when the law legalized abortion on a very limited scale, and only on serious medical consideration, eugenical grounds or rape, after evaluation by the Royal Board of Health. From 1946 abortions could also be permitted on social medicinal grounds. During the 1960s, a successive change in Swedish society took place, and the general attitude towards sexuality, as well as abortion, became more liberal. This, among other things, led to an increase in the number of permitted abortions.

The current Abortion Act (SFS 1974:595 with later amendments in 1995 and 2007) entered into force on 1 January 1975. It permits abortion on the request of the pregnant woman until the 18th week, and thereafter only in cases of severe indications of medical risk. After the 18th week, abortions can only be performed after an evaluation by the National Board of Health and Welfare.

In 1989, the Board issued general advice on implementation of the law (SOSFS 1989:6). From 1 September 2004, these were superseded by new advice and policy (SOSFS 2004:4).

Since 1 January 2008, foreign patients – including asylum applicants, non-permanent residents, and those not registered in Sweden – are allowed to get an abortion in the country. During 2009, 132 such abortions were performed in Sweden. The National Board of Health and Welfare called this a comparably small figure, in relation to the total number of abortions.

==Statistics==
The National Board of Health and Welfare is the central national authority for social services, public health, and the health services in Sweden. Among the board&#x27;s responsibilities are evaluation and monitoring of abortions performed in Sweden, as well as establishing norms by issuing provisions and general advice. The board is also responsible for the collection and publishing of official national statistics on abortions. Until 1995 reports were instead published by Statistics Sweden.

Statistical reports are published yearly and are based on data from all clinics and hospitals where abortions are performed. Data is collected on the age of the women, earlier pregnancies and abortions, the length of the pregnancy at the time of abortion, method of abortion, and where the abortion was performed.

One of the National Health Board&#x27;s main purposes with these reports is to measure changes and trends over time. The statistics on legal abortions stretches back to 1955 and, starting from 1975, data on frequencies for different age groups are available. From 1985 the women&#x27;s home municipality was also recorded.

===Trends===

The number of induced abortions performed in Sweden rose markedly on a yearly basis from the early 1960s, but soon leveled off following the liberalization of the abortion law in 1975. It is not possible to tell whether the increase in the statistics after the Abortion Act of 1974 reflects actual circumstances, or just bias resulting from an increased will to report abortions after legalization. Since 1975, the total yearly number of cases has averaged between 30,000 and 38,000 abortions. 
The number of abortions by age group were as follows: those performed on teenagers in 1975 were 30 in every 1,000, while those performed on women aged 20 to 24 years old was 27 in every 1,000. However, since 1977, the opposite has held true, with fewer abortions being performed on teenagers than women aged 20 to 24. The number of abortions among teenagers was around 11 per 1,000 women in 2018, a halving since 2009.

Most abortions in Sweden are performed on women aged 25–29 years old, followed in order by the age groups 20–24 years old, 30–34 years old, 35–39 years old, 15–19 years old (teenage abortions), and 40–44 years old. Before the age of thirty most women have not established a family life and abortion is more common amongst this age group, with multiple sex partners in the younger age groups parenthood is less desired and abortion more likely. The fact that most women in the younger age groups are still studying, combined with them being new on the labour market, influences the choice to perform abortion.

Although abortion rates vary widely in Sweden, according to geographical region, the highest rate of teenage abortions is registered in Gotland and in the metropolitan areas of Stockholm and Gothenburg. The lowest incidences are in the counties of Blekinge, Kronoberg, and Jönköping.

In 2018, 84 percent of the induced abortions were performed before the end of the 9th week of pregnancy and 57 percent before the end of the 7th week, compared to 55 and 10 percent respectively in 1994. The proportion of medical abortions constituted 93 percent of all abortions.

== Debate ==
Sweden has one of the most liberal abortion laws in the world. The topic itself does not have much controversy among the society and majority of Swedish population supports the law and policies around it.

A 2024 report by Pew Research Center revealed that 95% of Swedish adults believed that abortion should be legal in all or most cases.

However, there are political debates surrounding the cut-off period for abortion as well as other abortion rights. Right-wing conservative parties like the Christian Democrats and Swedish Democrats have earlier promoted a stricter ban on late abortions, but do no longer do so. The Swedish Association for Sexuality Education has responded by stating that a lot of political arguments stem from misinformation and lack of knowledge.

=== Abortion rights ===

==== Organizations ====
RFSU stands for abortion rights to all women, it is one of their main worldwide priority areas. They believe that in an equal and sustainable society individuals have a right over their own body, sexuality and reproduction.

=== Anti-abortion ===

==== Organizations ====
 (MRO, Human rights for the unborn) is a politically and religiously independent organization. They aim to promote right to life for those unborn by non-violent protests, showing pictures of fetuses, and supporting pregnant women.

 (Yes to life) is a non-profit organization which aims to influence the debate on human dignity within abortion, fetal diagnoses and elderly care. Their goal is to limit the abortions by showing that fetuses have a human value.

Some religious organizations have anti-abortion stand too. The Catholic Church believes that human life is created at the point of conception, thus abortion should not be permitted unless both mother and the child are in danger. A Catholic movement, (Respect), aims to promote human life from conception to death, meaning that, among other positions, they stand against abortions and euthanasia.

==== Ellinor Grimmark ====
In 2014, a controversial lawsuit was launched by midwife Ellinor Grimmark against the health authorities in Jönköping region because they refused to provide her with a job as she would not carry out abortions or prescribe contraceptives due to her religious beliefs. The case had financial support from a well-known Christian anti-abortion organisation in the US, Alliance Defending Freedom, which has interests in limiting abortion access in Europe. Grimmark&#x27;s case was tried by the discrimination ombudsman as well as a district court in Sweden, both of which ruled against her. The same decision was reached in the Swedish Labor court after which Grimmark decided to proceed to the European Court of Human Rights. In 2020, she lost her case against Swedish state, and in October 2021, the case was permanently closed when her motion for appeal was denied.

== See also ==
*Swedish Association for Sexuality Education

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Swedish Parliament – Abortion act </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9138333" start="0" end="18" title="Abortion in Sweden" label="Abortion in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="89" end="97" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="128" end="134" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="140" end="147" title="medicine" label="medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q775858" start="149" end="161" title="Humanitarianism" label="humanitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="166" end="175" title="eugenics" label="eugenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="201" end="210" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="297" end="301" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="358" end="367" title="congenital disorder" label="condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371575" start="978" end="981" title="Swedish Code of Statutes" label="SFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971056" start="1202" end="1238" title="National Board of Health and Welfare (Sweden)" label="National Board of Health and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297155" start="1494" end="1503" title="Prenatal development" label="22nd week"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="1889" end="1902" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="2140" end="2156" title="nordic countries" label="nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q535691" start="2221" end="2234" title="Teenage pregnancy" label="young parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q10397125" start="2365" end="2383" title="Civil Code of 1734" label="Civil Code of 1734"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="2545" end="2556" title="infanticide" label="infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="2725" end="2737" title="penal labour" label="penal labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="3434" end="3443" title="eugenics" label="eugenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143884" start="3555" end="3571" title="Social medicine" label="social medicinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="3683" end="3692" title="human sexuality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="4426" end="4432" title="right of asylum" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914395" start="4484" end="4494" title="Population registration in Sweden" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971056" start="4758" end="4794" title="National Board of Health and Welfare (Sweden)" label="National Board of Health and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472511" start="5231" end="5248" title="Statistics Sweden" label="Statistics Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q127448" start="5857" end="5869" title="Municipalities of Sweden" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222032" start="6225" end="6229" title="Bias (statistics)" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136753" start="7162" end="7183" title="multiple sex partners" label="multiple sex partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027830" start="7565" end="7572" title="Gotland" label="Gotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="7606" end="7615" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="7620" end="7630" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q200547" start="7665" end="7673" title="Counties of Sweden" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q675653" start="7677" end="7685" title="Blekinge" label="Blekinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q104746" start="7687" end="7696" title="Kronoberg" label="Kronoberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25415" start="7702" end="7711" title="Jönköping" label="Jönköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="8231" end="8250" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q213654" start="8505" end="8524" title="Christian Democrats (Sweden)" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q504069" start="8529" end="8546" title="Sweden Democrats" label="Swedish Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352891" start="8631" end="8674" title="Swedish Association for Sexuality Education" label="Swedish Association for Sexuality Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352891" start="8832" end="8836" title="Swedish Association for Sexuality Education" label="RFSU"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10046" end="10062" title=":sv:Ellinor Grimmark" label="Ellinor Grimmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732297" start="10353" end="10379" title="Alliance Defending Freedom" label="Alliance Defending Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="10679" end="10709" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352891" start="10870" end="10913" title="Swedish Association for Sexuality Education" label="Swedish Association for Sexuality Education"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723165" wikidata="Q457421" url="?curid=723165" title="Lauralee Bell">
<text>Lauralee Kristen Bell (born December 22, 1968) is an American actress. She is best known for her portrayal of Christine Blair in the CBS daytime soap operas, &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; and &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot;. As a producer, she received the award for Outstanding Special Class Short Format Daytime at the 41st Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Awards for the short film &quot;mI promise&quot;.

==Life and career==
Bell was born in Chicago, Illinois, and attended The Latin School of Chicago. The only daughter of soap opera creators William J. Bell and Lee Phillip Bell, and sister to Bill Bell, Jr. and Bradley Bell as well as sister-in-law to Maria Arena Bell and Colleen Bell. She was offered a bit role as a model, Christine &quot;Cricket&quot; Blair, on her parents&#x27; daytime soap opera &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; in 1983 and that became a contract role in 1986.

Over time, her character matured from a model into a legal aid lawyer. Her character also dropped the childish moniker &quot;Cricket&quot;, especially after her rival Phyllis (Michelle Stafford) turned it into an insult by calling her &quot;the Bug.&quot; In 2001, Bell asked to be moved to recurring status after maternity leave, though she returned to regular status the following year. In 2005, she returned to recurring for another year. In 2007, the character was brought over to &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; by executive producer Bradley Bell, the actress&#x27; real-life brother, for a short-term stint, returning to &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; in 2010, where she continues to make recurring appearances. Bell received Young Artist Award for Best Performance in a Daytime TV Series – Young Actress in 1989, the Soap Opera Digest Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in 1999, and Daytime Emmy Awards nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 2016.

Bell guest-starred on prime time shows including &quot;&quot;, &quot;Walker, Texas Ranger&quot;, &quot;Pacific Blue&quot;, &quot;&quot; and &quot;Castle&quot;. She made her film debut starring in the 2005 comedy &quot;Carpool Guy&quot; directed by Corbin Bernsen. The following year, she played the leading role in the Lifetime thriller film, &quot;Past Sins&quot;. She later starred in &quot;Deadly Expose&quot; (2017), &quot;Mistress Hunter&quot; (2018), and &quot;Nightmare Tenant&quot; (2018) which she also produced. In 2021, she played Daphne Dumas in V.C. Andrews&#x27; &quot;Ruby&quot; and &quot;Pearl in the Mist&quot;.

==Personal life==
Bell married photographer Scott Martin on October 4, 1997. They have a son, Christian James Martin, born on January 17, 2001, and a daughter, Samantha Lee Martin, born on October 28, 2002. Lauralee co-owned a boutique, &quot;On Sunset&quot;, which closed in 2009.

==Filmography==
== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q457421" start="0" end="21" title="Lauralee Bell" label="Lauralee Kristen Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965888" start="110" end="125" title="Christine Blair" label="Christine Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="164" end="190" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="207" end="233" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="283" end="329" title="Daytime Emmy Awards" label="Outstanding Special Class Short Format Daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508504" start="337" end="375" title="41st Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Awards" label="41st Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="457" end="474" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496477" start="489" end="516" title="The Latin School of Chicago" label="The Latin School of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568752" start="559" end="574" title="William J. Bell" label="William J. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514718" start="579" end="595" title="Lee Phillip Bell" label="Lee Phillip Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954882" start="630" end="642" title="Bradley Bell" label="Bradley Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761015" start="671" end="687" title="Maria Arena Bell" label="Maria Arena Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146234" start="692" end="704" title="Colleen Bell" label="Colleen Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965888" start="745" end="780" title="Christine Blair" label="Christine &amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot; Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="828" end="854" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q707748" start="964" end="973" title="legal aid" label="legal aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381869" start="1078" end="1085" title="Phyllis Summers Newman" label="Phyllis"/>
<link wikidata="Q433091" start="1087" end="1104" title="Michelle Stafford" label="Michelle Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="1402" end="1428" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954882" start="1457" end="1469" title="Bradley Bell" label="Bradley Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151691" start="1658" end="1736" title="Young Artist Award for Best Performance in a Daytime TV Series – Young Actress" label="Young Artist Award for Best Performance in a Daytime TV Series – Young Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141192" start="1750" end="1808" title="Soap Opera Digest Awards" label="Soap Opera Digest Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="1822" end="1841" title="Daytime Emmy Awards" label="Daytime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243451" start="1857" end="1905" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q426432" start="1985" end="2005" title="Walker, Texas Ranger" label="Walker, Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q593252" start="2019" end="2031" title="Pacific Blue (TV series)" label="Pacific Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q386880" start="2062" end="2068" title="Castle (TV series)" label="Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q737183" start="2164" end="2178" title="Corbin Bernsen" label="Corbin Bernsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="2235" end="2243" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q275955" start="2474" end="2486" title="V. C. Andrews" label="V.C. Andrews"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723166" wikidata="Q1011829" url="?curid=723166" title="Friockheim">
<text>Friockheim is a village in Angus, Scotland dating from 1814. It lies between the towns of Arbroath, Brechin, Forfar and Montrose.

==History==
The name &#x27;Friockheim&#x27;, literally translated, means &#x27;Heather Home&#x27;, with Friock being a derivative from the Gaelic &#x27;fraoch&#x27; (heather) and &#x27;heim&#x27; from the German for home. It has been described as one of the most curious hybrid names on the Scottish map. The word &#x27;Friockheim&#x27; as a whole, is pronounced &#x27;Free-come&#x27;.

The birth of the village took place soon after 1814 when Thomas Gardyne of Middleton succeeded his brother as the laird of the lands of Friock and feued them to Mr John Andson, of Arbroath, who built a flax spinning mill and as proprietor-in-feu attracted many textile workers to come and settle on easy terms in what was at first known as Friock feus.

Mr Andson&#x27;s son, John Andson added in the &#x27;heim&#x27; part of the name. This was at the request of the numerous Flemish weavers who had gone there to develop the flax spinning process. He had to obtain the sanction of Thomas Gardyne as superior and together they agreed on the following advertisement, which is thought of as Friockheim&#x27;s foundation charter.

Printed in Arbroath and dated May 22, 1824 this read:
:&quot;The Spinning Mill and Village of Friock, of which Mr Gardyne of Middleton is the Superior, and Mr John Andson, Proprietor holding in feu, hitherto called &#x27;Friock Feus&#x27; from this date henceforward is to be named “FRIOCKHEIM” and of which change of designation this on the part of Mr Gardyne and Mr Andson is notice unto all whom it may concern.”

John Andson died in office in 1814 (?) and his mill was burnt to the ground in 1862.

==Recent changes==
The village of Friockheim now has a population of around 800, having peaked at 1,200 in the early 1900s. It has a convenience store and pharmacy as well as several small businesses and shops. There is also a public park and two village halls as well as a primary school and community centre. It also has its own church, dating from 1835.

Friockheim was served by a railway station on the Arbroath and Forfar Railway from 1848 to 1955. The line has since been lifted.

It used to be home to Douglas Fraser &amp; Sons (Mfg) Ltd producing waterproof and leisure clothing but this firm no longer exists, and the ground where its mill was situated is now the site of modern housing. Planning conditions require the reinstatement of the mill lade, or at least part of it, with public access.

The local newsagent closed in 2016 after several decades of service to the village. The local co-operative has converted to a McColls, which has now been converted to a Morrisons Local, which provides many of the services the village has become accustomed to.

S.G. Baker Ltd produces hessian, cotton and polypropylene sacks for agriculture and business packaging. Although still based in the village, this firm is less involved in manufacturing than it used to be, and more involved in distributing goods that are manufactured overseas. It also has a base in Forfar.

Friockheim now has a &#x27;By Royal Appointment&#x27; sign, for Mike Lingard, Gunsmith, who supplied guns to Prince Charles. Mr Lingard&#x27;s premises are in the former Clydesdale Bank building in Gardyne Street.

Park Grove Crematorium opened in the 1990s and is used by surrounding towns as well as Friockheim itself as it is currently the only one in Angus.

Film of the village was shot in the 1930s by Dr AGW Thomson and is held by the Cinema Museum in London (ref HMo163).Cinema Museum Home Movie Database.xlsx

== Bus Services ==
Bus services in the village are operated by Stagecoach Strathtay, JP Minicoaches and Travel Wisharts. Stagecoach&#x27;s services 27 and 27B connect the town with Arbroath and Forfar while their 116 service connects Friockheim with Montrose and Forfar on Saturdays. JP Minicoaches, also known as JP Coaches or JP Minibus, operates Service 36 - which runs between Guthrie and Arbroath stops in the village. Travel Wisharts operate services 140 &amp; 141 which connect Friockheim with various towns and villages including Stracathro, Brechin, Arbroath and Auchmithie. The company&#x27;s bus depot is in Froickheim.
== Nearby Parishes ==
Guthrie, Kinnell, Kirkden (previously Idvies, now disappeared).

==References==
==Notes==
== External links ==

*Details with photo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1011829" start="0" end="10" title="Friockheim" label="Friockheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="27" end="42" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="90" end="98" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q45848" start="100" end="107" title="Brechin" label="Brechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q996509" start="109" end="115" title="Forfar" label="Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="120" end="128" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789926" start="575" end="589" title="Thomas Gardyne" label="Thomas Gardyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="720" end="724" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="1976" end="1987" title="public park" label="public park"/>
<link wikidata="Q55757524" start="2132" end="2149" title="Friockheim railway station" label="a railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784938" start="2157" end="2184" title="Arbroath and Forfar Railway" label="Arbroath and Forfar Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q736691" start="2500" end="2509" title="mill lade" label="mill lade"/>
<link wikidata="Q911285" start="2841" end="2848" title="Hessian (Cloth)" label="hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="2850" end="2856" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q146174" start="2861" end="2874" title="polypropylene" label="polypropylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q996509" start="3116" end="3122" title="Forfar" label="Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371796" start="3203" end="3211" title="Gunsmith" label="Gunsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="3234" end="3248" title="Prince Charles" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q971680" start="3295" end="3310" title="Clydesdale Bank" label="Clydesdale Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120743" start="3567" end="3580" title="Cinema Museum (London)" label="Cinema Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596845" start="3707" end="3727" title="Stagecoach Strathtay" label="Stagecoach Strathtay"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="4037" end="4045" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644791" start="4182" end="4192" title="Stracathro" label="Stracathro"/>
<link wikidata="Q45848" start="4194" end="4201" title="Brechin" label="Brechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="4203" end="4211" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819456" start="4216" end="4226" title="Auchmithie" label="Auchmithie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723168" wikidata="Q6749182" url="?curid=723168" title="Manguinhos, Serra">
<text>Manguinhos is a small village in the municipality of Serra in Espírito Santo, Brazil, technically known as a neighbourhood (&quot;Bairro&quot; in Portuguese). It is today mainly a residential village, as most people work in the Greater Vitória Metropolitan Area. Manguinhos is about 10 km north of Vitória.

In 2000, the Manguinhos campus of UCL – Faculdade do Centro Leste was founded by faculty from the Federal University of Espírito Santo (UFES). The college was acquired by the University of Vila Velha (UVV) in 2024.

==History==
The first mention of the area is said to have been made by Augustin Saint-Hilaire around 1818. While on one of his trips he went to Espirito Santo and refers to the &quot;ponta dos Fachos&quot;, which is the name of a beach in Manguinhos to this day.

The locality was founded as a fishing village around 1900. During a number of decades, the fish that was caught off the coast were taken to the capital, Vitória, by canoe, until much later in the middle of the century, when better roads made it possible to transport them in small trucks. It remained a fishing village until the late 20th century, when in rapid succession seven farms were granted planning permission to be sold off as land allotments in an urban development. Electricity first arrived to Manguinhos in the 1950s, when there was already better road communication with the nearby capital (then 30 km away). The approved plans are still not fully built out, but the village size is steadily and rapidly increasing.

==Present==
Today this residential village is a sea resort, with a large intermittent population who only live there in summer months. Local facilities have been able to cope well with this so far, despite some water shortages in the peak summer season. The local community is diversifying to attract tourists in the months between summers and create a more sustainable flow of visitors. Many beach-side bars have been built, and the town also sports one of the best traditional Moqueca Capixaba restaurants in the state. The continuing fishing activity, provides the fish that continues to be an attraction of local tourists and visitors.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6749182" start="0" end="10" title="Manguinhos, Serra" label="Manguinhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q927537" start="53" end="58" title="Serra (Brazil)" label="Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q43233" start="62" end="76" title="Espírito Santo" label="Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="78" end="84" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163503" start="228" end="243" title="Greater Vitória" label="Greater Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q10387830" start="406" end="442" title="Federal University of Espírito Santo" label="Federal University of Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334197" start="497" end="507" title="Vila Velha" label="Vila Velha"/>
<link wikidata="Q707961" start="595" end="617" title="Augustin Saint-Hilaire" label="Augustin Saint-Hilaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929676" start="1998" end="2014" title="Moqueca Capixaba" label="Moqueca Capixaba"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723169" wikidata="Q8042759" url="?curid=723169" title="X Marks the Spot (game show)">
<text>X Marks the Spot was a British radio quiz and panel game, broadcast on BBC Radio 4 between 1998 and 2006. It could be likened to be a more light-hearted version of &quot;Round Britain Quiz&quot;. It was presented by the comedian and author Pete McCarthy until his death in October 2004. The writer and broadcaster David Stafford took over the reins from series 7.

==Concept==

The game consisted of three celebrities identifying four places around the United Kingdom, as well as a supplementary question set in those locations. The four locations join up to form a giant X on the map. Where the two lines cross, a treasure is (metaphorically) hidden. The panel have to identify the treasure using up to four lines of a riddle gained by answering the supplementary questions correctly. Unlike the UK television programme &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot;, there is no actual buried treasure and the panel do not have to fetch it, merely identify it.

The format, created by John Higgs, encouraged the team of three contestants to co-operate rather than compete against each other, and was designed to encourage the telling of interesting anecdotes and digressions. It was inspired in part by the book &quot;Lights out for the Territory&quot; by Iain Sinclair, in which the author walks across London and at one point takes a route that marks an &#x27;X&#x27; across the ground. Another influence was an interview with Paul Devereux, the editor of &quot;The Ley Hunter&quot; magazine, a periodical devoted to ley lines and other earth mysteries. Devereux had eventually concluded that most ley lines were nothing more than co-incidence, and commented that it was remarkably easy to draw a line on a map that crossed a number of interesting places.

The questions were written by David J. Bodycombe (and, for one series, treasure hunt author Dan James) and the programme was an independent production by Hewland International for BBC Radio 4.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q274079" start="37" end="41" title="quiz" label="quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049337" start="46" end="56" title="panel game" label="panel game"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="71" end="82" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371004" start="170" end="188" title="Round Britain Quiz" label="Round Britain Quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172134" start="240" end="253" title="Pete McCarthy" label="Pete McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240015" start="314" end="328" title="David Stafford (writer)" label="David Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="453" end="467" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q352219" start="827" end="840" title="Treasure Hunt (UK game show)" label="Treasure Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386797" start="867" end="882" title="buried treasure" label="buried treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q33200722" start="966" end="976" title="John Higgs" label="John Higgs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1199" end="1227" title="Lights out for the Territory" label="Lights out for the Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980623" start="1237" end="1250" title="Iain Sinclair" label="Iain Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1445" end="1459" title="The Ley Hunter" label="The Ley Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542294" start="1500" end="1509" title="ley lines" label="ley lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327165" start="1520" end="1535" title="earth mysteries" label="earth mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1770" end="1788" title="David J. Bodycombe" label="David J. Bodycombe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1894" end="1915" title="Hewland International" label="Hewland International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723173" wikidata="Q2915932" url="?curid=723173" title="Obligate anaerobe">
<text>Obligate anaerobes are microorganisms killed by normal atmospheric concentrations of oxygen (20.95% O2). Oxygen tolerance varies between species, with some species capable of surviving in up to 8% oxygen, while others lose viability in environments with an oxygen concentration greater than 0.5%.

==Oxygen sensitivity==
The oxygen sensitivity of obligate anaerobes has been attributed to a combination of factors including oxidative stress and enzyme production. Oxygen can also damage obligate anaerobes in ways not involving oxidative stress.

Because molecular oxygen contains two unpaired electrons in the highest occupied molecular orbital, it is readily reduced to superoxide () and hydrogen peroxide () within cells. A reaction between these two products results in the formation of a free hydroxyl radical (OH.). Superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radicals are a class of compounds known as reactive oxygen species (ROS), highly reactant products that are damaging to microbes, including obligate anaerobes. Aerobic organisms produce superoxide dismutase and catalase to detoxify these products, but obligate anaerobes produce these enzymes in very small quantities, or not at all. The variability in oxygen tolerance of obligate anaerobes (&lt;0.5 to 8% O2) is thought to reflect the quantity of superoxide dismutase and catalase being produced.

In 1986, Carlioz and Touati performed experiments which support the idea that reactive oxygen species may be toxic to anaerobes. &quot;E. coli,&quot; a facultative anaerobe, was mutated by a deletion of superoxide dismutase genes. In the presence of oxygen, this mutation resulted in the inability to properly synthesize certain amino acids or use common carbon sources as substrates during metabolism. In the absence of oxygen, the mutated samples grew normally. In 2018, Lu et al. found that in &quot;Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron,&quot; an obligate anaerobe found in the mammalian digestive tract, exposure to oxygen results in increased levels of superoxide which inactivated important metabolic enzymes.

Dissolved oxygen increases the redox potential of a solution, and high redox potential inhibits the growth of some obligate anaerobes. For example, methanogens grow at a redox potential lower than -0.3 V. Sulfide is an essential component of some enzymes, and molecular oxygen oxidizes this to form disulfide, thus inactivating certain enzymes (e.g. nitrogenase). Organisms may not be able to grow with these essential enzymes deactivated. Growth may also be inhibited due to a lack of reducing equivalents for biosynthesis because electrons are exhausted in reducing oxygen.

==Energy metabolism==
Obligate anaerobes convert nutrients into energy through anaerobic respiration or fermentation. In aerobic respiration, the pyruvate generated from glycolysis is converted to acetyl-CoA. This is then broken down via the TCA cycle and electron transport chain. Anaerobic respiration differs from aerobic respiration in that it uses an electron acceptor other than oxygen in the electron transport chain. Examples of alternative electron acceptors include sulfate, nitrate, iron, manganese, mercury, and carbon monoxide.

Fermentation differs from anaerobic respiration in that the pyruvate generated from glycolysis is broken down without the involvement of an electron transport chain (i.e. there is no oxidative phosphorylation). Numerous fermentation pathways exist such as lactic acid fermentation, mixed acid fermentation, 2-3 butanediol fermentation where organic compounds are reduced to organic acids and alcohol.

The energy yield of anaerobic respiration and fermentation (i.e. the number of ATP molecules generated) is less than in aerobic respiration. This is why facultative anaerobes, which can metabolise energy both aerobically and anaerobically, preferentially metabolise energy aerobically. This is observable when facultative anaerobes are cultured in thioglycolate broth.

==Ecology and examples==
Obligate anaerobes are found in oxygen-free environments such as the intestinal tracts of animals, the deep ocean, still waters, landfills, in deep sediments of soil. Examples of obligately anaerobic bacterial genera include &quot;Actinomyces&quot;, &quot;Bacteroides&quot;, &quot;Clostridium&quot;, &quot;Fusobacterium&quot;, &quot;Peptostreptococcus&quot;, &quot;Porphyromonas&quot;, &quot;Prevotella&quot;, &quot;Propionibacterium&quot;, and &quot;Veillonella&quot;. &quot;Clostridium&quot; species are endospore-forming bacteria, and can survive in atmospheric concentrations of oxygen in this dormant form. The remaining bacteria listed do not form endospores.

Several species of the &quot;Mycobacterium, Streptomyces, and Rhodococcus&quot; genera are examples of obligate anaerobe found in soil. Obligate anaerobes are also found in the digestive tracts of humans and other animals as well as in the first stomach of ruminants.

Examples of obligately anaerobic fungal genera include the rumen fungi &quot;Neocallimastix&quot;, &quot;Piromonas&quot;, and &quot;Sphaeromonas&quot;.

== See also ==
* Aerobic respiration
* Fermentation
* Obligate aerobe
* Facultative anaerobe
* Microaerophile

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2915932" start="0" end="18" title="Obligate anaerobe" label="Obligate anaerobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="23" end="36" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="55" end="66" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="atmospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="85" end="91" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="424" end="440" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497595" start="565" end="571" title="Triplet oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="594" end="602" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q899637" start="611" end="645" title="HOMO and LUMO" label="highest occupied molecular orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q413283" start="672" end="682" title="superoxide" label="superoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="690" end="707" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q427071" start="798" end="814" title="hydroxyl radical" label="hydroxyl radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="909" end="932" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q193124" start="1026" end="1042" title="Aerobic organism" label="Aerobic organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q410776" start="1052" end="1072" title="superoxide dismutase" label="superoxide dismutase"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824566" start="1077" end="1085" title="catalase" label="catalase"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="1501" end="1508" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q798597" start="1869" end="1897" title="Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron" label="Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron"/>
<link wikidata="Q186487" start="2106" end="2121" title="Reduction potential" label="redox potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="2223" end="2233" title="methanogen" label="methanogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="2374" end="2383" title="disulfide" label="disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q410381" start="2425" end="2436" title="nitrogenase" label="nitrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="2561" end="2580" title="reducing equivalent" label="reducing equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q851162" start="2586" end="2598" title="biosynthesis" label="biosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181713" start="2731" end="2752" title="anaerobic respiration" label="anaerobic respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="2756" end="2768" title="fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="2822" end="2832" title="glycolysis" label="glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q715317" start="2849" end="2859" title="acetyl-CoA" label="acetyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="2894" end="2903" title="Citric acid cycle" label="TCA cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="2908" end="2932" title="electron transport chain" label="electron transport chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="2969" end="2988" title="aerobic respiration" label="aerobic respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231592" start="3008" end="3025" title="electron acceptor" label="electron acceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="3128" end="3135" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="3137" end="3144" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="3146" end="3150" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="3152" end="3161" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="3163" end="3170" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="3176" end="3191" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="3278" end="3288" title="glycolysis" label="glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="3377" end="3402" title="oxidative phosphorylation" label="oxidative phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43017" start="3450" end="3474" title="lactic acid fermentation" label="lactic acid fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22275677" start="3476" end="3499" title="mixed acid fermentation" label="mixed acid fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q209161" start="3501" end="3528" title="Butanediol fermentation" label="2-3 butanediol fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="3675" end="3678" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="3749" end="3770" title="facultative anaerobes" label="facultative anaerobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784667" start="3944" end="3963" title="thioglycolate broth" label="thioglycolate broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="4191" end="4199" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4201" end="4207" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q312213" start="4222" end="4233" title="Actinomyces" label="Actinomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q133186" start="4247" end="4258" title="Bacteroides" label="Bacteroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q327663" start="4272" end="4283" title="Clostridium" label="Clostridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720082" start="4297" end="4310" title="Fusobacterium" label="Fusobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543267" start="4324" end="4342" title="Peptostreptococcus" label="Peptostreptococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21226978" start="4356" end="4369" title="Porphyromonas" label="Porphyromonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242440" start="4383" end="4393" title="Prevotella" label="Prevotella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309614" start="4407" end="4424" title="Propionibacterium" label="Propionibacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918682" start="4442" end="4453" title="Veillonella" label="Veillonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="4497" end="4506" title="endospore" label="endospore"/>
<link wikidata="Q194309" start="4687" end="4700" title="Mycobacterium" label="Mycobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144013" start="4702" end="4714" title="Streptomyces" label="Streptomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q288311" start="4720" end="4731" title="Rhodococcus" label="Rhodococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="4915" end="4923" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="4960" end="4966" title="fungus" label="fungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q427652" start="4986" end="4991" title="rumen" label="rumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6992030" start="5004" end="5018" title="Neocallimastix" label="Neocallimastix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5032" end="5041" title="Piromonas" label="Piromonas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5059" end="5071" title="Sphaeromonas" label="Sphaeromonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="5097" end="5116" title="Aerobic respiration" label="Aerobic respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="5119" end="5131" title="Fermentation" label="Fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075150" start="5134" end="5149" title="Obligate aerobe" label="Obligate aerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="5152" end="5172" title="Facultative anaerobic organism" label="Facultative anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q548321" start="5175" end="5189" title="Microaerophile" label="Microaerophile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723179" wikidata="Q7371004" url="?curid=723179" title="Round Britain Quiz">
<text>Round Britain Quiz (RBQ) is a panel game that has been broadcast on BBC Radio since 1947, making it the oldest quiz still broadcast on British radio. It was based on a format called &quot;Transatlantic Quiz&quot;, a contest between American and British teams on which Alistair Cooke was an early participant.

The format of the quiz is that teams from various regions around the United Kingdom play in a tournament of head-to-head battles. In a half-hour programme, each team is given four multi-part cryptic questions, each worth up to six points, to be awarded on the host&#x27;s judgement. The parts of the question are generally centred on a common theme, and a degree of lateral thinking is necessary to score full marks.

One question for each team has a music or sound component, and at least one other is submitted by listeners. Points are awarded to each team by the host. Team members may ask questions, to narrow the field; but the more they ask, or the more clues the host supplies to assist them, the fewer marks the team will score.

Until 1995, there was a &quot;resident London team&quot; which was challenged by teams from other parts of the UK (and sometimes Ireland). There were two hosts, one with each team. In the 1950s, the hosts were Gilbert Harding and Lionel Hale. Later hosts, in various combinations, included Roy Plomley, Jack Longland, Anthony Quinton, Louis Allen, and Gordon Clough.

The programme was formally taken out of production after the death of Gordon Clough in 1996, but was revived a year later with a single chairman and a new format of six teams playing four matches each. From 1997 it was hosted by broadcaster Nick Clarke until his death in 2006. He was succeeded at the start of the 2007 series by Tom Sutcliffe. Kirsty Lang took over hosting in March 2022.

Regional contestants have included Irene Thomas, John Julius Norwich, Fred Housego, Polly Devlin, Brian J. Ford, Antonia Fraser, Patrick Hannan, Patrick Nuttgens and Philippa Gregory. Current contestants include Marcus Berkmann, Cariad Lloyd, Adèle Geras, Stuart Maconie, Val McDermid, Paul Sinha and Frankie Fanko.

The original theme tune was &quot;Radioscopie&quot; by Georges Delerue and then, until the end of the 2023 series, &quot;Scherzo and Trio&quot; performed by the Penguin Cafe Orchestra. For the 2024 series the theme tune is the library music track &quot;Tangled&quot; by Philip Guyler. 

Puzzles like those in &quot;Round Britain Quiz&quot; (a series of cryptic clues linked by a common theme) have appeared in written form in publications such as &quot;BBC MindGames Magazine&quot;.

==References==
== External links ==
*Brief history
*UK Game Shows - Round Britain Quiz</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2049337" start="30" end="40" title="panel game" label="panel game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="68" end="77" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094347" start="268" end="282" title="Alistair Cooke" label="Alistair Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8964044" start="1258" end="1273" title="Gilbert Harding" label="Gilbert Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q17419163" start="1278" end="1289" title="Lionel Hale" label="Lionel Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373268" start="1338" end="1349" title="Roy Plomley" label="Roy Plomley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113739" start="1351" end="1364" title="Jack Longland" label="Jack Longland"/>
<link wikidata="Q573844" start="1366" end="1381" title="Anthony Quinton, Baron Quinton" label="Anthony Quinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584995" start="1400" end="1413" title="Gordon Clough" label="Gordon Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026901" start="1657" end="1668" title="Nick Clarke" label="Nick Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817731" start="1746" end="1759" title="Tom Sutcliffe (broadcaster)" label="Tom Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416172" start="1761" end="1772" title="Kirsty Lang" label="Kirsty Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15486156" start="1842" end="1854" title="Irene Thomas" label="Irene Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q335071" start="1856" end="1875" title="John Julius Norwich" label="John Julius Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495501" start="1877" end="1889" title="Fred Housego" label="Fred Housego"/>
<link wikidata="Q19629494" start="1891" end="1903" title="Polly Devlin" label="Polly Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964156" start="1905" end="1918" title="Brian J. Ford" label="Brian J. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q242796" start="1920" end="1934" title="Antonia Fraser" label="Antonia Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146653" start="1936" end="1950" title="Patrick Hannan (presenter)" label="Patrick Hannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147353" start="1952" end="1968" title="Patrick Nuttgens" label="Patrick Nuttgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q240212" start="1973" end="1989" title="Philippa Gregory" label="Philippa Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948638" start="2019" end="2034" title="Marcus Berkmann" label="Marcus Berkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039319" start="2036" end="2048" title="Cariad Lloyd" label="Cariad Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686975" start="2050" end="2061" title="Adèle Geras" label="Adèle Geras"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505924" start="2063" end="2077" title="Stuart Maconie" label="Stuart Maconie"/>
<link wikidata="Q239911" start="2079" end="2091" title="Val McDermid" label="Val McDermid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153629" start="2093" end="2103" title="Paul Sinha" label="Paul Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q435034" start="2179" end="2194" title="Georges Delerue" label="Georges Delerue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634392" start="2285" end="2307" title="Penguin Cafe Orchestra" label="Penguin Cafe Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111784" start="2351" end="2364" title="Production music" label="library music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834849" start="2577" end="2599" title="BBC MindGames Magazine" label="BBC MindGames Magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723186" wikidata="Q62988" url="?curid=723186" title="W. Michael Blumenthal">
<text>Werner Michael Blumenthal (born January 3, 1926) is a German-American business leader, economist and political adviser who served as United States Secretary of the Treasury under President Jimmy Carter from 1977 to 1979.

At age thirteen, Blumenthal barely escaped Nazi Germany with his Jewish family in 1939. He was forced to spend World War II living in the ghetto of Japanese-occupied Shanghai, China, until 1947. He then made his way to San Francisco and began doing odd jobs to work his way through school. He enrolled in college, eventually graduating from University of California, Berkeley and Princeton University with degrees in international economics. During his career, he became active in both business and public service.

Before being appointed to a cabinet position with newly elected President Jimmy Carter, Blumenthal had become a successful business leader and had already held administrative positions under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson. As a member of the Carter administration, he helped guide economic policy and took part in re establishing ties with China. After he resigned, he became chairman and CEO of Burroughs Corporation and Unisys, followed by seventeen years as director of the restored Jewish Museum in Berlin. He is the author of &quot;The Invisible Wall&quot; (1998, Counterpoint Press) and &quot;From Exile to Washington: A Memoir of Leadership in the Twentieth Century&quot; (2013, The Overlook Press). Blumenthal is the oldest living former U.S. Cabinet member.

==Early life and education==

Blumenthal was born in Oranienburg, Weimar Republic (present-day Germany), the son of Rose Valerie (née Markt) and Ewald Blumenthal. His family was of modest means as owners of a dress shop. His forebears had lived in Oranienburg since the 16th century. As a result of the Nazi party&#x27;s Nuremberg Laws, which took effect in 1935, his family began to fear for their lives and realized they had to escape from Germany. Blumenthal recalled Kristallnacht, a series of coordinated attacks against Jews and their property which began throughout Germany on November 9, 1938, when he was 12 years old:

Nazi Gestapo men forced their way into his home early one morning in 1938 and arrested his father for no stated reason. His father was taken to Buchenwald concentration camp, one of the largest forced labor camps in Germany, where an estimated 56,000 people, mostly Jews, were eventually killed. His mother hastily sold all their household possessions and managed to win her husband&#x27;s release. They had no choice but to sell their long-established dress store to their managing saleswoman for &quot;practically nothing,&quot; says his older sister Stefanie. She recalls, &quot;My mother wept—not so much out of the loss, but out of a sense of the unfairness of it, that someone we&#x27;d trained could turn on us, could get something we had worked so hard for, for nothing.&quot;

With their little remaining money, his mother bought tickets for them to go to Shanghai, China, an open port city which didn&#x27;t require a visa. They fled Germany on a passenger-carrying freighter shortly before war broke out in 1939. They took only minimal possessions; they were not allowed to take any money. He remembers the voyage: &quot;From Naples via Port Said, Suez, Aden, Bombay, Colombo, Singapore, and Hong Kong; each one of those ports of call was part of the British Empire, and none would admit Jewish refugees.&quot;

Upon arriving, they expected to remain only briefly, assuming they could then travel on to a safer country. However, with the outbreak of World War II, Japan had occupied Shanghai, and the Blumenthals were confined to the Shanghai Ghetto along with 20,000 other Jewish refugees for the next eight years.

Blumenthal witnessed severe poverty and starvation throughout the ghetto, sometimes seeing corpses lying in the streets. &quot;It was a cesspool,&quot; he said. He was able to find a cleaning job at a chemical factory and earned $1 a week, which was used to feed his family:

His schooling was haphazard, and the stress of survival caused his parents to divorce. Nevertheless, he was able to learn English during a brief period attending a British school, and learned to speak some Chinese, French and Portuguese during other periods there.

When the war in the Pacific ended in the summer of 1945, American troops entered Shanghai. He found a job as a warehouse helper with the U.S. Air Force, which benefited from his linguistic skills. By 1947 he and his sister, after much effort and being refused visas to Canada, received visas to the U.S.

They made their way to San Francisco, where they knew no one, and with only $200 between them. With limited education, and now a stateless refugee, he did his best to make something of himself:

==Education==
Blumenthal found his first full-time job earning $40 per week as a billing clerk for the National Biscuit Company. He later enrolled at San Francisco City College and supported himself doing part-time work, including truck driver, night elevator operator, busboy and movie theater ticket-taker. He also worked as an armored guard and at a wax factory, where he filled &quot;little paper cups with wax&quot; from midnight until 8 a.m.

Blumenthal was admitted to the University of California, Berkeley where he graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1951 with a B.S. degree in international economics. It was also where he met and married Margaret Eileen Polley in 1951. In 1952 Blumenthal became a naturalized U.S. citizen.

Blumenthal was offered a scholarship to attend the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University, in New Jersey. From there, he earned a Master of Arts and Master of Public Affairs in 1953, followed by a Ph.D. in economics in 1956. Blumenthal&#x27;s doctoral dissertation was titled &quot;Labor-management relations in the German steel industry, 1947-54.&quot; For income, his wife worked as a secretary and he taught economics at Princeton from 1954 to 1957. He also worked as a labor arbitrator for the state of New Jersey from 1955 to 1957.

==Career==

Blumenthal left Princeton University to join Crown Cork, a manufacturer of bottle caps, in 1957, where he remained until 1961 and rose to become its vice president and director.

In 1961, having by then been a registered Democrat, he moved to Washington, D.C., following John F. Kennedy&#x27;s inauguration, where he was offered a position by diplomat, George Ball, to serve as Kennedy&#x27;s deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs. He accepted the position and served in the State Department from 1961 until 1967 as an adviser on trade to Kennedy and, after Kennedy&#x27;s assassination, as an adviser to Lyndon B. Johnson.

Johnson made him U.S. Ambassador and chief U. S. negotiator at the Kennedy Round General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade talks in Geneva, considered to be one of the world&#x27;s most significant multilateral trade negotiation. Canada&#x27;s Minister of Trade and Commerce described Blumenthal as a tough negotiator, which Blumenthal feels is ironic: &quot;If they&#x27;d let me into the country in 1945, I might have been working on their side.&quot;

In 1967, Blumenthal left government to join Bendix International, a manufacturing and engineering company specializing in auto parts, electronics and aerospace. After five years he was appointed as its chairman and CEO, and remained with the company for ten more years. When he first took over to head Bendix, the company was regarded by Wall Street as a faltering company. After five years as its chairman, the company nearly doubled its sales to just under $3 billion, and by 1976 &quot;Duns Review&quot; rated Bendix as &quot;one of the five best-managed companies in the U.S.&quot;

While Blumenthal headed Bendix, newly elected President Carter nominated him to become his U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, a position in which he served from January 23, 1977, to August 4, 1979. Cyrus Vance had originally wanted him to be his deputy when he became Carter&#x27;s Secretary of State, but Carter decided he would be better placed as Secretary of the Treasury. His nomination was unanimously confirmed. That June, he traveled to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development&#x27;s (OECD) Paris headquarters for its annual conference, with its main agenda concerned with how Western powers would manage the sluggish recovery after the deep recession of 1974-75.

Blumenthal first met Carter in 1975 at a meeting of the Trilateral Commission in Japan. Carter subsequently invited him to his home knowing his talents as a successful business manager and negotiator, and knew Blumenthal would offer him sound economic advice. Blumenthal recalls at the time, &quot;The list of top Democratic businessmen isn&#x27;t very long.&quot; In accepting the position, his income went from $473,000 per year to $66,000. He was also amused at the irony of reading a German newspaper headline, &quot;A Berliner is to Become Carter&#x27;s New Minister of Finance.&quot;

As Secretary of the Treasury, however, he was never made a member of Carter&#x27;s &quot;inner circle,&quot; and his responsibilities were never clearly defined, writes historian Burton Ira Kaufman. Although he was made chair of Carter&#x27;s Economic Policy Group (EPG), and was Carter&#x27;s chief economic policy official, he was still unable to chart economic policy or be recognized as the administration&#x27;s chief economic spokesman. He instead had to share the role with those closer to the president, which caused confusion among outsiders and weakened Blumenthal&#x27;s effectiveness.

Blumenthal took an active role in fighting inflation, which had increased from 7 percent at the beginning of 1978 to 11 percent by the fall. By the summer of 1979 inflation had reached 14 percent, with unemployment in some cities running close to 25 percent. Much of the increase had to do with OPEC raising oil prices. During this period, the U.S. dollar was also a target of one of the largest currency speculations in history by countries including Germany and Japan, whose currencies were rapidly appreciating against the dollar.

In February 1979, Blumenthal represented the U.S. in its first visit to China by an American Cabinet officer following America&#x27;s official recognition of their Communist government, which China had proclaimed in 1949. Until that time, most American China scholars had never been to China, and the event was so newsworthy that twenty journalists traveled with Blumenthal and his staff. His experience living in Shanghai is considered to have been an important factor in Chinese leaders inviting him, instead of a State Department official. His trip was a great success, notes biographer Bernard Katz. Blumenthal also went back the following month for the opening of the U.S. Embassy. He explains:

He used part of his speech, much of which he gave speaking in Chinese, to convey to Chinese leaders America&#x27;s serious concern with China&#x27;s invasion of Vietnam a week earlier. Henry Kissinger described the multipronged invasion which may have included up to 400,000 Chinese soldiers. Blumenthal asked them to withdraw their troops &quot;as quickly as possible,&quot; since it carried the &quot;risk of wider wars.&quot; The Chinese were particularly impressed by Blumenthal&#x27;s speech, adds Katz. And although the effect of his speech is not known, the Chinese army did withdraw a few weeks after his visit.

In July 1979, Carter outlined his measures for dealing with the nation&#x27;s economic and energy crisis, and at the same time asked five members of his cabinet, including Blumenthal, to resign. Twenty-three other senior staff members were also let go.

After resigning he joined Burroughs Corporation in 1980 as vice chairman, then chairman of the board a year later. After merging the company with Sperry Corporation, it became Unisys Corporation in 1986, with Blumenthal its chairman and chief executive officer (CEO). He remained with Unisys until 1990 when he stepped down after several years of losses to become a limited partner at Lazard Freres &amp; Company, an investment bank located in New York. Having more free time, he taught economics courses at Princeton.

In April 2016, he was one of eight former Treasury secretaries who called on the United Kingdom to remain a member of the European Union ahead of the June 2016 Referendum.

==Jewish Museum of Berlin==

In 1997, Blumenthal became the founding director of the Jewish Museum Berlin in Germany&#x27;s then-new capital of the Federal Republic. His work began in December of that year, when he accepted an invitation from the city of Berlin to become president and chief executive of the Berlin Jewish Museum. The first Jewish Museum in Berlin was founded in 1933, but was closed in 1938 by the Nazi regime. The re-imagined museum includes displays documenting 2,000 years of the often-tragic chapters in German-Jewish history, including The Holocaust, and is the largest Jewish museum in Europe. Blumenthal remained the museum&#x27;s director from 1997 until 2014, with the completion and opening of the Museum in 2001 being credited to his direction. The project has attracted considerable attention within and outside of Germany. In 1999 and 2006, Blumenthal was awarded Germany&#x27;s Senior Medals of Merit for his services to the Federal Republic of Germany, in recognition of his work in Berlin.

==Personal life==
He married Margaret Eileen Polley, a teacher, while in college; they had three daughters: Ann, Jill, and Jane. 

Currently he resides in Princeton, New Jersey, with his second wife Barbara (née Bennett), with whom he has one son, Michael.

In 2008, he was elected as a delegate to the Democratic National Convention, and pledged to back then-Senator Barack Obama.

Blumenthal is featured in the 2020 documentary &quot;Harbor from the Holocaust&quot;.

==Awards and honors==
*Recipient of The International Center in New York&#x27;s Award of Excellence.
*In 1980, Blumenthal received the Horatio Alger Award from the Horatio Alger Association of Distinguished Americans.
*In 1999, he received the Leo Baeck Medal for his humanitarian work promoting tolerance and social justice, as well as the Grand Cross of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany. In 2002, he received the Goethe Medal, Culture Prize of Berlin and Berlin&#x27;s Medal of Merit. In 2013 he received the Lucius D. Clay Medal and Roland Berger Prize for Human Dignity. In 2014 he received the Nachama Prize for Tolerance and Civil Courage and, in 2015, received the Jewish Museum Berlin&#x27;s Prize for Tolerance and Understanding..
*He was elected an honorary citizen of Berlin in 2015, as well as of Oranienburg, the city of his birth.
*Blumenthal holds numerous honorary degrees from major U.S. universities.
*He was the recipient of Princeton University&#x27;s Madison Medal for Outstanding Public Service in 1979.

==See also==
* List of foreign-born United States Cabinet members
* List of Jewish United States Cabinet members

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62988" start="0" end="25" title="W. Michael Blumenthal" label="Werner Michael Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="54" end="69" title="German-American" label="German-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="133" end="172" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="United States Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="189" end="201" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="265" end="277" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="333" end="345" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q314645" start="360" end="366" title="Shanghai Ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="388" end="396" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="563" end="597" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="602" end="622" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="812" end="824" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="940" end="955" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="960" end="974" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q256593" start="1149" end="1170" title="Burroughs Corporation" label="Burroughs Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="1175" end="1181" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q157003" start="1239" end="1262" title="Jewish Museum, Berlin" label="Jewish Museum in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14808" start="1574" end="1585" title="Oranienburg" label="Oranienburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="1587" end="1602" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1616" end="1623" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="1842" end="1856" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="1992" end="2005" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="2294" end="2323" title="Buchenwald concentration camp" label="Buchenwald concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3015" end="3023" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="3287" end="3293" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q134509" start="3298" end="3307" title="Port Said" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q134514" start="3309" end="3313" title="Suez" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="3315" end="3319" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="3321" end="3327" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="3329" end="3336" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="3338" end="3347" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="3353" end="3362" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3412" end="3426" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q314645" start="3695" end="3710" title="Shanghai Ghetto" label="Shanghai Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="4648" end="4661" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545718" start="4923" end="4947" title="National Biscuit Company" label="National Biscuit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974556" start="4970" end="4996" title="San Francisco City College" label="San Francisco City College"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="5300" end="5334" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="5354" end="5368" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="5384" end="5388" title="B.S." label="B.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q2349578" start="5599" end="5656" title="Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs" label="Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="5660" end="5680" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="5721" end="5735" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="6157" end="6177" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13845007" start="6186" end="6196" title="Crown Cork" label="Crown Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="6384" end="6400" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="6412" end="6427" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q997635" start="6494" end="6505" title="George Ball (diplomat)" label="George Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809000" start="6541" end="6603" title="Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs" label="Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="6648" end="6664" title="State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="6731" end="6759" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy&amp;#x27;s assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="6778" end="6795" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051097" start="6865" end="6878" title="Kennedy Round" label="Kennedy Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="6879" end="6917" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="6927" end="6933" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887137" start="7294" end="7314" title="Bendix Corporation" label="Bendix International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265181" start="7733" end="7756" title="Dun &amp;amp; Bradstreet" label="&amp;quot;Duns Review&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="7883" end="7899" title="President Carter" label="President Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="7928" end="7958" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="U.S. Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="8032" end="8043" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="8283" end="8337" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="8582" end="8603" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="10010" end="10014" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="11112" end="11119" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="11136" end="11151" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="11179" end="11187" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11533" end="11541" title="Sino-Vietnamese War#Chinese withdrawal" label="withdraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q256593" start="11852" end="11873" title="Burroughs Corporation" label="Burroughs Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q784567" start="11972" end="11990" title="Sperry Corporation" label="Sperry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="12002" end="12008" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="12063" end="12086" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q637440" start="12211" end="12238" title="Lazard" label="Lazard Freres &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="12427" end="12441" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="12468" end="12482" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="12496" end="12516" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="June 2016 Referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q157003" start="12604" end="12624" title="Jewish Museum Berlin" label="Jewish Museum Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="13078" end="13091" title="The Holocaust" label="The Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="13699" end="13720" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13743" end="13764" title="Barbara (née Bennett)" label="Barbara (née Bennett)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034682" start="13847" end="13877" title="2008 Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="13912" end="13924" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902607" start="14178" end="14230" title="Horatio Alger Association of Distinguished Americans" label="Horatio Alger Association of Distinguished Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818451" start="14258" end="14273" title="Leo Baeck Medal" label="Leo Baeck Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="14355" end="14760" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Grand Cross of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany. In 2002, he received the Goethe Medal, Culture Prize of Berlin and Berlin&amp;#x27;s Medal of Merit. In 2013 he received the Lucius D. Clay Medal and Roland Berger Prize for Human Dignity. In 2014 he received the Nachama Prize for Tolerance and Civil Courage and, in 2015, received the Jewish Museum Berlin&amp;#x27;s Prize for Tolerance and Understanding."/>
<link wikidata="Q6620958" start="15064" end="15114" title="List of foreign-born United States Cabinet members" label="List of foreign-born United States Cabinet members"/>
<link wikidata="Q130197948" start="15117" end="15161" title="List of Jewish United States Cabinet members" label="List of Jewish United States Cabinet members"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723188" wikidata="Q2303515" url="?curid=723188" title="Alexander L. Kielland (platform)">
<text>Alexander L. Kielland was a Norwegian semi-submersible drilling rig that, on 27 March 1980, capsized in the Ekofisk oil field in the North Sea, killing 123 people. The capsize was the worst disaster in Norwegian waters since the Second World War. The rig, located approximately 320 km east of Dundee, Scotland, was owned by the Stavanger Drilling Company of Norway and was on hire to the U.S. company Phillips Petroleum at the time of the disaster. 

==History==
The rig was built as a mobile drilling unit at a French shipyard, and delivered to Stavanger Drilling in July 1976. The rig was named after the Norwegian writer Alexander Lange Kielland. It could be used for drilling purposes or as a semi-submersible &#x27;flotel&#x27; providing living quarters for offshore workers. By 1978 additional accommodation blocks had been added to the platform, so that up to 386 persons could be accommodated. In 1980, the platform was providing offshore accommodation for the production platform &quot;Edda&quot; 2/7C.

==Accident==

Early in the evening of 27 March 1980, more than 200 men were off duty in the accommodation on &quot;Alexander L. Kielland&quot;. Conditions were rainy with dense fog, with the wind gusting to and waves up to high. &quot;Kielland&quot; had just been winched away from the &quot;Edda&quot; production platform.

Minutes before 18:30, those on board felt a &#x27;sharp crack&#x27; followed by &#x27;some kind of trembling&#x27;. Suddenly &quot;Kielland&quot; heeled over 30° and then stabilised. Five of the six anchor cables had broken, the one remaining cable preventing the rig from capsizing. The list continued to increase and at 18:53, the remaining anchor cable snapped and the rig capsized.

130 men were in the mess hall and the cinema when the capsizing occurred. &quot;Kielland&quot; had seven 50-man lifeboats and twenty 20-man rafts. Four lifeboats were launched, but only one managed to release from the lowering cables. (A safety device did not allow release until the strain was removed from the cables). A fifth lifeboat came adrift and surfaced upside down; its occupants righted it and gathered nineteen men from the water. Two of &quot;Kielland&quot;″s rafts were detached and three men were rescued from them. Two 12-man rafts were thrown from &quot;Edda&quot; and rescued thirteen survivors. Seven men were taken from the sea by supply boats and seven swam to &quot;Edda&quot;.

No one was rescued by the standby vessel &quot;Silver Pit&quot;, which took an hour to reach the scene. Of the 212 people aboard the rig, 123 had been killed, making it the worst disaster in Norwegian offshore history since the Second World War and the deadliest offshore rig disaster of all time up to that point. Most of the workers were from Rogaland.
At around 21:30 hrs. a vessel from the Dutch company Smitlloyd came on location. The crew of this vessel heard people shouting for help. Maneuvering with great caution the Smitlloyd vessel encountered a life raft from the rig and after checking this raft it was found empty. It was very difficult to get this life raft on deck so the crew let the raft go. 2 more liferafts were found by the Smitlloyd vessel and they also were found empty. The crew heard still people shouting for help but due to the dense fog nobody was seen. The Smitlloyd vessel stayed on location for several days helping the coordinated rescue operation.

==Investigation==

In March 1981, an investigative report concluded that &quot;Kielland&quot; collapsed due to a fatigue crack in one of its six bracings (bracing D-6), which connected the collapsed D-leg to the rest of the rig. This was traced to a small 6mm fillet weld which joined a non-load-bearing flange plate to this D-6 bracing. This flange plate held a sonar device used during drilling operations. The poor profile of the fillet weld contributed to a reduction in its fatigue strength.

Further, the investigation found considerable amounts of lamellar tearing in the flange plate and cold cracks in the underlying groove weld. Cold cracks in the welds, increased stress concentrations due to the weakened flange plate, the poor weld profile, and cyclical stresses (which would be common in the North Sea) seemed to collectively play a role in the rig&#x27;s collapse. Judging by paint on part of the fractured surface, the crack was probably due to improper work during the rig&#x27;s construction in 1976. Other major structural elements then failed in sequence, destabilising the entire structure. The design of the rig was flawed owing to the absence of structural redundancy.

&quot;Kielland&quot; was recovered in 1983 at the third attempt. The rig was scuttled later that year in the Nedstrand Fjord after a search for missing bodies had been completed, as well as several tests to determine the cause of the disaster.

==Consequences==
In response to the &quot;Kielland&quot; disaster, North Sea offshore installations tightened their command organization, identifying a clear authority who would order abandonment in case of emergency. The fourteen minutes between initial failure of the leg and the rig&#x27;s eventual capsize left a window in which most of the personnel on board could have escaped, had a more effective command structure been in place. These revised command structures, similar to conventional shipping command structures, are now frequently put into use when vessels lose anchorage in storm conditions or when fixed installations are threatened by out-of-control vessels.

The failure to deploy lifeboats led to new legislation regarding on-load release hooks for lifeboats on oil rigs. As a consequence, the International Maritime Organization issued a requirement for all lifeboats on merchant ships to be fitted with hooks that could be released even when they were under load.

A memorial to the disaster was erected in 1986 on the coast of Kvernevik. Named &quot;Broken Chain&quot; (), the memorial depicts a broken chain link. It weighs about and stands high.

==Similar incidents==
Not long after &quot;Kielland&quot; capsized, her sister rig, &quot;Henrik Ibsen&quot;, suffered a jammed ballast valve, causing her to list twenty degrees, but was later righted again. Approximately eighteen months later, &quot;Ocean Ranger&quot; capsized in similar weather conditions off the Newfoundland coast. An investigation into the cause of the &quot;Ocean Ranger&quot; disaster by the United States Coast Guard established that structural failure was not a factor.

==Fictional account==

A fictionalised account of the disaster was first broadcast in Norway in 2018 in the drama series &quot;Lykkeland&quot; (&quot;State of Happiness&quot;) It was broadcast in the UK in February 2022 by BBC Four. The disaster and subsequent rescue operation were spread over episodes seven and eight of Series Two (&quot;Mayday&quot; and &quot;123&quot; respectively). The political approach was portrayed in the NRK1 series &quot;Makta&quot; (&quot;Power Play&quot;). It was broadcast in Norway in 2023.

==References==
== External links==

*An animation by Failure Analysis Associates (now Exponent)
*Petroleum Museum, Norway
*Oil rig disasters listing and descriptions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42896381" start="38" end="54" title="semi-submersible" label="semi-submersible"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688575" start="55" end="67" title="drilling rig" label="drilling rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522772" start="92" end="100" title="capsized" label="capsized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323379" start="108" end="125" title="Ekofisk oil field" label="Ekofisk oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="133" end="142" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="229" end="245" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="293" end="299" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476277" start="401" end="419" title="Phillips Petroleum" label="Phillips Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="486" end="506" title="Semi-submersible platform#Mobile offshore drilling units (MODU)" label="mobile drilling unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q318358" start="624" end="648" title="Alexander Lange Kielland" label="Alexander Lange Kielland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522772" start="1611" end="1620" title="capsizing" label="capsizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503449" start="1626" end="1630" title="angle of list" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746393" start="1837" end="1845" title="lifeboat (shipboard)" label="lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2654" end="2670" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q50624" start="2771" end="2779" title="Rogaland" label="Rogaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="3522" end="3535" title="fatigue crack" label="fatigue crack"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013535" start="3669" end="3680" title="fillet weld" label="fillet weld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099034" start="3964" end="3980" title="lamellar tearing" label="lamellar tearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="4215" end="4224" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204361" start="4578" end="4599" title="Redundancy (engineering)" label="structural redundancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980211" start="4711" end="4720" title="Nedstrand" label="Nedstrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="5659" end="5694" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q848944" start="5737" end="5751" title="merchant ships" label="merchant ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449707" start="5895" end="5904" title="Kvernevik" label="Kvernevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772356" start="6268" end="6280" title="Ocean Ranger" label="Ocean Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="6334" end="6346" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="6434" end="6459" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309431" start="6477" end="6495" title="structural failure" label="structural failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q58048835" start="6642" end="6651" title="Lykkeland" label="Lykkeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025656" start="6948" end="6952" title="NRK1" label="NRK1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723189" wikidata="Q839677" url="?curid=723189" title="John Bates Clark Medal">
<text>The John Bates Clark Medal is awarded by the American Economic Association to &quot;that American economist under the age of forty who is adjudged to have made a significant contribution to economic thought and knowledge.&quot; The award is named after the American economist John Bates Clark (1847–1938).

According to &quot;The Chronicle of Higher Education&quot;, it &quot;is widely regarded as one of the field&#x27;s most prestigious awards... second only to the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences.&quot; Many of the recipients went on to receive the Nobel Prizes in their later careers, including the inaugural recipient Paul Samuelson. The award was made biennially until 2007, but from 2009 is now awarded every year because of the growth of the field. Although the Clark medal is billed as a prize for American economists, it is sufficient that the candidates work in the US at the time of the award; US nationality is not necessary to be considered.

== Past recipients ==
== See also ==

* List of economics awards
* Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation
* Nakahara Prize
* Gossen Prize
* Fields Medal
* Bernácer Prize
* Elaine Bennett Research Prize
* Prix du meilleur jeune économiste de France

== References ==
== External links ==
*John Bates Clark Medal at American Economic Association website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q839677" start="4" end="26" title="John Bates Clark Medal" label="John Bates Clark Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464096" start="45" end="74" title="American Economic Association" label="American Economic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="98" end="107" title="economics" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q704893" start="276" end="292" title="John Bates Clark" label="John Bates Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q73617" start="326" end="359" title="The Chronicle of Higher Education" label="The Chronicle of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="468" end="509" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q102454" start="634" end="648" title="Paul Samuelson" label="Paul Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779496" start="1008" end="1032" title="List of economics awards" label="List of economics awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059648" start="1035" end="1059" title="Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation" label="Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145999" start="1062" end="1076" title="Nakahara Prize" label="Nakahara Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q318716" start="1079" end="1091" title="Gossen Prize" label="Gossen Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="1094" end="1106" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552278" start="1109" end="1123" title="Germán Bernácer Prize" label="Bernácer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404554" start="1126" end="1155" title="Elaine Bennett Research Prize" label="Elaine Bennett Research Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383535" start="1158" end="1201" title="Prix du meilleur jeune économiste de France" label="Prix du meilleur jeune économiste de France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723190" wikidata="Q365776" url="?curid=723190" title="Manhunt">
<text>Manhunt may refer to:
== Search processes ==
* Manhunt (law enforcement), a search for a dangerous fugitive
* Manhunt (military), a search for a high-value target by special operations forces or intelligence agencies

== Social organisations ==
* Manhunt (social network), an online dating service for gay men
* Manhunt International, an international beauty pageant for men, begun 1993

== Sport ==
* Manhunt (urban game), the name of a number of variations on the game of tag

== Titled works ==
=== Television ===
====Series====
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (1959 TV series), a syndicated crime show, starring Victor Jory
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (1969 TV series), a drama set in World War II
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (2001 TV series), a reality TV on UPN
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (2004 TV series), a model competition
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (2017 TV series), an American anthology drama series
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (2019 TV series), an ITV drama series about the investigations that caught Levi Bellfield and Delroy Grant
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (miniseries), a 2024 Apple TV+ miniseries about John Wilkes Booth
* &quot;Manhunt – Solving Britain&#x27;s Crimes&quot;, on ITV starting 2006
* &quot;Lone Target&quot;, a reality TV, a.k.a. &quot;Manhunt&quot;, 2014

====Episodes====
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (&quot;Captain Scarlet&quot;), 1967
* &quot;Man Hunt&quot; (&quot;Dad&#x27;s Army&quot;), 1969
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (&quot;Due South&quot;)
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (&quot;Highlander&quot;)
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (&quot;Prison Break&quot;)
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (&quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;)
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (&quot;Under the Dome&quot;)
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (&quot;The Unit&quot;)

===Film===
* &quot;The Man Hunt&quot;, a 1918 American comedy drama film directed by Travers Vale
* &quot;Man Hunt&quot; (1933 film), a mystery film directed by Irving Cummings
* &quot;Man Hunt&quot; (1936 film), a comedy film directed by William Clemens
* &quot;Man Hunt&quot; (1941 film), directed by Fritz Lang
* &quot;Man Hunt&quot; (1985 film), a Western film directed by Fabrizio De Angelis
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (1972 film), also known as &quot;The Italian Connection&quot; (&quot;La mala ordina&quot;), a crime film directed by Fernando di Leo
* &quot;Kimi yo Fundo no Kawa o Watare&quot;, a 1976 Japanese film also known as &quot;Manhunt&quot;
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (2008 film), a Norwegian horror film
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (2017 film), directed by John Woo, a remake of &quot;Kimi yo Fundo no Kawa o Watare&quot;
* &quot;The Manhunt&quot;, or &quot;Manhunt in the City&quot;, a 1975 Italian film 
* &quot;&quot;, a 2013 documentary directed by Greg Barker about the hunt for bin Laden
* &quot;Bloodfist VII: Manhunt&quot;, a 1995 action-adventure film starring Don Wilson
* &quot;&quot;, a 2024 documentary

=== Other media ===
* &quot;&quot;, a 2012 book by journalist Peter Bergen
* &quot;Manhunt&quot; (video game), a 2003 video game published by Rockstar Games
** &quot;Manhunt 2&quot;, a 2007 sequel to the above
* &quot;Manhunt&quot;, a song by Karen Kamon from the 1983 film &quot;Flashdance&quot;
* &quot;Manhunt&quot;, a 2003 song by Winnebago Deal on the album &quot;Plata O Plomo&quot;
* &quot;Manhunt&quot;, a 2022 sci-fi horror novel by Gretchen Felker-Martin
* &quot;Minecraft Manhunt, &quot;a web series by YouTuber Dream

== See also ==
* Manhunter (disambiguation)
* Human hunting, humans being hunted and killed for other persons&#x27; revenge, pleasure, entertainment, sports, or sustenance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q365776" start="0" end="7" title="Manhunt" label="Manhunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q989278" start="47" end="72" title="Manhunt (law enforcement)" label="Manhunt (law enforcement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749366" start="110" end="128" title="Manhunt (military)" label="Manhunt (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749361" start="247" end="271" title="Manhunt (social network)" label="Manhunt (social network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q921142" start="312" end="333" title="Manhunt International" label="Manhunt International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749368" start="402" end="422" title="Manhunt (urban game)" label="Manhunt (urban game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844597" start="534" end="570" title="Manhunt (1959 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (1959 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749362" start="620" end="656" title="Manhunt (1969 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (1969 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749363" start="688" end="724" title="Manhunt (2001 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (2001 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670376" start="748" end="784" title="Manhunt (2004 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (2004 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30091619" start="808" end="844" title="Manhunt (2017 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (2017 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769279" start="883" end="919" title="Manhunt (2019 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (2019 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112481520" start="1012" end="1044" title="Manhunt (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (miniseries)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749374" start="1106" end="1145" title="Manhunt – Solving Britain&amp;#x27;s Crimes" label="Manhunt – Solving Britain&amp;#x27;s Crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035070" start="1182" end="1193" title="Lone Target" label="Lone Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490412" start="1268" end="1317" title="Manhunt (Captain Scarlet)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Captain Scarlet&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746189" start="1326" end="1376" title="Man Hunt (Dad&amp;#x27;s Army)" label="&amp;quot;Man Hunt&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Dad&amp;#x27;s Army&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569393" start="1385" end="1428" title="Manhunt (Due South)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Due South&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468962" start="1431" end="1475" title="Manhunt (Highlander)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Highlander&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399846" start="1478" end="1524" title="Manhunt (Prison Break)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Prison Break&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1527" end="1591" title="Manhunt (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515360" start="1594" end="1642" title="Manhunt (Under the Dome)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Under the Dome&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468613" start="1645" end="1687" title="Manhunt (The Unit)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Unit&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64435621" start="1708" end="1720" title="The Man Hunt" label="The Man Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152050" start="1789" end="1821" title="Man Hunt (1933 film)" label="&amp;quot;Man Hunt&amp;quot; (1933 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949906" start="1868" end="1900" title="Man Hunt (1936 film)" label="&amp;quot;Man Hunt&amp;quot; (1936 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162011" start="1946" end="1978" title="Man Hunt (1941 film)" label="&amp;quot;Man Hunt&amp;quot; (1941 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375493" start="2005" end="2037" title="Man Hunt (1985 film)" label="&amp;quot;Man Hunt&amp;quot; (1985 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822965" start="2088" end="2119" title="Manhunt (1972 film)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (1972 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q870882" start="2249" end="2279" title="Kimi yo Fundo no Kawa o Watare" label="Kimi yo Fundo no Kawa o Watare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755118" start="2344" end="2375" title="Manhunt (2008 film)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (2008 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608371" start="2403" end="2434" title="Manhunt (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (2017 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820033" start="2521" end="2532" title="The Manhunt" label="The Manhunt"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2693" end="2715" title="Bloodfist VII: Manhunt" label="Bloodfist VII: Manhunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q853344" start="2885" end="2917" title="Manhunt (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Manhunt&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799879" start="2974" end="2983" title="Manhunt 2" label="Manhunt 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369755" start="3051" end="3062" title="Karen Kamon" label="Karen Kamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259909" start="3143" end="3157" title="Winnebago Deal" label="Winnebago Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q112124494" start="3250" end="3272" title="Gretchen Felker-Martin" label="Gretchen Felker-Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q99196256" start="3331" end="3336" title="Dream (YouTuber)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q405788" start="3355" end="3381" title="Manhunter (disambiguation)" label="Manhunter (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937807" start="3384" end="3397" title="Human hunting" label="Human hunting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723193" wikidata="Q60549" url="?curid=723193" title="Gustav Nachtigal">
<text>Gustav Nachtigal (; born 23 February 1834 – 20 April 1885) was a German military surgeon and explorer of Central and West Africa. He is further known as the German Empire&#x27;s consul-general for Tunisia and Commissioner for West Africa. His mission as commissioner resulted in Togoland and Kamerun becoming the first colonies of a German colonial empire. The &quot;Gustav-Nachtigal-Medal&quot;, awarded by the Berlin Geographical Society, is named after him.

==Life and travels==
Gustav Nachtigal, the son of a Lutheran pastor, was born at Eichstedt in the Prussian province of Saxony-Anhalt. His father died of Phthisis pulmonum in 1839. After medical studies at the universities of Halle, Würzburg and Greifswald, he practised for several years as a military surgeon. He worked in Cologne, Germany. Nachtigal contracted a lung disease and relocated to Annaba in Algeria in October, 1862. He travelled to Tunis in 1863, where he studied Arabic, and took part as surgeon in several expeditions into Central Africa between 1869 and 1875.

He returned to Germany and met Friedrich Gerhard Rohlfs. Rohlfs asked him to go to the Bornu Empire. He then would be commissioned by King Wilhelm I of Prussia to carry gifts to Umar of Borno, sheik of the Bornu Empire, in acknowledgment of kindness shown to German travellers, such as Heinrich Barth. Nachtigal set out in 1869 from Ottoman Tripoli and accomplished his mission after a two years&#x27; journey. During this period, he visited Tibesti and Borku, regions of the central Sahara not previously known to Europeans, and reached the region of the Toubou people. He travelled with eight camels and six men.

From Bornu he travelled to Baguirmi, an independent state to the southeast of Bornu. From there, he proceeded to Wadai (a powerful Muslim kingdom to the northeast of Baguirmi) and to Kordofan (a former province of central Sudan). Nachtigal finally emerged from his journey through the Sahel at Khartoum (then the centre of Turkish-Egyptian Sudan) in the winter of 1874, after having been given up as lost. His journey, described in his &quot;Sahara and Sudan&quot;, earned him a reputation as a discoverer. In 1882, he was awarded the Royal Geographical Society&#x27;s Founder&#x27;s Medal.

After the establishment of a French protectorate over Tunisia, Nachtigal was sent as consul-general for the German Empire and remained there until 1884. Thereafter, he was appointed by Chancellor Otto von Bismarck as special commissioner for West Africa. Local German business interests in that region began advocating for protection by the German Empire, after they had acquired huge properties in West Africa. Nachtigal’s task was to establish a claim for Germany, before the British could advance their own interests — and Togoland and Kamerun became Germany’s first colonial possessions. On his return, he died at sea aboard the gunboat off Cape Palmas on 20 April 1885 and was initially interred at Grand Bassam. In 1888 Nachtigal’s remains were exhumed and reburied in a ceremonial grave in Duala in front of the Kamerun colonial government building.

==Legacy==

Along with Heinrich Barth, Nachtigal has been regarded as the other important German explorer of Africa. Like Barth, Nachtigal was primarily interested in ethnography, and additionally in tropical medicine. His works stand out because of their wealth of details and because of his unbiased views of Africans. In contrast to most contemporary explorers, Nachtigal did not regard Africans as inferior to Europeans, as is reflected in his descriptions and choice of words.

He had witnessed slave hunts performed by African rulers and the cruelties inflicted by them upon other Africans. The horror that he felt about these atrocities made him enter colonial endeavours, because he believed that European domination of the African continent might stop slave-hunting and slave ownership.

In 2022, &quot;Nachtigalplatz&quot; (Nachtigal Square) in Berlin was renamed &quot;Manga-Bell-Platz&quot;, in honor of Duala king and resistance leader Rudolf Duala Manga Bell.

==Works==
Original Publication
*&quot;Saharâ und Sûdân&quot;. 2 volumes, Berlin 1879-81, volume 3 published by E. Groddeck, Leipzig 1889.

English Translation
*&quot;Sahara and Sudan&quot;. volume I: &quot;Fezzan and Tibesti&quot;; volume II: &quot;Kawar, Bornu, Kanem, Borku, Ennedi&quot;; volume III: &quot;The Chad Basin and Bagirmi&quot;; volume IV: &quot;Wadai and Darfur&quot;. Translated from the original German with an Introduction and Notes by Allan G. B. Fisher and H. J. Fisher. London — New York — Berkeley - 1971-1987.

==See also==
*Mimi of Nachtigal, an extinct language of Chad

==References==

===Footnotes===


===Sources===
*&quot;Gustav Nachtigal — ein deutscher Forscher und Afrika&quot; (Manuscript of speech held at the Togo Exhibition at Düsseldorf 1986). Peter Kremer. 
*&quot;Die Forschungsreisenden&quot;, Cornelius Trebbin &amp; Peter Kremer, &quot;Die Tuareg&quot;. Düsseldorf 1985. 

==External links==

* Sahara and Sudan By Gustav Nachtigal, Allan George Barnard Fisher, Humphrey J. Fisher</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60549" start="0" end="16" title="Gustav Nachtigal" label="Gustav Nachtigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q774306" start="81" end="88" title="surgeon" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="93" end="101" title="Exploration" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="105" end="112" title="Central Africa" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="117" end="128" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="157" end="170" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="178" end="192" title="consul-general" label="consul-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="197" end="204" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q524778" start="209" end="221" title="Commissioner" label="Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="279" end="287" title="Togoland" label="Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q668294" start="292" end="299" title="Kamerun" label="Kamerun"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="333" end="355" title="German colonial empire" label="German colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q530819" start="412" end="439" title="Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin" label="Berlin Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="514" end="522" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q634985" start="543" end="552" title="Eichstedt" label="Eichstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="581" end="594" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q32120" start="687" end="692" title="University of Halle-Wittenberg" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q161976" start="694" end="702" title="University of Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165528" start="707" end="717" title="University of Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480945" start="755" end="771" title="military surgeon" label="military surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="786" end="802" title="Cologne, Germany" label="Cologne, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="827" end="839" title="lung disease" label="lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q45942" start="857" end="863" title="Annaba" label="Annaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="867" end="874" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="909" end="914" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="941" end="947" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="1002" end="1016" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q63209" start="1072" end="1096" title="Friedrich Gerhard Rohlfs" label="Friedrich Gerhard Rohlfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="1128" end="1140" title="Bornu Empire" label="Bornu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="1180" end="1189" title="Wilhelm I, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm I"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1193" end="1200" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881146" start="1219" end="1232" title="Umar of Borno" label="Umar of Borno"/>
<link wikidata="Q60141" start="1327" end="1341" title="Heinrich Barth" label="Heinrich Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="1382" end="1389" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q309104" start="1483" end="1490" title="Tibesti" label="Tibesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139666" start="1495" end="1500" title="Borku" label="Borku"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="1525" end="1531" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q521547" start="1597" end="1610" title="Toubou people" label="Toubou people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="1636" end="1641" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="1662" end="1667" title="Bornu Empire" label="Bornu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472873" start="1684" end="1692" title="Kingdom of Baguirmi" label="Baguirmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132786" start="1770" end="1775" title="Ouaddai Kingdom" label="Wadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q867052" start="1840" end="1848" title="Kordofan" label="Kordofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="1879" end="1884" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="1938" end="1947" title="the Sahel" label="the Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="1951" end="1959" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464621" start="1980" end="2002" title="Turkish Sudan" label="Turkish-Egyptian Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="2192" end="2218" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q119627729" start="2226" end="2246" title="Founder&amp;#x27;s Medal" label="Founder&amp;#x27;s Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2278" end="2284" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="2285" end="2297" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="2303" end="2310" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="2334" end="2348" title="consul-general" label="consul-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2357" end="2370" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="2445" end="2462" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q524778" start="2474" end="2486" title="commissioner" label="commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="2491" end="2502" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="2775" end="2783" title="Togoland" label="Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q668294" start="2788" end="2795" title="Kamerun" label="Kamerun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034489" start="2894" end="2905" title="Cape Palmas" label="Cape Palmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q582922" start="2953" end="2965" title="Grand Bassam" label="Grand Bassam"/>
<link wikidata="Q132830" start="3046" end="3051" title="Douala" label="Duala"/>
<link wikidata="Q60141" start="3130" end="3144" title="Heinrich Barth" label="Heinrich Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="3274" end="3285" title="ethnography" label="ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365243" start="3307" end="3324" title="tropical medicine" label="tropical medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057915" start="3607" end="3646" title="Slavery in Africa" label="slave hunts performed by African rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262591" start="4023" end="4028" title="Duala people" label="Duala"/>
<link wikidata="Q656027" start="4056" end="4079" title="Rudolf Duala Manga Bell" label="Rudolf Duala Manga Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353372" start="4536" end="4554" title="Allan George Barnard Fisher" label="Allan G. B. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862207" start="4630" end="4647" title="Mimi of Nachtigal" label="Mimi of Nachtigal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723196" wikidata="Q277550" url="?curid=723196" title="Pentakis dodecahedron">
<text>In geometry, a pentakis dodecahedron or kisdodecahedron is a polyhedron created by attaching a pentagonal pyramid to each face of a regular dodecahedron; that is, it is the Kleetope of the dodecahedron. Specifically, the term typically refers to a particular Catalan solid, namely the dual of a truncated icosahedron.

==Cartesian coordinates==

Let formula_1 be the golden ratio. The 12 points given by formula_2 and cyclic permutations of these coordinates are the vertices of a regular icosahedron. Its dual regular dodecahedron, whose edges intersect those of the icosahedron at right angles, has as vertices the points formula_3 together with the points formula_4 and cyclic permutations of these coordinates. Multiplying all coordinates of the icosahedron by a factor of formula_5 gives a slightly smaller icosahedron. The 12 vertices of this icosahedron, together with the vertices of the dodecahedron, are the vertices of a pentakis dodecahedron centered at the origin. The length of its long edges equals formula_6. Its faces are acute isosceles triangles with one angle of formula_7 and two of formula_8. The length ratio between the long and short edges of these triangles equals formula_9.

==Chemistry==
&lt;br&gt;The &quot;pentakis dodecahedron&quot; in a model of buckminsterfullerene: each (spherical) surface segment represents a carbon atom, and if all are replaced with planar faces, a pentakis dodecahedron is produced. Equivalently, a truncated icosahedron is a model of buckminsterfullerene, with each vertex representing a carbon atom.

==Biology==
The &quot;pentakis dodecahedron&quot; is also a model of some icosahedrally symmetric viruses, such as Adeno-associated virus. These have 60 symmetry related capsid proteins, which combine to make the 60 symmetrical faces of a &quot;pentakis dodecahedron&quot;.
==Orthogonal projections==
The pentakis dodecahedron has three symmetry positions, two on vertices, and one on a midedge:
== Concave pentakis dodecahedron ==
A concave pentakis dodecahedron replaces the pentagonal faces of a dodecahedron with &quot;inverted&quot; pyramids.

== Related polyhedra==

The faces of a regular dodecahedron may be replaced (or augmented with) any regular pentagonal pyramid to produce what is in general referred to as an elevated dodecahedron. For example, if pentagonal pyramids with equilateral triangles are used, the result is a non-convex deltahedron. Any such elevated dodecahedron has the same combinatorial structure as a pentakis dodecahedron, i.e., the same Schlegel diagram.


== See also==
* Excavated dodecahedron

==Cultural references==
*The Spaceship Earth structure at Walt Disney World&#x27;s Epcot is a derivative of a pentakis dodecahedron.
*The model for a campus arts workshop designed by Jeffrey Lindsay was actually a hemispherical pentakis dodecahedron https://books.google.com/books?id=JD8EAAAAMBAJ&amp;dq=jeffrey+lindsay&amp;pg=PA92
*The shape of the &quot;Crystal Dome&quot; used in the popular TV game show &quot;The Crystal Maze&quot; was based on a pentakis dodecahedron.
*In Doctor Atomic, the shape of the first atomic bomb detonated in New Mexico was a pentakis dodecahedron.
*In De Blob 2 in the Prison Zoo, domes are made up of parts of a Pentakis Dodecahedron. These Domes also appear whenever the player transforms on a dome in the Hypno Ray level.
*Some Geodomes in which people play on are Pentakis Dodecahedra, or at least elevated dodecahedra.

==References==

* (Section 3-9)
* (The thirteen semiregular convex polyhedra and their duals, Page 18, Pentakisdodecahedron)
*&quot;The Symmetries of Things&quot; 2008, John H. Conway, Heidi Burgiel, Chaim Goodman-Strauss, (Chapter 21, Naming the Archimedean and Catalan polyhedra and tilings, page 284, Pentakis dodecahedron )

==External links==
*Pentakis Dodecahedron – Interactive Polyhedron Model
*Visual Polyhedra pentakis dodecahedron</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3" end="11" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q277550" start="15" end="36" title="Pentakis dodecahedron" label="pentakis dodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q277550" start="40" end="55" title="Pentakis dodecahedron" label="kisdodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154713" start="95" end="113" title="pentagonal pyramid" label="pentagonal pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629569" start="132" end="152" title="regular dodecahedron" label="regular dodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670289" start="173" end="181" title="Kleetope" label="Kleetope"/>
<link wikidata="Q258921" start="259" end="272" title="Catalan solid" label="Catalan solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053857" start="285" end="289" title="Dual polyhedron" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q499980" start="295" end="316" title="truncated icosahedron" label="truncated icosahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="367" end="379" title="golden ratio" label="golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015071" start="481" end="500" title="regular icosahedron" label="regular icosahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629569" start="511" end="531" title="regular dodecahedron" label="regular dodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075376" start="1279" end="1299" title="buckminsterfullerene" label="buckminsterfullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="1347" end="1353" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="1354" end="1358" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q355989" start="1675" end="1697" title="Adeno-associated virus" label="Adeno-associated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129097" start="2400" end="2406" title="Convex polytope" label="convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140112" start="2407" end="2418" title="deltahedron" label="deltahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004228" start="2531" end="2547" title="Schlegel diagram" label="Schlegel diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q778671" start="2567" end="2589" title="Excavated dodecahedron" label="Excavated dodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916749" start="2620" end="2635" title="Spaceship Earth (Disney)" label="Spaceship Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="2649" end="2666" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052042" start="2674" end="2679" title="Epcot" label="Epcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658068" start="3005" end="3021" title="The Crystal Maze" label="The Crystal Maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233821" start="3070" end="3083" title="Doctor Atomic" label="Doctor Atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="3133" end="3143" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647935" start="3177" end="3186" title="De Blob 2" label="De Blob 2"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723197" wikidata="Q7442045" url="?curid=723197" title="Seattle &amp; King County Emergency Medical Services System">
<text>The Seattle &amp; King County Emergency Medical Services System is a fire-based two-tier response system providing prehospital basic and advanced life support services.

There are six paramedic provider programs in the system. The Seattle Fire Department operates Seattle Medic One. The program is funded by the city&#x27;s general fund and has a different administrative structure than the five other Medic One programs. The five other Medic One programs with the exception of King County Medic One are operated by fire departments under a formal contract with the EMS Division of Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County. King County Medic One is directly operated by the EMS Division.

The modern EMS system in King County began operation in 1970 with 15 paramedics staffing one paramedic unit in Seattle. In 2009, there were 255 paramedics from six paramedic programs staffing 26 paramedic units.

The system is a dynamic layered response system. An EMS response to an emergency begins with a telephone call to 9-1-1. Calls are transferred from a primary call taker to emergency medical call taker who gathers information from the caller, gives instructions to the caller, and determines what types of emergency personnel to send. For very serious and life-threatening emergencies firefighters trained in basic life support and paramedics trained in advanced life support respond simultaneously. Paramedics transport patients in critical condition. For less severe emergencies only firefighters will be dispatched. Basic life support personnel from either a fire department or private ambulance company transport non-critical patients. 

==History==


In 1968, motivated by the work of Frank Pantridge, cardiologist Leonard Cobb proposed to the chief of the Seattle Fire Department, Gordon Vickery, training firefighters to treat cardiac arrest. The department was attractive to Cobb because it already provided first aid and tracked its performance electronically.

In 1969, they trained fifteen firefighters and used a grant from the Washington/Alaska Regional Medical Program to convert a large motor home into a Mobile Coronary Care Unit nicknamed &quot;Moby Pig&quot;, which would respond to calls with both the firefighter paramedics and a physician on board.

The first Medic One call was on March 7, 1970. During the program&#x27;s first year, 31 lives were saved. The following year the program was changed, replacing the on-board doctors with fire department paramedics given advanced special training and remote access to the doctors.

In 1974, the TV news-magazine &quot;60 Minutes&quot; profiled the success of Medic One, lauding the high standards of training and education provided by the Seattle training program. Correspondent Morley Safer declared, &quot;If you have to have a heart attack, have it in Seattle&quot;. The phrase is still used frequently in conjunction with Medic One, due to its continued success which is reflected in the area&#x27;s high survival rate for heart attacks and their comprehensive CPR training program.

That same year Medic One incorporated as a privately held, non-profit organization and established the Medic One Foundation, which works on behalf of both fund raising and the expansion of the program. The program is financed by local property tax levies, which are voted on by the public every six years, along with private and corporate donations.

Medic One had saved 655 patients from cardiac arrest by 1976 and this success was gaining national and international attention. Medic One service was expanded into the rest of King County in 1976, and in conjunction with the Medic One Foundation, other counties in Washington State began paramedic programs to serve their communities.

In 1979, Cobb and UW professor Mickey Eisenberg began training fire department emergency medical technician - Basics (EMT-Bs) to perform the administration of defibrillation for patients in cardiac arrest since the EMTs were usually at the patient&#x27;s side several minutes before the paramedics. Eisenberg began training 9-1-1 dispatchers to provide instructions to lay-persons on how to perform CPR in 1982. With the introduction of automatic external defibrillators (AEDs) in 1984, EMTs were able to defibrillate patients in cardiac arrest even more quickly.

==Programs==
There are five paramedic programs in the Medic One system.

===Seattle Medic One===

Seattle Medic One is the paramedic provider program serving Seattle. It is operated by the Seattle Fire Department. The paramedic medical director for Seattle Medic One is Michael Sayre. The Seattle program conducts field internships for the University of Washington Paramedic Training Program.
===King County Medic One===

King County Medic One is the paramedic service serving all of South King County provided by Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County. Its medical director is Peter Kudenchuk.
==Structure==

Founded on strong physician leadership Medic One is structured around response, training, and quality improvement.

One of the primary components to the success of Medic One is their “Tiered Response System” which begins with the citizen call to the 9-1-1 center. Emergency Medical Dispatchers are trained to rapidly triage the call to dispatch the appropriate level of assistance, while providing pre-arrival instruction of CPR. Firefighters, with EMT training, respond first to deliver immediate Basic Life Support (BLS), pending the arrival of the paramedics. Specially trained paramedics arrive within minutes to provide Advanced Life Support (ALS) and, if needed, can provide transportation to the nearest appropriate Medical Center.

The system is successful due to the blended cooperation between the fire department and paramedic/ambulance services, as well as, a strict policy of meticulous measurement of system performance and cardiac arrest survival information. Strong leadership and regional programs promote uniformity in medical care and response, regardless of jurisdiction.

Another critical element to the Medic One program is the comprehensive training program for the paramedics, one of the most stringent anywhere, making their paramedics some of the most thoroughly trained in the world. Only paramedics with at least three years of prior firefighter or EMT experience may enter the program. Medic One paramedics receive 2,000 hours of instruction, using both “book” studies and hands on field and clinical application through both the University of Washington and Harborview Medical Center. The national standard for paramedic training is just 1,100 hours. Medic One paramedics will have more than 700 patient contacts during their training, which is three times the national standard. Upon completion of training Medic One paramedics are considered to be an extension of the ER doctors and may perform advanced medical care, open airways and administer a variety of medications.

The final component is an emphasis on community based CPR training, called Medic Two. The Seattle/King County area has the highest per capita number of citizens that are trained in the administration of CPR techniques, approximately 50% of its residents.

===Leadership===

Medic One is operated as a partnership between physicians and administrators. Medical directors review patient care by paramedics and can make recommendations including decertification and termination. Administrators act upon the recommendations of the medical director.

===Response===

The major components of Medic One&#x27;s response system are universal access, dispatcher triage, basic life support services, advanced life support services, and transport to hospitals.

A medical 9-1-1 call is handled by one of the following communication centers Seattle Fire Department Alarm Center, Valley Communications Center, North East King County Regional Public Safety Communication Agency, or Port of Seattle Police Department Communications Center.

Medic One dispatchers use criteria based dispatch guidelines to send the most appropriate care providers. The three response levels are basic with advanced life support units, emergency BLS only, and non-emergency BLS only.

The first tier is basic life support provided by cross-trained firefighter emergency medical technician - basics.

The second tier is advanced life support.

Basic life support transports for 9-1-1 calls are provided by either a fire department or one of the private ambulance companies American Medical Response and Tri-Med Ambulance. Advanced life support transports for 9-1-1 calls are provided by paramedics.

===Education===

All paramedics in King County are graduates of the University of Washington Paramedic Training Program regardless of previous training. The training is 1,866 total hours consisting of 380 lecture hours, 120 lab hours, 466 clinical hours in the operating room and emergency department at Harborview Medical Center and critical care unit and labor and delivery at Seattle Children&#x27;s Hospital, and 900 field internship hours with Seattle Medic One. Students see an average of 700 patient contacts.

===Improvement===

The paramedic medical director for the one of six Medic One programs that provided care reviews every resuscitation, intubation, and central-line placement attempt. That director provides both positive and negative feedback. For probationary paramedics a more rigorous review is conducted.

==Funding==

Medic One paramedic programs are funded by a property tax levy. Basic life support services receive partial funding from the levy. The levy passed in 1979, 1985, 1991, 1998, 2001, and 2008. The levy did not pass in 1997.

The Medic One Foundation is a nonprofit charitable foundation supporting paramedic training, research, medical oversight and quality review, and the purchasing of emergency medical equipment.

==Performance==

===Cardiac arrest===

A change in the protocol of emergency response personnel is also credited as contributing to the high survival rate in the region. Guidelines set by the American Heart Association in 2000, recommend repeated shocks from a defibrillator and to check for a pulse prior to starting CPR. Medic One guidelines, established in 2005, are to provide a single shock from a defibrillator followed immediately by two minutes of CPR, beginning with chest compressions. This has dropped the average time between first shock to starting CPR from twenty-eight seconds to seven seconds, resulting in a near 50% increase in the previous rate of survival. For every one hundred cardiac arrest calls, now an additional thirteen patients will live.



In King County outcomes of attempted out-of-hospital resuscitations are recorded, following the Utstein uniform reporting guidelines, in a cardiac arrest registry. In 2008 Medic One&#x27;s survival rate for witnessed cardiac arrests due to heart disease prior to EMS arrival with initial rhythm of ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia was 49%.

The average response time for basic life support personnel for cardiac arrests from time of 9-1-1 being dialed to arrival is 4 minutes 40 seconds and for advanced life support personnel is 9 minutes 45 seconds.

In 2008, 58% (530/920) of EMS-treated cardiac arrests not witnessed by EMS in Seattle &amp; King County CPR was initiated by a bystander.

===Endotracheal intubation===

Seattle Medic One&#x27;s first-pass success rate for oral endotracheal intubation is 75% (years 2001–2005). Its overall success rate is 98.4%.

==Research==
* Cardiac Arrest Blood Study (CABS)
* AutoPulse Assisted Prehospital International Resuscitation (ASPIRE) Trial 
* Transthoracic Incremental Monophasic Versus Biphasic by Emergency Responders (TIMBER)
* Dispatcher-Assisted Resuscitation Trial (DART)
* Emergency Medical Technician Treatment of Hypoglycemia in the Field
* Induced Hypothermia for Cardiac Arrest Patients
* Resuscitation Outcomes Consortium
* SPHERE Hypertension Intervention Study
* At-Home Automated External Defibrillator (AED) Training Study

==Footnotes==

==References==
* 
*USA Today: Six Minutes to Live or Die
*Seattle Medic One
*King County Medic One
*Medic One Foundation
*Medic One 40th Anniversary: Seattle Channel
*Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County EMS Division&#x27;s 2009 EMS Annual Report
*Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County EMS Division&#x27;s 2008 EMS Annual Report
*Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County EMS Division&#x27;s 2007 EMS Annual Report
*Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County EMS Division&#x27;s 2006 EMS Annual Report
*Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County EMS Division&#x27;s 2005 EMS Annual Report
*Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County EMS Division&#x27;s 2004 EMS Annual Report
*Public Health - Seattle &amp; King County EMS Division&#x27;s 2003 EMS Annual Report
*Seattle Fire Department Annual Report 2017
*Medic One/EMS 2014-2019 Strategic Plan - King County
*2008-2013 Medic One/Emergency Medical Services Strategic Plan
*2002 Strategic Plan Update of the 1998-2003 Emergency Medical Services Strategic Plan
*South King County Medic One Feasibility Study, 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7442045" start="0" end="63" title="Seattle &amp;amp; King County Emergency Medical Services System" label="The Seattle &amp;amp; King County Emergency Medical Services System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257413" start="582" end="623" title="Public Health - Seattle &amp;amp; King County" label="Public Health - Seattle &amp;amp; King County"/>
<link wikidata="Q330204" start="783" end="792" title="paramedic" label="paramedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="1016" end="1021" title="9-1-1" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370696" start="1074" end="1102" title="emergency medical dispatcher" label="emergency medical call taker"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="1286" end="1297" title="firefighter" label="firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250470" start="1310" end="1328" title="basic life support" label="basic life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586939" start="1355" end="1376" title="advanced life support" label="advanced life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488886" start="1691" end="1706" title="Frank Pantridge" label="Frank Pantridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442098" start="1763" end="1786" title="Seattle Fire Department" label="Seattle Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q746448" start="2103" end="2113" title="Recreational vehicle" label="motor home"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="2588" end="2598" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q920637" start="2749" end="2761" title="Morley Safer" label="Morley Safer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="3117" end="3140" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978007" start="3824" end="3860" title="emergency medical technician - Basic" label="emergency medical technician - Basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="3904" end="3918" title="defibrillation" label="defibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="4468" end="4475" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442098" start="4499" end="4522" title="Seattle Fire Department" label="Seattle Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="4650" end="4674" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q330204" start="4675" end="4684" title="Paramedic" label="Paramedic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4732" end="4753" title="King County Medic One" label="King County Medic One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4794" end="4811" title="South King County" label="South King County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257413" start="4824" end="4865" title="Public Health - Seattle &amp;amp; King County" label="Public Health - Seattle &amp;amp; King County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4891" end="4906" title="Peter Kudenchuk" label="Peter Kudenchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="4993" end="5001" title="Emergency management" label="response"/>
<link wikidata="Q918385" start="5003" end="5011" title="training" label="training"/>
<link wikidata="Q757012" start="5017" end="5036" title="quality improvement" label="quality improvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q108861" start="7026" end="7037" title="King County, Washington" label="King County"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="7688" end="7693" title="9-1-1" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7756" end="7792" title="Seattle Fire Department Alarm Center" label="Seattle Fire Department Alarm Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7794" end="7822" title="Valley Communications Center" label="Valley Communications Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7824" end="7890" title="North East King County Regional Public Safety Communication Agency" label="North East King County Regional Public Safety Communication Agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7895" end="7950" title="Port of Seattle Police Department Communications Center" label="Port of Seattle Police Department Communications Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7979" end="8002" title="criteria based dispatch" label="criteria based dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250470" start="8196" end="8214" title="basic life support" label="basic life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978007" start="8253" end="8289" title="emergency medical technician - basic" label="emergency medical technician - basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586939" start="8312" end="8333" title="advanced life support" label="advanced life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614084" start="8465" end="8490" title="American Medical Response" label="American Medical Response"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8495" end="8512" title="Tri-Med Ambulance" label="Tri-Med Ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8660" end="8711" title="University of Washington Paramedic Training Program" label="University of Washington Paramedic Training Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="8853" end="8867" title="operating room" label="operating room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="8872" end="8892" title="emergency department" label="emergency department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654758" start="8896" end="8921" title="Harborview Medical Center" label="Harborview Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="8926" end="8944" title="critical care unit" label="critical care unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="8949" end="8967" title="labor and delivery" label="labor and delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442069" start="8971" end="9003" title="Seattle Children&amp;#x27;s" label="Seattle Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9041" end="9058" title="Seattle Medic One" label="Seattle Medic One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903266" start="10715" end="10751" title="Utstein Style" label="Utstein uniform reporting guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915526" start="11556" end="11565" title="AutoPulse" label="AutoPulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316564" start="11890" end="11923" title="Resuscitation Outcomes Consortium" label="Resuscitation Outcomes Consortium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723198" wikidata="Q2415382" url="?curid=723198" title="World's Children's Prize for the Rights of the Child">
<text>The World’s Children’s Prize for the Rights of the Child was founded in 2000 and is run by the World&#x27;s Children&#x27;s Prize Foundation (WCPF), based in Mariefred, Sweden. 

The WCPF is a non-profit organisation, independent of all political and religious affiliation, and run with support from bodies including the Swedish Postcode Lottery and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. 

== Patrons ==
Patrons of the World&#x27;s Children&#x27;s Prize include Malala Yousafzai, the late Nelson Mandela from South Africa, Democracy Champion, and Freedom Fighter Xanana Gusmão, from East Timor. Its patrons also include Queen Silvia of Sweden, Graça Machel and Desmond Tutu. Artists Loreen and Vusi &quot;The Voice&quot; Mahlasele are also patrons.

==Laureates ==
Since the launch of the program in 2000, more than 55 Prize Laureates have been awarded the World&#x27;s Children&#x27;s Prize.

== Oversight ==
The World&#x27;s Children&#x27;s Prize Foundation is regulated by Svensk Insamlingskontroll (Swedish Fundraising Control), which monitors charitable fundraising. 

==References==
== External links ==
* Official web page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2415382" start="4" end="56" title="World&amp;#x27;s Children&amp;#x27;s Prize for the Rights of the Child" label="World’s Children’s Prize for the Rights of the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q194359" start="158" end="175" title="Mariefred" label="Mariefred, Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670860" start="354" end="406" title="Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency" label="Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q32732" start="482" end="498" title="Malala Yousafzai" label="Malala Yousafzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="509" end="523" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q11509" start="583" end="596" title="Xanana Gusmão" label="Xanana Gusmão"/>
<link wikidata="Q152308" start="640" end="662" title="Queen Silvia of Sweden" label="Queen Silvia of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q239105" start="664" end="676" title="Graça Machel" label="Graça Machel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="681" end="693" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q483376" start="703" end="709" title="Loreen" label="Loreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161355" start="1079" end="1090" title="fundraising" label="fundraising"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723199" wikidata="Q4034861" url="?curid=723199" title="The Barnes Review">
<text>The Barnes Review (TBR) is a bi-monthly magazine founded in 1994 by Willis Carto&#x27;s Liberty Lobby and headquartered in Washington, D.C. The Southern Poverty Law Center describes &quot;The Barnes Review&quot; as &quot;one of the most virulent anti-Semitic organizations around&quot;; the journal and website are &quot;dedicated to historical revisionism and Holocaust denial.&quot;

The journal is named after the Holocaust denier Harry Elmer Barnes. Linked with it is a TBR Bookclub, promoting what the SPLC describes as &quot;a wide range of extremist books and publications&quot;. The organization also holds conferences with speakers such as Ted Gunderson. &quot;Claiming that its mission is to &#x27;tell the whole truth about history,&#x27; TBR really practices an extremist form of revisionist history that includes defending the Nazi regime, denying the Holocaust, discounting the evils of slavery, and promoting white nationalism&quot;, according to the SPLC.

Willis Carto, who founded the Institute for Historical Review in 1979, used to be associated with the organisation but lost control in an internal takeover by former associates. Eustace Mullins was a contributing editor.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4034861" start="18" end="23" title="The Barnes Review" label="(TBR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975413" start="68" end="80" title="Willis Carto" label="Willis Carto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541867" start="88" end="101" title="Liberty Lobby" label="Liberty Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="123" end="139" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="144" end="171" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="361" end="377" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="417" end="433" title="Holocaust denier" label="Holocaust denier"/>
<link wikidata="Q571932" start="434" end="452" title="Harry Elmer Barnes" label="Harry Elmer Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="507" end="511" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="SPLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517026" start="649" end="662" title="Ted Gunderson" label="Ted Gunderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975413" start="973" end="985" title="Willis Carto" label="Willis Carto"/>
<link wikidata="Q699454" start="1003" end="1034" title="Institute for Historical Review" label="Institute for Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360344" start="1151" end="1166" title="Eustace Mullins" label="Eustace Mullins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723201" wikidata="Q352219" url="?curid=723201" title="Treasure Hunt (British game show)">
<text>Treasure Hunt is a UK game show, based on the format of the French show &quot;&quot;, created by Jacques Antoine. It appeared on Channel 4 between 28 December 1982 and 18 May 1989 and was revived by BBC Two between 16 December 2002 and 2 August 2003.

==The game==

A team of two contestants in the studio had to use a library of maps and reference materials to solve up to five clues, and communicate instructions via a radio link to a &quot;skyrunner&quot; who had the use of a helicopter. Although viewers could see the skyrunner, the contestants could not, and all communication between them was by sound only. The contestants were given the first clue for free, the solving of which would lead to the location of the second clue and so on until a trinket or other significant object was found by solving the final clue.

The contestants won a higher cash prize each time they solved a clue correctly. This was all done against the clock. Even once the contestants had solved the final clue, the skyrunner still had to confirm they were correct, by reaching the final target. On a few occasions, the contestants solved all five clues with time to spare, in which case, a bonus clue was given to the contestants. This typically resulted in their winning a bottle of champagne.

The studio had a library of books which contestants could use for reference to help solve the clues. Although it appeared to be a random library, the production crew planted relevant books in the library with information to the contestants that was relevant to the location that the episode was taking place in.
The skyrunner and helicopter did not have freedom to fly and land anywhere they wished. Although the episodes would usually show Rice instructing the pilot where to fly under the direction of the contestants, the pilot would play along as if he didn&#x27;t know beforehand where they were going but would actually know where they were supposed to be flying and landing. He would wait until he was told where to go by Rice before heading there. Although the pilot could to an extent request permission from airspace authorities to fly off-course, as happened on occasions, the episodes were meticulously planned and the pilot would know beforehand what the course would be as landings needed to be agreed in advance with landowners to ensure the landing site was suitable, safe and near the clue. In one episode of season 6 based in the Chilterns, the contestants directed Rice to the wrong location on the penultimate clue. The helicopter pilot played along and landed in an allotment as instructed by Rice via the contestants. The contestants actually realised they were wrong and the correct location was a horse farm in Speen just before Rice landed, but she wasn&#x27;t listening to them and got out of the helicopter before being sent back.

On occasions the helicopter would land in a clearly marked out area, especially at public places. In several episodes when the skyrunner was leaving the helicopter just after landing, a police officer can be seen on camera near to the landing site especially at public spaces. This was arranged by the production team with the local constabularies beforehand to ensure the safety of the helicopter and keep members of the public away, as its rotors would still run whilst Rice was finding the clue. In a season 5 episode based in Wiltshire, the helicopter flew into Bath but due to the density of built-up areas the helicopter had to land out of the city and Rice was given a lift into the city centre in a police car with its blue lights and sirens.

Kenneth Kendall stressed that he did not know the clues and locations in advance, and any help that he gave the contestants was from his own knowledge.

According to a &quot;making of &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot;&quot; programme, Anneka Rice was confined to the hotel on the day that the camera operator, video and sound recordist; and helicopter pilot undertook a rehearsal and flew the course with the production team (typically the day before the programme was recorded), so she had no advance knowledge of the locations. This did not stop her carrying out research about the general area in order to have a stock of facts to fill in any silences that might arise while the contestants were thinking.

==Presenters and crew==

In the original version, the presenter was former BBC newsreader Kenneth Kendall and the &quot;skyrunner&quot; was broadcaster Anneka Rice. In the first series, Kendall was joined briefly in the studio for the handover of the first clue by the original clue-setter, Ann Meo. She would later rejoin the contestants if they had been successful in finding the treasure to offer her congratulations. If they had been unsuccessful, she would be heard as a voiceover explaining where they had gone wrong.

From the second series onwards, this role was expanded, another studio-based person acted as adjudicator, giving the contestants tips on how they were doing against the scheduled time, and providing additional information about the locations visited. In series 2, this was Annette Lynton (&quot;Nettie&quot;) who is married to Pink Floyd drummer Nick Mason. From series 3 onwards, TV-am weather girl Wincey Willis took over this role.

In 1988, Rice left to have a baby, and her place was taken by tennis player Annabel Croft. In this series, the set was revamped due to a move to Thames Television&#x27;s facilities (the original studios were at Trilion in Soho, London, and then Limehouse Studios on Canary Wharf in Docklands, East London which was later earmarked for demolition to make way for One Canada Square), and Willis was promoted to sharing main billing with Kendall. Croft was billed as &quot;Guest Skyrunner&quot; for the first episode of the series, and it was stated at the time that Rice would return after giving birth, but it turned out to be the show&#x27;s final series and the &quot;Guest Skyrunner&quot; credit was dropped.

In the BBC&#x27;s 2002–2003 version, newsreader Dermot Murnaghan presented, the &quot;skyrunner&quot; was Suzi Perry, and there was no adjudicator. Advances in broadcasting technology meant that this new version could come from a much greater range of locations; however, the new version was short-lived.
Keith Thompson of Castle Air Charters was the usual helicopter pilot in both versions, though for overseas editions a local pilot was often used. There was always a &quot;chase&quot; helicopter which relayed radio signals back to London and, although this could never be used tactically by the contestants, it was not hidden from the viewers. This communications helicopter had dark green with gold stripe livery, registration G-SPEY.

Both helicopters were usually Bell 206 JetRangers; the helicopter usually used by the skyrunner was registration G-BHXU, which later ditched and sank in the English Channel in 1995 due to what is believed to have been an engine/gearbox failure – the pilot and engineer on board were both safely rescued after around 30 minutes in the water.

The contestants would win a cash prize of £1,000 (£2,000 in the revived version).

==Broadcasts==

When first shown on Channel 4 on 28 December 1982, &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot; was one of the earliest major series on the then-new channel. The unusual format earned extra publicity for both the programme and the channel, which was striving to justify itself with new and different programming.

The 1982–1989 series were repeated on terrestrial television several times, and during the 1990s appeared on the Challenge satellite and cable channel, as well as Sky Travel. The first episode was repeated on 30 October 2007 on the digital channel More4 as part of Channel 4&#x27;s 25th anniversary celebrations. This was a one-off and there are no current plans to repeat the TV show.

On 21 November 2013, Challenge announced that they re-acquired the first two series. The first episode was repeated again on 28 December 2013 as part of Challenge&#x27;s First Ever Episodes weekend. Challenge confirmed that the re-run of series 1 and 2 would air on Saturdays and Sundays from 8 February 2014. The Saturday episode was screened at 6pm and the Sunday episode aired at 5pm (times varied afterwards).

The original run of the first series was watched by up to 900,000 viewers; however, by the mid-1980s, ratings were some of the highest for Channel 4 at around seven million.

Two charity editions of the show were produced, one locally in the London area for the Thames Television telethon in 1985 and another broadcast across the UK as part of the ITV network&#x27;s &quot;Telethon &#x27;88&quot;. The show was also featured in an edition of the BBC children&#x27;s aspiration show &quot;Jim&#x27;ll Fix It&quot;, in which a young viewer joined Anneka Rice in the famous helicopter over the county of Surrey for a scaled down version of the show, in &quot;The Paul Daniels Magic Show&quot; (BBC) and in &quot;The Krypton Factor&quot; (Granada for ITV).

For all the UK series, the programme was a Chatsworth Television independent production in association with Tele Union Paris.

==Spin-offs==
An eponymous board game based on the show was published in the UK. It involved moving pieces around a map of England and Wales.

There was also a computer game released for some home computer formats in 1986, including for the BBC Micro, published by Macsen Software. This game featured very basic graphic layout and was text-driven, and had the options of four locations to find clues in.

A one-off Welsh language version, &quot;&quot; (Welsh for &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot;), was produced for S4C in 1985.

BBC Three Counties Radio aired &quot;Treasure Quest&quot; each Sunday from 9am to 12 noon. Andy Gelder was in the studio and varying assistants in the radio car help two contestants to solve clues over the three-hour period. This format has now changed to Saturday mornings and now hosted by Jonathan Vernon-Smith, sharing with BBC Radio Northampton, with two runners running simultaneously in the two radio areas during the same programme. It aired from 9am until 12pm, and later 10am to 12pm. The show ended on 15 July 2023 after almost 10 years on air.

BBC Radio Norfolk began their own version of &quot;Treasure Quest&quot; in 2008, on Sunday mornings from 9am to 12 noon. David Whiteley presents in the studio, with Sophie Little in the radio car. On 6 September 2009, Wincey Willis stood in for the then clue hunter Becky Betts, and on 14 February 2010, Anneka Rice took part in the programme, appearing at the fifth clue location, Norwich Castle, and then teaming up with Betts to find the treasure.

On London&#x27;s talk station LBC, presenter James O&#x27;Brien hosted &quot;The Treasure Hunt&quot; on Wednesday lunchtimes as part of his weekday show. In this format, callers rang in and requested things they had been trying to get hold of, hoping that other listeners had the required items. Although otherwise unrelated to the original concept, the programme opened with the &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot; television series theme tune, and in August 2007, Anneka Rice recorded a voice-over lead-in for it.

BBC Radio Shropshire presented their own version of Treasure Hunt on Sunday mornings with presenter Ryan Kennedy reading out a set of clues to various locations. Prior to the first COVID-19 lockdown, the answers gave directions with a colleague driving to that location in the county. From the start of the first lockdown until Ryan&#x27;s departure from the station in March 2023, the quiz operated as a virtual tour with the answers providing locations both in the county and worldwide.

Cambridge 105 Radio have also presented their own version called &#x27;Where&#x27;s Flossie Live!&#x27;. Flossie is name of the station&#x27;s outside broadcast vehicle. This would air on a bank holiday weekend. Clues would be set around the city of Cambridge and a presenter, usually on a bike, accompanied by a sound/broadcast engineer would have to solve each clue at a different location to be able to move on to the next location. Flossie would be located at the final destination. The starting point was typically the station&#x27;s studios on the Gwydir Street Enterprise Centre in Cambridge.

==Transmissions==
===Original===
====Specials====
===Revival===
==List of episodes==

===1982–1989 version===
===2002–2003 version===
==Foreign versions==
==References==
==External links==
*Episode guide — with exhaustive location, clue and crew listings plus helicopter registration letters
*&quot;Off The Telly&quot; article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="22" end="31" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q546157" start="97" end="112" title="Jacques Antoine" label="Jacques Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="129" end="138" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="199" end="206" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="480" end="490" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="2429" end="2438" title="Chilterns" label="Chilterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575734" start="2716" end="2721" title="Speen, Buckinghamshire" label="Speen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4369" end="4372" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q982722" start="4384" end="4399" title="Kenneth Kendall" label="Kenneth Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q947873" start="4434" end="4445" title="Television presenter" label="broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768946" start="4446" end="4457" title="Anneka Rice" label="Anneka Rice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5092" end="5106" title="Annette Lynton" label="Annette Lynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="5146" end="5156" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q192936" start="5165" end="5175" title="Nick Mason" label="Nick Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672074" start="5200" end="5205" title="TV-am" label="TV-am"/>
<link wikidata="Q182868" start="5206" end="5218" title="Weather forecasting" label="weather girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023732" start="5219" end="5232" title="Wincey Willis" label="Wincey Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q458541" start="5331" end="5344" title="Annabel Croft" label="Annabel Croft"/>
<link wikidata="Q541667" start="5400" end="5417" title="Thames Television" label="Thames Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549183" start="5500" end="5517" title="Limehouse Studios" label="Limehouse Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q503477" start="5617" end="5634" title="One Canada Square" label="One Canada Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5974" end="5977" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262832" start="6015" end="6031" title="Dermot Murnaghan" label="Dermot Murnaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651082" start="6073" end="6083" title="Suzi Perry" label="Suzi Perry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6290" end="6309" title="Castle Air" label="Castle Air Charters"/>
<link wikidata="Q660969" start="6738" end="6746" title="Bell 206" label="Bell 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183447" start="7470" end="7478" title="rerun" label="repeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="7482" end="7504" title="terrestrial television" label="terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068886" start="7557" end="7566" title="Challenge (TV channel)" label="Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537542" start="7607" end="7617" title="Sky Travel" label="Sky Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219852" start="7692" end="7697" title="More4" label="More4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975136" start="8619" end="8636" title="ITV Telethon" label="Telethon &amp;#x27;88"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193251" start="8734" end="8752" title="Jim&amp;#x27;ll Fix It" label="Jim&amp;#x27;ll Fix It"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017406" start="8902" end="8929" title="The Paul Daniels Magic Show" label="The Paul Daniels Magic Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790380" start="8955" end="8973" title="The Krypton Factor" label="The Krypton Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087823" start="9043" end="9064" title="Chatsworth Television" label="Chatsworth Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="9368" end="9377" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="9542" end="9556" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="9635" end="9638" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834991" start="9649" end="9673" title="BBC Three Counties Radio" label="BBC Three Counties Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876753" start="9977" end="9998" title="BBC Radio Northampton" label="BBC Radio Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801365" start="10206" end="10223" title="BBC Radio Norfolk" label="BBC Radio Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241033" start="10327" end="10341" title="David Whiteley" label="David Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672292" start="10588" end="10602" title="Norwich Castle" label="Norwich Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457273" start="10688" end="10691" title="LBC" label="LBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140452" start="10703" end="10721" title="James O&amp;#x27;Brien (LBC)" label="James O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834928" start="11165" end="11185" title="BBC Radio Shropshire" label="BBC Radio Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025333" start="11655" end="11674" title="Cambridge 105 Radio" label="Cambridge 105 Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="11905" end="11914" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723208" wikidata="Q8554430" url="?curid=723208" title="Sunset Crater">
<text>Sunset Crater is a cinder cone located north of Flagstaff in the U.S. state of Arizona. The crater is within the Sunset Crater Volcano National Monument.

Sunset Crater is the youngest in a string of volcanoes (the San Francisco volcanic field) that is related to the nearby San Francisco Peaks.

== Formation ==
The date of the eruptions that formed the was initially derived from tree-ring dates, suggesting the eruption began between the growing seasons of AD 1064–1065. However, more recent geologic and archaeological evidence places the eruption around AD 1085. The largest vent of the eruption, Sunset Crater itself, was the source of the Bonito and Kana-a lava flows that extended about northwest and northeast, respectively. Additional vents along a extending southeast produced small spatter ramparts and a to the east. The Sunset Crater eruption peaked at VEI 4 (Sub-Plinian), produced a total 0.52 km3 of ejecta, had an eruption column between 20-30km tall and produced a blanket of ash and lapilli covering an area of more than , which forced the temporary abandonment of settlements of the local Sinagua people.

The volcano has partially revegetated, with pines and wildflowers. The crater is the namesake for the Sunset Crater Beardtongue (&quot;Penstemon clutei&quot;). The volcano is monitored by the Yellowstone Volcano Observatory and is classified as a moderate threat.

Damage from hikers forced the National Park Service to close a trail leading to the crater, but a short trail at the base remains.

The hiking trail below the summit skirts the substantial Bonito Lava Flow. This hardened lava is black and appears fresh as it has devastated the forest in its path. The lava flow also created an ice cave or tube that is now closed to the public after a partial collapse.

== 2015 eruption scare ==

On June 5, 2015, a website with satellite images reported steam rising from the crater, leading to fears that Sunset Crater was erupting. The cause of the steam was later determined to be a forest fire, and geologists stated that the volcano was extinct.

== Sunset Crater Volcano National Monument ==

Sunset Crater Volcano National Monument is a U.S. national monument created to protect Sunset Crater, a cinder cone within the San Francisco Volcanic Field.
The monument is managed by the National Park Service in conjunction with nearby Wupatki National Monument. In 1928, a Hollywood film company, Famous Players–Lasky Corporation, planned to detonate large quantities of explosives on the side of Sunset Crater in order to create an avalanche for Zane Grey&#x27;s motion picture &quot;Avalanche&quot;. Public outcry over this plan led in part to the proclamation of Sunset Crater Volcano National Monument by President Herbert Hoover in 1930.

A 1-mile (1.6 km), self-guided loop trail is located at the base of Sunset Crater, but hiking to the summit is not permitted. A trail providing access to the summit and crater was closed in 1973 because of excessive erosion caused by hikers. A visitor center is located near the park entrance, north of Flagstaff, Arizona, along U.S. Highway 89.

In April 2022, the Tunnel Fire burned over the entirety of the monument, though the visitor center was spared. In December 2022, 98 acres including the visitor center and administrative facilities were transferred from Coconino National Forest to the national monument.

==Climate==
According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Sunset Crater has a Continental climate, abbreviated &quot;Dsb&quot; on climate maps.
==See also==
* List of national monuments of the United States

==References==
==External links==
* Sunset Crater National Monument at National Park Service
* Sunset Crater at USGS
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8554430" start="0" end="13" title="Sunset Crater" label="Sunset Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806785" start="19" end="30" title="cinder cone" label="cinder cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79842" start="48" end="57" title="Flagstaff, Arizona" label="Flagstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="65" end="75" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="79" end="86" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q8554430" start="113" end="152" title="Sunset Crater" label="Sunset Crater Volcano National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="200" end="209" title="volcanoes" label="volcanoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680689" start="215" end="243" title="San Francisco volcanic field" label="San Francisco volcanic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974825" start="275" end="294" title="San Francisco Peaks" label="San Francisco Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="382" end="397" title="dendrochronology" label="tree-ring dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368970" start="794" end="809" title="spatter rampart" label="spatter rampart"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="867" end="870" title="Volcanic explosivity index" label="VEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q747501" start="878" end="885" title="Plinian eruption" label="Plinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362572" start="932" end="947" title="eruption column" label="eruption column"/>
<link wikidata="Q495423" start="1003" end="1010" title="lapilli" label="lapilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891996" start="1110" end="1117" title="Sinagua" label="Sinagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="1171" end="1175" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585615" start="1181" end="1191" title="wildflower" label="wildflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164842" start="1229" end="1254" title="Penstemon clutei" label="Sunset Crater Beardtongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348498" start="1319" end="1350" title="Yellowstone Volcano Observatory" label="Yellowstone Volcano Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="1404" end="1410" title="hiking" label="hikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="1422" end="1443" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="2172" end="2194" title="U.S. National Monument" label="U.S. national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806785" start="2231" end="2242" title="cinder cone" label="cinder cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="2315" end="2336" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q639000" start="2364" end="2389" title="Wupatki National Monument" label="Wupatki National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="2402" end="2411" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739165" start="2426" end="2458" title="Famous Players–Lasky Corporation" label="Famous Players–Lasky Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q146763" start="2576" end="2585" title="Zane Grey" label="Zane Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15103359" start="2614" end="2623" title="Avalanche (1928 film)" label="Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="2748" end="2762" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q79842" start="3076" end="3094" title="Flagstaff, Arizona" label="Flagstaff, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q410743" start="3102" end="3117" title="U.S. Highway 89" label="U.S. Highway 89"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915746" start="3139" end="3150" title="Tunnel Fire (2022)" label="Tunnel Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105434" start="3339" end="3363" title="Coconino National Forest" label="Coconino National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3420" end="3449" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3478" end="3497" title="Continental climate#Continental climate" label="Continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670549" start="3559" end="3606" title="List of national monuments of the United States" label="List of national monuments of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="3679" end="3700" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="3720" end="3724" title="United States Geological Survey" label="USGS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723210" wikidata="Q1355822" url="?curid=723210" title="Touro Synagogue">
<text>The Touro Synagogue or Congregation Jeshuat Israel () is a synagogue built in 1763 in Newport, Rhode Island. As the only surviving synagogue building in the U.S. dating to the colonial era, it is the oldest synagogue building still standing in the United States and North America. In 1946, it was declared a National Historic Site.

Touro Synagogue represents a profound symbol of religious freedom, a cornerstone of Rhode Island’s founding principles under Roger Williams. Rhode Island was established as a haven for those seeking freedom of conscience, and the synagogue’s existence is a testament to the colony’s early commitment to religious tolerance. The first congregation was composed of Sephardic Jews, believed to have migrated from the West Indies, where they had been part of the thriving trade networks connecting Dutch and English colonies. They followed the Spanish and Portuguese Jewish liturgy and customs, preserving their distinct cultural and religious heritage.

Amid the upheaval of the late 18th century, when threats of war loomed, the congregation entrusted the synagogue’s deed and Torah scrolls to New York&#x27;s Congregation Shearith Israel for safekeeping. Over time, the demographic shifted, and by the late 19th century, the congregation became predominantly Ashkenazi, reflecting the broader changes in Jewish immigration patterns to the United States.

In recent years, Touro Synagogue became the subject of a legal dispute over its ownership. In 2012, the Newport congregation sought to sell artifacts to finance the building&#x27;s restoration, leading to a court case with Congregation Shearith Israel. In 2017, the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit ruled in favor of the New York congregation, a decision that was left standing when the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear the case.

==History==
Touro Synagogue was designed by Peter Harrison, a noted British architect and Rhode Island resident. It is considered his most notable work. The interior is flanked by a series of twelve Ionic columns supporting balconies, which signify the twelve tribes of ancient Israel, and each column is carved from a single tree. The building is oriented to face east toward Jerusalem. The ark containing the Torah is on the east wall; above it is a mural representing the Ten Commandments in Hebrew, which was painted by Newport artist Benjamin Howland.

The Touro Synagogue was built from 1759 to 1763 for the Jeshuat Israel congregation in Newport under the leadership of Cantor (Chazzan) Isaac Touro. The cornerstone was laid by Aaron Lopez, a Newport-based philanthropist for Jewish causes who primarily made his fortune through the trading of candles and slaves (Lopez personally financed 30 slave voyages and enslaved almost a thousand Africans), in addition to being involved in the spermaceti candlemaking business and other commercial ventures. The Jeshuat Israel congregation dates to 1658, when 15 Spanish and Portuguese Jewish families arrived, probably from the Dutch or British West Indies. Many settled near Easton&#x27;s Point. The synagogue was formally dedicated 2 December 1763. Other notable leaders include Abraham Pereira Mendes and Henry Samuel Morais (1900–01).

Judah Touro, the son of Isaac Touro and his wife Reyna, made a fortune as a merchant in New Orleans. He left $10,000 ($ in current dollar terms) in his will for the upkeep of the Jewish cemetery and synagogue in Newport.

In 1946, Touro Synagogue was designated as a National Historic Site, and it is an affiliated area of the National Park Service. The synagogue was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 15, 1966. In 2001, the congregation joined into a partnership with the National Trust for Historic Preservation.

The Touro Synagogue is located at 85 Touro Street and remains an active Orthodox synagogue. The building underwent a restoration in 2005–2006, and a recreation of the original dedication ceremony was conducted in 2013 in honor of the 250th anniversary.

===Annual recitation of the Washington–Seixas letter on religious pluralism===
On August 17, 1790, the day that President George Washington visited Newport, the synagogue&#x27;s warden, Moses Seixas, wrote to Washington, expressing the support of the Congregation for Washington&#x27;s administration and good wishes for him.

Washington sent a letter on August 21 in response, which read in part:

The Touro congregation annually reads President Washington&#x27;s letter on religious pluralism and celebrates the occasion with invited speakers. They have included Supreme Court justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Elena Kagan; and Brown University presidents Ruth Simmons and Christina Paxson.

==Congregation==

The congregation at Newport, never large, was initially composed of Jews with roots in the Sephardic Spanish and Portuguese diaspora, and by the eighteenth century, with some Ashkenazim.

The first Jewish residents of Newport, fifteen Spanish Jewish families, arrived in 1658. It is presumed that they arrived via the communities in Curaçao, home to the oldest active Jewish congregation in the Americas, dating to 1651, and Suriname. The small community worshiped in rooms in private homes for more than a century before they could afford to build a synagogue.

The community purchased and dedicated the Jewish Cemetery at Newport in 1677.

In the late 1700s, the Jewish community removed the Torah scrolls and sent them for safekeeping, along with the deed to the building, to Congregation Shearith Israel in New York. The keys left the Jewish community and were passed to the Goulds, a Quaker family in Newport.

From the 1850s on, the building was occasionally opened for worship for the convenience of summer visitors. It was reopened on a regular basis in 1883 as Jewish life in Newport revived with the late nineteenth century immigration of eastern European Jews (Ashkenazim). The synagogue acquired a nearby building and ran a Hebrew school and other activities. It continues to serve as a thriving congregation with many year-round programs.

Although the congregation has been predominantly Ashkenazi for a century, it is constitutionally obliged to use the &quot;Sephardic ritual.” It therefore uses the ArtScroll Nusach Sefard prayer book; once a year representatives of the New York Congregation Shearith Israel visit and hold a service in the Spanish and Portuguese style.

Rabbi Dr. Marc Mandel became the rabbi in July 2012. , the congregation consisted of about 175 families. The current Rabbi is Rabbi Stephen Belsky.

==Restoration==

During 2005 and 2006, Touro Synagogue invested in a restoration project for its valued antique metal artifacts. In total, 150 metal objects, from eighteenth century hardware to European chandeliers and silver &quot;rimonim&quot; (ceremonial bells used on the Torah), needed to be rebuilt, have their surfaces stabilized, and have missing parts replaced. The project was carried out by the Newport-based restoration company Newmans Ltd.

==Ownership controversy==
Conflict over the ownership of the Touro building and its contents surfaced in 2012. Newport&#x27;s Congregation Jeshuat Israel put up for sale ceremonial bells, called rimonim, to the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, for $7.4 million. New York&#x27;s Congregation Shearith Israel sued the Newport congregation, saying that Shearith Israel owns the Touro synagogue building and its contents, based on the 18th century transfer of deed. They wanted to evict the Newport congregation from the Touro building and site. In April 2015 both sides of the dispute said several attempts at mediation had failed and they were preparing for trial.

In May 2016 a federal judge ruled on the matter, rejecting Congregation Shearith Israel&#x27;s claim to oversight. U.S. District Judge John J. McConnell, Jr. noted that &quot;for at least the past 20 years, Shearith Israel has not taken any meaningful action in its capacity as trustee for the Touro Synagogue and lands.&quot; In June 2016 Congregation Shearith Israel announced it would appeal the decision. Congregation Shearith Israel was awarded ownership on August 2, 2017 by the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston.

On March 18, 2019, the United States Supreme Court declined to take up the case; thus, the lower court ruling that Congregation Shearith Israel owns Touro stands.

==Images==
==See also==

* Touro Cemetery
* Touro Synagogue (New Orleans)
* Kahal Kadosh Beth Elohim
* Partners for Sacred Places
* List of the oldest synagogues in the United States
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Newport County, Rhode Island

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==
*Touro Synagogue National Historic Site (National Park Service profile)
*
*Loeb Visitors Center (Starting point for tours of Touro Synagogue)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1355822" start="4" end="19" title="Touro Synagogue" label="Touro Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355822" start="23" end="50" title="Touro Synagogue" label="Congregation Jeshuat Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="59" end="68" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="86" end="107" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="176" end="188" title="Colonial America" label="colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643195" start="200" end="225" title="Oldest synagogues in the United States" label="oldest synagogue building"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="248" end="261" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="266" end="279" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="308" end="330" title="National Historic Sites (United States)" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="381" end="398" title="Freedom of religion" label="religious freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="417" end="431" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q391591" start="458" end="472" title="Roger Williams" label="Roger Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q573756" start="532" end="553" title="freedom of conscience" label="freedom of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="696" end="710" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="747" end="758" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556538" start="827" end="832" title="Dutch colonization of the Americas" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q617219" start="837" end="844" title="English colonies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="873" end="880" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="885" end="910" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Portuguese Jewish liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015" start="1014" end="1026" title="18th century" label="18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1033" end="1047" title="American Revolutionary War" label="threats of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435187" start="1141" end="1169" title="Congregation Shearith Israel" label="Congregation Shearith Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="1291" end="1300" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="1653" end="1683" title="United States courts of appeals" label="United States Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178933" start="1885" end="1899" title="Peter Harrison (architect)" label="Peter Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="2040" end="2045" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="2252" end="2257" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q432864" start="2380" end="2396" title="Benjamin Howland" label="Benjamin Howland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077226" start="2535" end="2546" title="Isaac Touro" label="Isaac Touro"/>
<link wikidata="Q610200" start="2576" end="2587" title="Aaron Lopez" label="Aaron Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="2953" end="2982" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Spanish and Portuguese Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="3036" end="3047" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330818" start="3067" end="3086" title="Easton&amp;#x27;s Point" label="Easton&amp;#x27;s Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669127" start="3172" end="3194" title="Abraham Pereira Mendes" label="Abraham Pereira Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460615" start="3199" end="3218" title="Henry Samuel Morais" label="Henry Samuel Morais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710864" start="3231" end="3242" title="Judah Touro" label="Judah Touro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="3319" end="3330" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="3498" end="3520" title="National Historic Sites (United States)" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="3558" end="3579" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3613" end="3649" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967792" start="3732" end="3772" title="National Trust for Historic Preservation" label="National Trust for Historic Preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="3847" end="3855" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="4151" end="4168" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="4617" end="4636" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11105" start="4641" end="4652" title="Elena Kagan" label="Elena Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="4658" end="4674" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q541673" start="4686" end="4698" title="Ruth Simmons" label="Ruth Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360535" start="4703" end="4719" title="Christina Paxson" label="Christina Paxson"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="4831" end="4840" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="4864" end="4872" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="4915" end="4925" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="5073" end="5080" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="5165" end="5173" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026937" start="5345" end="5371" title="Jewish Cemetery at Newport" label="Jewish Cemetery at Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435187" start="5519" end="5547" title="Congregation Shearith Israel" label="Congregation Shearith Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="5889" end="5910" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="eastern European Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569738" start="6256" end="6265" title="ArtScroll" label="ArtScroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909536" start="6266" end="6279" title="Nusach Sefard" label="Nusach Sefard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="6398" end="6420" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Spanish and Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="6854" end="6859" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q49133" start="7243" end="7270" title="Museum of Fine Arts, Boston" label="Museum of Fine Arts, Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435187" start="7306" end="7334" title="Congregation Shearith Israel" label="Congregation Shearith Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241158" start="7827" end="7849" title="John J. McConnell, Jr." label="John J. McConnell, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q250492" start="8177" end="8229" title="United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="8233" end="8239" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="8265" end="8292" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026937" start="8433" end="8447" title="Touro Cemetery" label="Touro Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071313" start="8450" end="8479" title="Touro Synagogue (New Orleans)" label="Touro Synagogue (New Orleans)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507989" start="8482" end="8506" title="Kahal Kadosh Beth Elohim" label="Kahal Kadosh Beth Elohim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140729" start="8509" end="8535" title="Partners for Sacred Places" label="Partners for Sacred Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643195" start="8538" end="8588" title="List of the oldest synagogues in the United States" label="List of the oldest synagogues in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977007" start="8591" end="8668" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Newport County, Rhode Island" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Newport County, Rhode Island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723213" wikidata="Q954097" url="?curid=723213" title="Akron–Canton Airport">
<text>Akron–Canton Airport is a commercial airport in the city of Green, in southern Summit County, Ohio (a small piece of each runway is in Stark County). The airport is located about southeast of Akron and northwest of Canton. It is jointly operated by Summit County and Stark County. The airport is a &quot;reliever&quot; airport for Northeast Ohio and markets itself as &quot;A better way to go&quot;, emphasizing the ease of travel in comparison to Cleveland Hopkins International Airport. Just under 90% of its traffic is general aviation. It is included in the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems for 2019–2023, in which it is categorized as a small-hub primary commercial service facility.

Akron-Canton Airport covers and has two runways: 01/19 is 7,601 feet long and 05/23 is 8,204 feet long.

The airport has a maintenance base for PSA Airlines, a regional carrier owned by the American Airlines Group that flies under the American Eagle brand.

==History==
Public funds for the construction of the airport were allocated during World War II for defense purposes, but construction stalled over a controversy relating to whether public funding of airport construction would be appropriate. As a result, private funding was essential to the initial construction of the airport, particularly in purchasing the land.

The airport was dedicated on October 13, 1946, as the Akron–Canton–Massillon Airport; the name was later changed to Akron–Canton Regional Airport. Passenger air service began in 1948 when American, United, Capital, and Eastern airlines moved from the Akron Fulton International Airport.

A permanent terminal was built in 1955 and expanded in 1962. In the summer of 2020, a new expansion was made to the terminal, relocating gates from the original terminal to a new bi-level concourse. The original gates and terminal area from the 1960s are slated for demolition to make room for new aircraft parking areas.

In 2021, the airport received $7.7 million from the Federal Aviation Administration to acquire snow removal equipment, rehabilitate taxiways and aviation aprons, rehabilitate existing lighting systems, and perform sealing along sections of taxiway surface area.

=== Passenger growth and decline ===
During the mid-2000s, the airport was one of the fastest-growing airports in the Midwest, attracting passengers from the Akron/Canton area and Cleveland metropolitan area. The airport&#x27;s passenger count doubled between 2000 and 2006, with several new routes added by AirTran Airways and Frontier Airlines. The airport experienced its busiest year in 2012, with 1.83 million passengers flying through.

Since 2012, passenger traffic has decreased. AirTran&#x27;s presence at the airport shrank following the airline&#x27;s acquisition by Southwest Airlines in 2011. Several other low-cost carriers, including JetBlue, Frontier Airlines, and Spirit Airlines, established new routes from nearby Cleveland Hopkins, lowering average airfares at that airport and reducing demand for Cleveland-based travelers to fly out of further-away Akron. In 2017, Southwest dropped Akron and consolidated operations at Cleveland Hopkins, as Allegiant Air did the same year.

By 2017, the airport&#x27;s passenger traffic sank to its lowest level since 2004. As of May 2018, the airport had the 2nd fastest declining passenger count of any US airport. 

In the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, the airport suffered further loss of service, as Delta Air Lines ceased its long-running service from the airport to Atlanta in 2020, and Spirit Airlines ended all flights to Orlando and seasonal service to Myrtle Beach and Fort Myers in 2022. United Express dropped service to Washington–Dulles in 2022, citing ongoing staff shortages. This service had replaced their erstwhile service to Newark in 2021, although the airline hopes to restart scheduled flights to Dulles in 2023.

=== Expansion ===

In 2006, the airport completed a terminal expansion and renovation, including the addition of a new wing off the main concourse. It increased the number of gates from 9 to 11 and provides new baggage areas, a food court, and better aesthetics. The new wing opened to passengers in May 2006 and was home to AirTran Airways and its successor, Southwest.

In 2011, the expanded TSA screening area was completed. It has four lanes for screening, with the ability to open two more. Along with the expanded screening area, Advanced Imaging Devices were installed and a TSA Precheck lane was added.

The airport initiated CAK 2018, its 10-year, $110 million Capital Improvement Plan, in March 2008. The plan is the most ambitious capital improvement plan in Akron–Canton Airport&#x27;s history and calls for 10 projects in the next 10 years. One of those projects, a runway expansion, has already been completed: runway 05/23 was extended from to . The runways will allow aircraft to fly non-stop to anywhere in the U.S. and throughout Mexico and Canada.

Other projects include expanding aircraft parking and general aviation area, replacing aircraft rescue and firefighting maintenance facility, a new customs and border patrol facility, expanding auto parking lots, a widened entrance road, expanded ticket wing and TSA screening area, and an expanded upper-level concourse. The construction of Port Green Industrial Park, on , also began to be developed into 10-12 business sites.

In June 2021, Breeze Airways launched nonstop flights from Akron to Charleston (SC), New Orleans, and Tampa. They have since continued their expansion at the airport, adding scheduled service to Las Vegas, Nashville, and West Palm Beach. Following the withdrawal of Spirit Airlines at CAK, Breeze Airways also announced the commencement of service to Orlando beginning in March 2023.

In September 2021, Allegiant Air announced that they would be discontinuing service to Cleveland and returning to Akron–Canton, flying to 4 different destinations with operations beginning March 2, 2022. Further expansions to Fort Lauderdale and Orlando-Sanford were announced in May 2022.

==Airlines and destinations==
===Passenger===

===Cargo===
==Statistics==

===Top destinations===
===Airline market shares===
===Annual traffic===

== Facilities and aircraft ==
The airport has two runways, both paved with asphalt. Runway 5/23 measures 8204 x 150 ft (2501 x 46 m), and runway 1/19 measures 7601 x 150 ft (2317 x 46 m). For the 12-month period ending December 31, 2021, the airport had 58,035 aircraft operations, an average of 159 per day. This was 52% general aviation, 34% air taxi, 12% commercial, and 3% military. For the same time period, 129 aircraft were based at the airport: 59 single-engine and 25 multi-engine airplanes, 30 jets, 12 military aircraft, and 3 helicopters.

==Ground transportation==
Akron–Canton Airport has a number of taxicab and shuttle services.

It is also served by one route from each of the region&#x27;s two public transit providers, Akron Metro Regional Transit route 110, and Canton-based Stark Area Regional Transit Authority (SARTA) route 81.

The SARTA route provides service every hour for most of the day Monday through Saturday and serves both Canton and Akron via Interstate 77, including transit centers in both downtown Canton and downtown Akron.

The Akron Metro route is a five-times-per-day Monday through Friday local route through Southern Summit County, but does serve the downtown Akron Transit Center.

==Accidents and incidents==

* On November 4, 1949, a Harrington&#x27;s Inc. DC-3, a cargo flight, crashed at CAK short of runway 36 in light snow and limited visibility, hitting trees and landing inverted east of the runway, killing all 3 occupants. This is the worst crash on airport property in its history.

* On November 27, 1973, Eastern Airlines Flight 300 was arriving from Pittsburgh International Airport when it ran off the end of the runway. The aircraft was a McDonnell Douglas DC-9-31 with five crew members and 21 passengers, and originated at Miami International Airport with a routing MIA-PIT-CAK. The weather conditions were low ceilings, light rain showers and fog. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) determined that landing at excessive speed too far down the wet runway caused the aircraft to hydroplane and not be able to stop. It went over an embankment and was severely damaged and written off. There were no fatalities, but all 26 on board had various injuries.

* On August 2, 1979, a Cessna Citation 501 piloted by New York Yankees catcher Thurman Munson stalled and crashed short of runway 19, killing Munson. The two other people in the plane with him were able to escape the plane just as it caught fire.
* On December 26, 2002, a Cessna 172S was substantially damaged while landing at the Akron-Canton Regional Airport. The pilot reported he was landing with a 15 knot crosswind component. The airplane touched down hard and began to bounce. The airplane bounced five or six times before the pilot performed a go-around. During the second landing attempt, the pilot experienced difficulty manipulating the airplane&#x27;s controls. The airplane landed hard, veered off the left side of the runway, and struck a snow bank. The probable cause of the accident was found to be the pilot&#x27;s improper flare, which resulted in a hard landing.
* On July 12, 2003, a Piper PA-23 was destroyed shortly after takeoff from Akron-Canton Regional Airport. The aircraft was being flown to Medina Municipal Airport after an annual inspection. Almost immediately after rotation, the aircraft veered left due to a loss of left engine power. The pilot was unable to maintain directional control, and the aircraft contacted the ground with the left wing first, followed by the nose, and came to rest at the approach end of Runway 32. After the investigation, a representative of the salvage company who the aircraft was sold to said the left engine&#x27;s main bearing was found partially seated on the journal. The probable cause of the accident was found to be the pilot&#x27;s failure to maintain minimum control single engine airspeed (Vmc) during a loss of power on one engine, which resulted in a loss of control in flight an in-flight collision with terrain.
* On January 30, 2004, a Gates Learjet 35A was substantially damaged while taxiing at the Akron-Canton Regional Airport. According to the pilot, the taxi from the runway to the ramp area was normal. After making a right 90 degree turn onto the ramp from taxiway &quot;E&quot;, the airplane began to slide on top of an ice layer. The brakes were ineffective and the co-pilot shut down the engines; however, due to the downward slope of the ramp area and the wind conditions, the airplane continued to accelerate. The airplane then struck a concrete retaining wall, before it came to rest. The probable cause of the accident was found to be improper ramp maintenance, resulting in a loss of airplane control while taxiing on ice, with contributing factors including high winds and the ramp&#x27;s downward slope.
* On January 19, 2005, a Cessna 414 was substantially damaged during a hard landing at Akron-Canton Regional Airport. After departure from Akron Fulton Airport, the aircraft entered clouds and immediately picked up heavy ice, and the aircraft&#x27;s deicing systems were activated, though they could not compete with the ice accumulation. The pilot attempted to land back at Fulton but could not because ice was clouding the front window and could not be removed. The pilot then proceeded to Akron-Canton for an Airport Surveillance Radar approach. When the pilot reduced power in the flare, the aircraft landed hard on all three landing gear wheels simultaneously. The probable cause of the incident was found to be the pilot&#x27;s failure to obtain a complete weather briefing, which resulted in an inadequate weather decision, and flight into known icing conditions. A factor was the airplane not being equipped for flight in icing conditions.
* On November 14, 2006, a Mooney M20J impacted the runway during landing at the Akron-Canton Regional Airport. The pilot reported that the aircraft&#x27;s flaps did not deploy symmetrically on final; though full flaps had been selected, the left flap did not fully deploy. The pilot attempted to raised the flaps, but they subsequently became jammed asymmetrically. As the pilot rounded out to flare, the left wing stalled and dropped sharply; the pilot attempted to add power to correct, but this caused the aircraft to enter a steep left turn due to the differences in the amount of lift each wing was producing. A post accident examination confirmed flap system continuity. In addition, the flap actuator motor operated when electrical power was applied. Impact damage precluded an exact measurement of the flap deflections and rigging. The probable cause of the accident was found to be the pilot&#x27;s failure to maintain sufficient airspeed during final approach, resulting in an inadvertent stall.
* On December 19, 2008, a Piper Saratoga impacted a flagpole and crashed into the lawn of a vacant house while attempting to land at Akron-Canton Airport, killing the pilot. The crash occurred about 2 miles east/northeast of the airport because of icing conditions, spatial disorientation, pilot error, and the pilot’s failure to initially intercept and establish the airplane on the proper approach course.
* On March 18, 2011, an Embraer 145 veered off of the left side of the runway while landing at the Akron-Canton Regional Airport. The crew reported to a Federal Aviation Administration inspector that the flight was uneventful until the nose landing gear touched down on the runway during landing. At that point, the airplane made an uncommanded left turn that the pilots were unable to correct. The airplane veered off the runway pavement before coming to a stop. The captain reported that the approach was normal and that there were no warnings or messages from the airplane&#x27;s systems prior to touchdown. He said that, during the event, the first officer attempted to manually disengage nosewheel steering using the switch provided on his control wheel, but this action did not prevent the airplane from veering to the side. Postincident examination of the nosewheel steering system did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation, and the cause of the accident was found to be the uncommanded left deflection of the airplane&#x27;s nosewheel for reasons that could not be determined.
* On May 10, 2016, a Mooney Aircraft M20 was substantially damaged by a runway excursion during takeoff at the Akron-Canton Regional Airport. The pilot reported the aircraft veered left during the takeoff roll as the it accelerated to takeoff speed. The pilot reduced engine power and applied full right rudder, but the airplane exited the runway and struck airport lighting, where it sustained substantial wing and fuselage damage. It was found a bolt that attaches the nose landing gear retraction link to the nose gear truss assembly was missing from the nose wheel well; wheel steering and the brakes were found to be functioning properly. A representative of Mooney Aircraft Co did not believe the missing bolt would cause the nose wheel to castor into the wind on a takeoff roll, and he indicated that he did not believe it would allow the wheel to castor if the bolt fell out. Regardless, the probable cause of the accident was found to be the missing bolt in the nose landing gear assembly, which resulted in the airplane suddenly turning left and the pilot&#x27;s inability to maintain directional control during a crosswind takeoff.

==See also==
*List of airports in Ohio

==References==
==External links==
*
*Route Map
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q954097" start="0" end="20" title="Akron–Canton Airport" label="Akron–Canton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652788" start="60" end="65" title="Green, Ohio" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q485536" start="79" end="98" title="Summit County, Ohio" label="Summit County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q421974" start="135" end="147" title="Stark County, Ohio" label="Stark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="192" end="197" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q491239" start="215" end="221" title="Canton, Ohio" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q485536" start="249" end="262" title="Summit County, Ohio" label="Summit County"/>
<link wikidata="Q421974" start="267" end="279" title="Stark County, Ohio" label="Stark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100795" start="448" end="487" title="Cleveland Hopkins International Airport" label="Cleveland Hopkins International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="522" end="538" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="562" end="593" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121040" start="600" end="643" title="National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems" label="National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308813" start="674" end="685" title="FAA airport categories" label="categorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536988" start="883" end="895" title="PSA Airlines" label="PSA Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742937" start="929" end="952" title="American Airlines Group" label="American Airlines Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="974" end="988" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1080" end="1092" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="1553" end="1561" title="American Airlines" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="1563" end="1569" title="United Airlines" label="United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937375" start="1571" end="1578" title="Capital Airlines (United States)" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="1584" end="1591" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059807" start="1616" end="1650" title="Akron Executive Airport" label="Akron Fulton International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q849706" start="1665" end="1673" title="Airport terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="2357" end="2364" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="2419" end="2428" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q406695" start="2547" end="2562" title="AirTran Airways" label="AirTran Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="2567" end="2584" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q503308" start="2817" end="2835" title="Southwest Airlines" label="Southwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="2888" end="2895" title="JetBlue" label="JetBlue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="2897" end="2914" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190598" start="2920" end="2935" title="Spirit Airlines" label="Spirit Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="3203" end="3216" title="Allegiant Air" label="Allegiant Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="3439" end="3456" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="3507" end="3522" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="3702" end="3716" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="3736" end="3753" title="Washington Dulles International Airport" label="Washington–Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q466786" start="3848" end="3854" title="Newark Liberty International Airport" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q503308" start="4300" end="4309" title="Southwest Airlines" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804789" start="4522" end="4534" title="TSA Precheck" label="TSA Precheck"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641146" start="5452" end="5466" title="Breeze Airways" label="Breeze Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163183" start="5506" end="5521" title="Charleston International Airport" label="Charleston (SC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461076" start="5523" end="5534" title="Louis Armstrong International Airport" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q571536" start="5540" end="5545" title="Tampa International Airport" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q853886" start="5633" end="5642" title="Harry Reid International Airport" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432146" start="5644" end="5653" title="Nashville International Airport" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432310" start="5659" end="5674" title="Palm Beach International Airport" label="West Palm Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190598" start="5704" end="5719" title="Spirit Airlines" label="Spirit Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q929859" start="5789" end="5796" title="Orlando International Airport" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="5842" end="5855" title="Allegiant Air" label="Allegiant Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100795" start="5910" end="5919" title="Cleveland Hopkins International Airport" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q635361" start="6049" end="6064" title="Fort Lauderdale–Hollywood International Airport" label="Fort Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q597631" start="6069" end="6084" title="Orlando Sanford International Airport" label="Orlando-Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="6312" end="6319" title="Runway" label="runways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="6584" end="6600" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133228" start="6606" end="6614" title="air taxi" label="air taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="6620" end="6630" title="Commercial aviation" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q627716" start="6639" end="6647" title="Military aviation" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="6679" end="6687" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="6752" end="6761" title="Airplane" label="airplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="6766" end="6770" title="Jet aircraft" label="jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q216916" start="6775" end="6792" title="military aircraft" label="military aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="6800" end="6811" title="Helicopter" label="helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="6877" end="6884" title="Taxi" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715494" start="7000" end="7028" title="METRO RTA" label="Akron Metro Regional Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601948" start="7057" end="7094" title="Stark Area Regional Transit Authority" label="Stark Area Regional Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q94764" start="7239" end="7252" title="Interstate 77" label="Interstate 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="7565" end="7569" title="DC-3" label="DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="7824" end="7840" title="Eastern Airlines" label="Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421504" start="7870" end="7902" title="Pittsburgh International Airport" label="Pittsburgh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="7961" end="7983" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="8047" end="8074" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="8177" end="8213" title="National Transportation Safety Board" label="National Transportation Safety Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q937707" start="8512" end="8531" title="Cessna Citation 501" label="Cessna Citation 501"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="8543" end="8559" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050571" start="8560" end="8567" title="catcher" label="catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q921807" start="8568" end="8582" title="Thurman Munson" label="Thurman Munson"/>
<link wikidata="Q244479" start="8762" end="8773" title="Cessna 172" label="Cessna 172S"/>
<link wikidata="Q441585" start="9394" end="9405" title="Piper PA-23" label="Piper PA-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q649136" start="9510" end="9534" title="Medina Municipal Airport" label="Medina Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q667988" start="10307" end="10324" title="Learjet 35" label="Gates Learjet 35A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057233" start="11118" end="11128" title="Cessna 414" label="Cessna 414"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059807" start="11232" end="11252" title="Akron Fulton Airport" label="Akron Fulton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060664" start="11314" end="11317" title="Aircraft icing" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q409037" start="11605" end="11631" title="Airport surveillance radar" label="Airport Surveillance Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="11723" end="11735" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q920799" start="12067" end="12078" title="Mooney M20" label="Mooney M20J"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="13040" end="13045" title="Stall (fluid dynamics)" label="stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q912903" start="13073" end="13087" title="Piper Saratoga" label="Piper Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060664" start="13295" end="13311" title="icing conditions" label="icing conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745489" start="13313" end="13335" title="spatial disorientation" label="spatial disorientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="13479" end="13490" title="Embraer-145" label="Embraer 145"/>
<link wikidata="Q920799" start="14591" end="14610" title="Mooney M20" label="Mooney Aircraft M20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432616" start="15728" end="15752" title="List of airports in Ohio" label="List of airports in Ohio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723216" wikidata="Q263875" url="?curid=723216" title="Bob Blackman">
<text>Robert John Blackman MP (born 26 April 1956) is a British politician who has been the chairman of the 1922 Committee and chair of the Backbench Business Committee since 2024. A member of the Conservative Party, he has been the Member of Parliament (MP) for Harrow East since 2010. He served as the Joint Executive Secretary of the backbench 1922 Committee from 2012 to 2024. Blackman was the Member of the London Assembly (MLA) for Brent and Harrow between 2004 and 2008.

==Early life and career==
Robert Blackman was born on 26 April 1956 in Kensington. After three A-levels, he studied maths and physics at the University of Liverpool, where he graduated with a BSc. While at Liverpool, he was president of the students&#x27; union.

After graduation, he joined the sales team of Burroughs Machines (later Unisys). Blackman worked in various sales and management positions for BT and worked at their training school in Milton Keynes as a tutor and later as a regulatory compliance manager for BT until his election to Parliament.

==Political career==
Blackman unsuccessfully stood as the Conservative candidate in the Tokyngton ward of Brent London Borough Council in 1986. A few months later, in November 1986, he stood in the Preston ward in a by-election and was elected; he retained the seat until 2010, when he did not stand. He was the leader of the Conservative group on Brent council from 1990 to 2010, having been council leader between 1991 and 1996, when his party lost control of the council. From June 2006 to May 2010, he was deputy leader of Brent Council, the Conservatives having formed a coalition with the Liberal Democrats.

He stood as the Conservative Party candidate for the London Assembly constituency of Brent and Harrow at the 2000 elections, losing to the Labour candidate Toby Harris. He defeated Harris at the 2004 assembly elections and was elected as the Conservative group&#x27;s whip on the London Assembly.

In the 2008 London Assembly election, Blackman lost his seat to the Labour candidate Navin Shah by 1,649 votes.

In 2024, Blackman successfully ran for the position of chairman of the Conservative parties &quot;1922 Committee&quot;. He won against fellow backbencher Geoffrey Clifton-Brown by 61 votes to 37 – with 98 votes cast.

==Parliamentary career==
At the 1992 general election, Blackman stood for election in Brent South, coming second with 30.5% of the vote behind the incumbent Labour MP Paul Boateng.

Blackman stood in Bedford at the 1997 general election, coming second with 33.7% of the vote behind the Labour candidate Patrick Hall.

At the 2005 general election, Blackman stood for election in Brent North, coming second with 33% of the vote behind the incumbent Labour MP Barry Gardiner.

He has taken the oath of allegiance on both the King James Version and the Bhagavad Gita multiple times.

=== 1st term (2010–2015) ===
At the 2010 general election, Blackman was elected to Parliament as MP for Harrow East with 44.7% of the vote and a majority of 3,403.

In 2010, Blackman was elected a member of the Communities and Local Government Select Committee and was elected secretary of the 1922 Committee in 2015 (serving jointly with Nigel Evans until 8 January 2020 when Evans became second deputy chairman of Ways and Means).

Blackman called for the adoption of plain packaging legislation for cigarettes in November 2012, and supported Cameron&#x27;s plan calling for energy companies to provide simplified energy bills to their customers.

In December 2012, when the Conservative Party launched a consultation into legalising same-sex marriages, Blackman suggested that David Cameron should resurrect Section 28, stating that he believed that &quot;Section 28 was the right rules to have in school so that we should not in any way shape or form promote same-sex relationships&quot; and said he would be &quot;very opposed&quot; to seeing teachers being forced to say same-sex relationships are equivalent to heterosexual relationships. Soon afterwards, David Cameron announced his approval for same-sex marriage. In response, Blackman told the BBC News Channel that Cameron&#x27;s backing of religious same-sex marriages was wrong &quot;on principle&quot; and that marriage had to be &quot;between one man and one woman&quot;. According to the &quot;Harrow Times&quot;, he was accused of hypocrisy by a former fellow Brent council colleague who claimed she had an 11-year affair with him whilst he was married. On 5 February 2013, Bob Blackman voted against the bill in the House of Commons second reading vote on marriage equality in Britain.

Blackman is an officer of the Conservative Friends of Israel group. He has been part of several delegations to Israel, including during the Operation Defensive Shield conflict when he visited for an Israeli military briefing on the Iron Dome defence system.

In 2015, the compliance officer for the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (IPSA) made a judgement that Blackman had submitted 732 inaccurate mileage claims. According to IPSA he claimed up to 10 miles for a two-mile journey, making him the highest-mileage MP, claiming almost twice the mileage as the 10 next-highest MPs.

=== 2nd term (2015–2017) ===
Blackman was re-elected as MP for Harrow East at the 2015 general election with an increased vote share of 50.3% and an increased majority of 4,757.

On 1 July 2015, Blackman was elected chair of the All Party Political Group on Smoking and Health, after serving as its secretary for several years.

Blackman supported Brexit in the 2016 referendum. He subsequently joined the European Research Group, a Eurosceptic group within Parliament.

In October 2016, he was drawn second in the annual Parliamentary ballot for a Private Member&#x27;s Bill and put together a Homelessness Reduction Bill in partnership with national homelessness charity, Crisis. It was the first Private Member&#x27;s Bill to be supported by a select committee. After receiving Government support at second reading, it passed through all stages in Parliament unopposed in both Houses and received Royal Assent on 27 April 2017.

=== 3rd term (2017–2019) ===
At the snap 2017 general election, Blackman was again re-elected, with a decreased vote share of 49.4% and a decreased majority of 1,757.

In October 2017, Blackman drew criticism from Tom Peck of &quot;The Independent&quot; for hosting Tapan Ghosh, an anti-Islam extremist from India, at a House of Commons event. Blackman also shared anti-Islam posts on Twitter by far-right activist Tommy Robinson and was a member of various anti-Islam groups on Facebook. These comments and others by some Conservative candidates and representatives led the Muslim Council of Britain to call for an independent inquiry into alleged Islamophobia in the Conservative Party.

In Parliament, Blackman serves on the Procedure Committee, the Backbench Business Committee and the Housing, Communities and Local Government Committee.

In March 2019, Blackman was among a group of MPs who argued for a number of measures to encourage people to quit smoking and prevent young people from taking it up, including raising the legal smoking age to 21 and introducing a levy on large tobacco companies.

Also in March 2019, Blackman was one of 21 MPs who voted against LGBT-inclusive sex and relationship education in English schools.

In August 2019, Blackman expressed his support for Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi revoking Article 370 of the Constitution of India, calling the article an &quot;anomaly&quot;, adding that &quot;Kashmiri Pandits must be guaranteed right of return after they were the victims of ethnic cleansing&quot;. Presumably Blackman is referring here to a return by Kashmiri Pandits to the Kashmiri Valley.

=== 4th term (2019–2024) ===
Blackman was again re-elected at the 2019 general election, with an increased vote share of 54.4% and an increased majority of 8,170.

Following an interim report on the connections between colonialism and properties now in the care of the National Trust, including links with historic slavery, Blackman was among the signatories of a letter to &quot;The Telegraph&quot; in November 2020 from the &quot;Common Sense Group&quot; of Conservative Parliamentarians. The letter accused the National Trust of being &quot;coloured by cultural Marxist dogma, colloquially known as the &#x27;woke agenda&#x27;&quot;.

Blackman attended a Diwali event held in October 2022 at the Houses of Parliament as a guest of the Hindu Forum of Britain. Nithya Atmadayananda, a prominent supporter of Nithyananda, was photographed with Blackman and the President of the Hindu Forum of Britain, Trupti Patel. The brochure for the event featured a full-page advert for Kailasa UK containing images of Nithyananda. The Hindu Forum of Britain itself has been accused of links to Hindu nationalists in India.

=== 5th term (2024–) ===
At the 2024 general election, Blackman was again re-elected, with a decreased vote share of 53.3% and an increased majority of 11,680. Blackman was the only Conservative to achieve over 50% of the vote in their constituency. He was elected unopposed as the Chair of the Backbench Business Committee on 9 September 2024.

=== Azerbaijan All-Party Parliamentary Group ===
Blackman is the chair of the Azerbaijan All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG). In 2013, &quot;The Guardian&quot; published an article &quot;Plush hotels and caviar diplomacy: how Azerbaijan&#x27;s elite wooed MPs&quot;, criticising Blackman&#x27;s five-day visit to Azerbaijan, paid for by The European Azerbaijan Society (TEAS). &quot;The National&quot; highlighted in 2022 that several of his trips to Azerbaijan were paid for by the Azerbaijani parliament or its London embassy. Blackman received a series of briefings from high-level Azerbaijani figures, including in 2020 and 2021 from Azerbaijani MP Javanshir Feyziyev, who was investigated by the National Crime Agency, followed by a court case where £5.6m of laundered cash was ordered to be seized from his family&#x27;s accounts. OpenDemocracy reported in February 2022 that Blackman tabled four pro-regime motions in the House and had written to two foreign secretaries, urging them to strengthen ties with Azerbaijan and condemn its opponent Armenia.

Blackman told the &quot;Eye To Eye&quot; podcast in July 2020 that he &quot;put down positions on behalf of good friends in Azerbaijan&quot; on a regular basis, that [referring to July 2020 Armenian–Azerbaijani clashes] &quot;in these types of conflicts ... whoever gets the best propaganda tends to grab the attention of the listeners and the viewers&quot;, adding that in this regard he has been &quot;fed the information through the Azerbaijan embassy in the UK&quot;, praising the latter for being &quot;very very helpful and proactive&quot;. Blackman urged the then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, to take Azerbaijan&#x27;s side in the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war. On Blackman&#x27;s Azerbaijan lobbying, Steve Goodrich from anti-corruption group Transparency International UK commented &quot;It&#x27;s pretty shocking if you&#x27;ve got MPs essentially being briefed by foreign embassies and then making contributions in the House based on what they&#x27;ve been advised to say.&quot;

==Personal life==
Blackman married Nicola Jennings in 1988. He employs his wife as a part-time office manager.

In 2012, it was reported that Blackman had been involved in an 11-year affair with Carol Shaw while they both served on Brent Council in the 1990s.

== Honours and awards ==
Blackman was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2023 Birthday Honours for political and public service.
** 2020: Padma Shri of India 

== References ==
==External links==

* Bob Blackman&#x27;s website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q263875" start="0" end="20" title="Bob Blackman" label="Robert John Blackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="21" end="23" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561171" start="102" end="116" title="1922 Committee" label="1922 Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839559" start="134" end="162" title="Backbench Business Committee" label="Backbench Business Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="191" end="209" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="227" end="247" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077528" start="257" end="268" title="Harrow East" label="Harrow East"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="275" end="279" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561171" start="341" end="355" title="1922 Committee" label="1922 Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="406" end="421" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078119" start="432" end="448" title="Brent and Harrow" label="Brent and Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="544" end="554" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="568" end="575" title="A-level" label="A-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q499510" start="614" end="637" title="University of Liverpool" label="University of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="665" end="668" title="BSc" label="BSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="714" end="734" title="students&amp;#x27; union" label="students&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="809" end="815" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="880" end="882" title="BT Group plc" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="922" end="935" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q146258" start="1122" end="1131" title="Tokyngton" label="Tokyngton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961461" start="1140" end="1168" title="Brent London Borough Council" label="Brent London Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870011" start="1172" end="1176" title="1986 Brent London Borough Council election" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q146331" start="1232" end="1244" title="Preston, London" label="Preston ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871520" start="1306" end="1310" title="2010 Brent London Borough Council election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="1629" end="1646" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="1702" end="1717" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078119" start="1734" end="1750" title="Brent and Harrow" label="Brent and Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669839" start="1758" end="1772" title="2000 London Assembly election" label="2000 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="1788" end="1794" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q576669" start="1805" end="1816" title="Toby Harris" label="Toby Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669841" start="1844" end="1867" title="2004 London Assembly election" label="2004 assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="1917" end="1921" title="Whip (politics)" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669844" start="1954" end="1983" title="2008 London Assembly election" label="2008 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982484" start="2032" end="2042" title="Navin Shah" label="Navin Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561171" start="2158" end="2172" title="1922 Committee" label="1922 Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q285183" start="2214" end="2236" title="Geoffrey Clifton-Brown" label="Geoffrey Clifton-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="2310" end="2331" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399074" start="2364" end="2375" title="Brent South" label="Brent South"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2435" end="2441" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q332667" start="2445" end="2457" title="Paul Boateng" label="Paul Boateng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032329" start="2478" end="2485" title="Bedford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="2493" end="2514" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146637" start="2581" end="2593" title="Patrick Hall (politician)" label="Patrick Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="2603" end="2624" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077540" start="2657" end="2668" title="Brent North" label="Brent North"/>
<link wikidata="Q391169" start="2736" end="2750" title="Barry Gardiner" label="Barry Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074471" start="2770" end="2788" title="Oath of Allegiance (United Kingdom)" label="oath of allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="2801" end="2819" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="2828" end="2841" title="Bhagavad Gita" label="Bhagavad Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="2895" end="2916" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077528" start="2963" end="2974" title="Harrow East" label="Harrow East"/>
<link wikidata="Q105503088" start="3070" end="3119" title="Communities and Local Government Select Committee" label="Communities and Local Government Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561171" start="3153" end="3167" title="1922 Committee" label="1922 Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q303814" start="3198" end="3209" title="Nigel Evans" label="Nigel Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033330" start="3584" end="3613" title="Same-sex marriage in the United Kingdom" label="legalising same-sex marriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="3639" end="3652" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098925" start="3670" end="3680" title="Section 28" label="Section 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q787216" start="4113" end="4129" title="BBC News Channel" label="BBC News Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201650" start="4357" end="4366" title="hypocrisy" label="hypocrisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163041" start="4644" end="4674" title="Conservative Friends of Israel" label="Conservative Friends of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276724" start="4754" end="4780" title="Operation Defensive Shield" label="Operation Defensive Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q81231" start="4846" end="4855" title="Iron Dome" label="Iron Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848097" start="4913" end="4958" title="Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority" label="Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="5290" end="5311" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="5556" end="5562" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="5570" end="5585" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743308" start="5614" end="5637" title="European Research Group" label="European Research Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="5757" end="5783" title="Private Member&amp;#x27;s Bill" label="Private Member&amp;#x27;s Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224996" start="5803" end="5830" title="Homelessness Reduction Bill 2016–17" label="Homelessness Reduction Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185945" start="5882" end="5888" title="Crisis (charity)" label="Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="6108" end="6120" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="6181" end="6202" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="6372" end="6387" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843792" start="6406" end="6417" title="Tapan Ghosh" label="Tapan Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247597" start="6460" end="6476" title="House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="6525" end="6532" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345201" start="6555" end="6569" title="Tommy Robinson" label="Tommy Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="6619" end="6627" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771989" start="6715" end="6740" title="Muslim Council of Britain" label="Muslim Council of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6756" end="6827" title="Islamophobia in the UK Conservative Party#Calls for an independent inquiry" label="independent inquiry into alleged Islamophobia in the Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462253" start="7092" end="7104" title="quit smoking" label="quit smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546043" start="7177" end="7188" title="smoking age" label="smoking age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906580" start="7221" end="7244" title="Big Tobacco" label="large tobacco companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="7452" end="7465" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15543855" start="7475" end="7515" title="Article 370 of the Constitution of India" label="Article 370 of the Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996554" start="7579" end="7595" title="Kashmiri Pandits" label="Kashmiri Pandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="7847" end="7868" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="8000" end="8011" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="8050" end="8064" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="8087" end="8103" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="historic slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="8161" end="8174" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q112221492" start="8213" end="8231" title="Common Sense Group" label="Common Sense Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q601271" start="8337" end="8353" title="cultural Marxist" label="cultural Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8393" end="8397" title="Woke#Woke as a pejorative term" label="woke"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="8439" end="8445" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="8480" end="8500" title="Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200892" start="8519" end="8541" title="Hindu Forum of Britain" label="Hindu Forum of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074205" start="8590" end="8601" title="Nithyananda" label="Nithyananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="8926" end="8947" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839559" start="9189" end="9217" title="Backbench Business Committee" label="Backbench Business Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="9382" end="9394" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33921653" start="9445" end="9461" title="caviar diplomacy" label="caviar diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50413987" start="9578" end="9616" title="The European Azerbaijan Society (TEAS)" label="The European Azerbaijan Society (TEAS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573802" start="9624" end="9636" title="The National (Scotland)" label="The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q330600" start="9724" end="9746" title="Azerbaijani parliament" label="Azerbaijani parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971199" start="9750" end="9768" title="Embassy of Azerbaijan, London" label="its London embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19713709" start="9894" end="9912" title="Javanshir Feyziyev" label="Javanshir Feyziyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971994" start="9942" end="9963" title="National Crime Agency" label="National Crime Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051984" start="10078" end="10091" title="OpenDemocracy" label="OpenDemocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q97303396" start="10482" end="10520" title="July 2020 Armenian–Azerbaijani clashes" label="July 2020 Armenian–Azerbaijani clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q268584" start="10892" end="10904" title="Dominic Raab" label="Dominic Raab"/>
<link wikidata="Q99659280" start="10944" end="10969" title="2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war" label="2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="11053" end="11079" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="11602" end="11646" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q119802813" start="11660" end="11681" title="2023 Birthday Honours" label="2023 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="11725" end="11735" title="Padma Shri" label="Padma Shri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723220" wikidata="Q676116" url="?curid=723220" title="Iqbal Masih">
<text>Iqbal Masih (; 1 January 1983 – 16 April 1995) was a Pakistani Christian child labourer and activist who campaigned against abusive child labour in Pakistan.

He was assassinated on 16 April 1995. On 23 March 2022 (Pakistan Day), he was posthumously awarded the Tamgha-e-Shujaat by the government of Pakistan.

== Family background and bonded labour ==

Iqbal Masih was born on 1 January 1983 in Muridke, a village outside of Lahore in Punjab, Pakistan, into a poor Catholic Christian family. His parents were Saif Masih, a laborer, and Inayat Bibi, who worked as a house cleaner. The former later abandoned the family leaving Inayat to work and Iqbal&#x27;s older sisters taking care of him and his siblings.

In 1986, Saif Masih was to marry off one of his sons but he lacked savings and was unable to finance this: banks would not provide loans while government aid programs were few. He took a loan of 600 rupees from a (carpet factory owner), using the only collateral he had, his children. The loan was to be paid off by four-year-old Iqbal&#x27;s labor, and included undisclosed interest and expenses, an institution known as . Due to the illegality of selling children, the transaction was informal, allowing the loaner to add arbitrary expenses to the loan without oversight.

Expenses were to include the cost of a year of training (during which Iqbal would not be paid), tools, food and fines for any mistakes Iqbal was to make. He was paid 1 rupee a day. Due to the high interest rate at which the loan was taken, it stood at 13,000 rupees prior to his escape.

At the carpet maker&#x27;s, Iqbal was chained to a loom and made to work as much as 14 hours a day. He was fed little and beaten, more than other children because of his attempts at escaping and refusal to work. These conditions stunted his growth; he had the height and weight of a 6-year-old when he was 12.

Explaining the background behind bonded labourers in Pakistan, American professor C. Christine Fair states that &quot;Large numbers of Christians in the Punjab and Sindh, in particular, are trapped in bonded labour or slavery in work like brick kilns and carpet-weaving. Around 80% of brick kiln workers in some areas are Christians working to pay off family debts long since paid in absolute terms, yet who are illiterate and remain powerless to do anything about their circumstances. The plight of Pakistan&#x27;s bonded labourers came to international attention briefly with the murder of 12-year-old Christian Iqbal Masih in 1995&quot;.

==Escape and activism==
At the age of 10, Iqbal escaped his slavery, after learning that bonded labour had been declared illegal by the Supreme Court of Pakistan. He escaped and attempted to report his employer Ashad to the police, but the police brought him back to the factory seeking a finder&#x27;s fee for returning escaped bonded labourers. Iqbal escaped a second time and attended the Bonded Labour Liberation Front (BLLF) school for former child slaves and quickly completed a four-year education in only two years. Iqbal helped over 3,000 Pakistani children that were in bonded labour escape to freedom and made speeches about child labour all over the world.

He expressed a desire to become a lawyer to better equip him to free bonded labourers, and he visited other countries, including Sweden and the United States, to share his story, encouraging others to join the fight to eradicate child slavery.

In 1994 he received the Reebok Human Rights Award in Boston, and in his acceptance speech he said: &quot;I am one of those millions of children who are suffering in Pakistan through bonded labour and child labour, but I am lucky that due to the efforts of Bonded Labour Liberation Front, I go out in freedom I am standing in front of you here today. After my freedom, I joined BLLF School and I am studying in that school now. For us slave children, Ehsan Ullah Khan and BLLF have done the same work that Abraham Lincoln did for the slaves of America. Today, you are free and I am free too.&quot;


==Death==
Iqbal was fatally shot by the &quot;carpet mafia,&quot; a gang that killed slaves if they ran away from a carpet factory, while visiting relatives in Muridke on 16 April 1995, Easter Sunday. He was only 12 years old. His funeral was attended by approximately 800 mourners. A protest of 3,000 people, half of whom were younger than 12, took place in Lahore demanding an end to child labor in the week that followed.

His mother said she did not believe her son had been the victim of a plot by the &quot;carpet mafia&quot;. However, the BLLF disagreed because Iqbal had received death threats from individuals connected to the Pakistani carpet industry, the most recent of which had been two weeks prior to his death.

Following his death, Pakistani economic elites responded to declining carpet sales by denying that they were using bonded child labour in their factories and by employing the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) to brutally harass and arrest activists working for the BLLF. The Pakistani press conducted a smear campaign against the BLLF, arguing that child labourers received high wages and favourable working conditions.

== Legacy ==
* Iqbal&#x27;s cause inspired the creation of organizations such as We Charity, a Canada-based charity and youth movement, the Iqbal Masih Shaheed Children Foundation, which has founded over 20 schools in Pakistan, and GoodWeave International (formerly Rugmark).
* In 1994, Iqbal visited Broad Meadows Middle School in Quincy, Massachusetts, and spoke to 7th graders about his life. He inspired the famous afterschool program run by teacher Ronald Adams called ODW (Operation: Day&#x27;s Work). When the students learned of his death, they decided to raise money with a financially productive program called &quot;Penny Power,&quot; and build a school in his honour in Kasur, Pakistan.
* Iqbal&#x27;s story was depicted in a book entitled &quot;Iqbal&quot; by Francesco D&#x27;Adamo, a fictional story based on true events, from the point of view of a girl named Fatima.
* In 1994 he received the &quot;Reebok Youth in Action Award&quot;.
* In 1996 the Movimiento Cultural Cristiano (MCC- Christian Cultural Movement) and Camino Juvenil Solidario (CJS- Youth Solidarity Path) promoted 16 April as International Day Against Child Slavery in Spain and South America.
* In 1998 the newly formed Istituto Comprensivo Iqbal Masih, a comprehensive education institute comprising several schools in Trieste, Italy, was named after him.
* In 2000 he received a posthumous World&#x27;s Children&#x27;s Prize for the Rights of the Child and the Piazzale dei Traghetti Iqbal Masih was inaugurated in Genoa, Italy.
* The 2006 book &quot;The Little Hero: One Boy&#x27;s Fight for Freedom&quot; tells the story of his legacy.
* In 2009 the United States Congress established the annual Iqbal Masih Award for the Elimination of Child Labor.
* On 16 April 2012, the Council of Santiago, after a proposal of Movimiento Cultural Cristiano, inaugurated a square named after Iqbal in Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 
* The 2014 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to children&#x27;s rights advocate Kailash Satyarthi on grounds of prevention of child labour and promotion of female education. Satyarthi mentioned Masih in his Nobel Peace Prize award speech, dedicating it to him and other martyrs.
* In 2016, the &quot;X Iqbal Masih Rugby Tournament&quot; was held in Catania, Sicily.
* On 17 April 2017, the University of Salamanca committed itself to celebrating every 16 April as a Day Against Child Slavery on behalf of Iqbal Masih.
* In May 2019, Sharmeen Obaid Chinoy released an Urdu-animated short titled &#x27;Iqbal Ka Bachpan&#x27; which explores the story of Iqbal under its 4-part series, &quot;Shattering the Silence&quot;.
* On 23 March 2022, President of Pakistan Arif Alvi conferred the Sitara-e-Shujaat (award for bravery) posthumously to Iqbal.
* In December 2023, Shoaib Sultan directed the film Gunjal, based on the murder of Iqbal Masih.It features Ahmed Ali Akbar, Resham and Amna Ilyas in leading roles.
* &quot;Iqbal - The Forgotten Story&quot; is an upcoming and yet unreleased Pakistani movie directed by Raja Saad. The movie stars Alyy Khan &amp; Adnan Siddiqui.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* &quot;Who Was Iqbal Masih?&quot; mirrorimage.com.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q676116" start="0" end="11" title="Iqbal Masih" label="Iqbal Masih"/>
<link wikidata="Q630063" start="53" end="72" title="Christianity in Pakistan" label="Pakistani Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097861" start="132" end="144" title="Child labour in Pakistan" label="child labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597018" start="215" end="227" title="Pakistan Day" label="Pakistan Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124648" start="262" end="278" title="Civil decorations of Pakistan" label="Tamgha-e-Shujaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978509" start="396" end="403" title="Muridke" label="Muridke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="426" end="432" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478" start="436" end="442" title="Punjab, Pakistan" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="466" end="484" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165988" start="1918" end="1931" title="bonded labour" label="bonded labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006351" start="1967" end="1984" title="C. Christine Fair" label="C. Christine Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854572" start="2919" end="2949" title="Bonded Labour Liberation Front" label="Bonded Labour Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="3231" end="3237" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3326" end="3332" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3341" end="3354" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q739786" start="3466" end="3491" title="Reebok Human Rights Award" label="Reebok Human Rights Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3607" end="3615" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854572" start="3698" end="3728" title="Bonded Labour Liberation Front" label="Bonded Labour Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q21515963" start="3892" end="3908" title="Ehsan Ullah Khan" label="Ehsan Ullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854572" start="3913" end="3917" title="BLLF" label="BLLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="3947" end="3962" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978509" start="4201" end="4208" title="Muridke" label="Muridke"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="4227" end="4240" title="Easter Sunday" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896633" start="4944" end="4972" title="Federal Investigation Agency" label="Federal Investigation Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q495642" start="5272" end="5282" title="Free The Children" label="We Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="5409" end="5417" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537593" start="5423" end="5446" title="GoodWeave International" label="GoodWeave International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272176" start="5492" end="5519" title="Broad Meadows Middle School" label="Broad Meadows Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49143" start="5523" end="5544" title="Quincy, Massachusetts" label="Quincy, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q989283" start="5873" end="5878" title="Kasur" label="Kasur"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="6496" end="6503" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415382" start="6568" end="6630" title="World&amp;#x27;s Children&amp;#x27;s Prize for the Rights of the Child" label="World&amp;#x27;s Children&amp;#x27;s Prize for the Rights of the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="6693" end="6698" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6830" end="6852" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="7068" end="7090" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="7092" end="7097" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442375" start="7176" end="7193" title="Kailash Satyarthi" label="Kailash Satyarthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15675634" start="7252" end="7268" title="female education" label="female education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="7445" end="7452" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="7454" end="7460" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q308963" start="7486" end="7509" title="University of Salamanca" label="University of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563826" start="7629" end="7650" title="Sharmeen Obaid Chinoy" label="Sharmeen Obaid Chinoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="7663" end="7667" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790529" start="7856" end="7865" title="Arif Alvi" label="Arif Alvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q104872534" start="7880" end="7896" title="Sitara-e-Shujaat" label="Sitara-e-Shujaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q123588520" start="7992" end="7998" title="Gunjal" label="Gunjal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603360" start="8047" end="8062" title="Ahmed Ali Akbar" label="Ahmed Ali Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315364" start="8064" end="8070" title="Resham" label="Resham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983355" start="8075" end="8085" title="Amna Ilyas" label="Amna Ilyas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723221" wikidata="Q6206173" url="?curid=723221" title="Joanne McCartney">
<text>Joanne McCartney is a British barrister and Labour and Co-operative Party politician. Since 2004, she has served as a member of the London Assembly, representing Enfield &amp; Haringey. Following the election of Sadiq Khan as Mayor of London in 2016, McCartney has served as Statutory Deputy Mayor of London.

== Legal career ==
Prior to her career in politics, Joanne McCartney worked as a barrister specialising in employment law. She also worked as an adjudicator for the Housing Ombudsman dealing with disputes between landlords and tenants.

== Political career ==
McCartney was elected councillor in the London Borough of Enfield in 1998, representing Edmonton and then Palmers Green.

She was elected to the London Assembly for Enfield and Haringey in the 2004 Assembly Elections and stood down as a councillor at the 2006 local elections. Subsequently, she has retained her seat at the 2008, 2012, 2016, 2021 and 2024 elections.

McCartney won re-election in 2008 by approximately 1,400 votes. In the 2012 election, she increased her margins to 36,741 votes. In the 2016 election, she broke records by winning by a margin of 51,152 votes.

She was a member of the Metropolitan Police Authority. She currently sits on the London Assembly&#x27;s Environment Committee, Oversight Committee and Transport Committee.

Since the election of Sadiq Khan as Mayor of London in 2016, McCartney has served as Statutory Deputy Mayor of London. As Deputy Mayor, McCartney has led work on the Mayor of London&#x27;s universal free school meals programme and on the Young Londoners fund and worked to create &quot;Early Years Hubs&quot; for disadvantaged children. As an Assembly Member, she has campaigned on rail devolution upgrades to the Piccadilly Line and child poverty.

== Personal life ==
McCartney has three children, and was chair of governors at her local primary school.

== References ==
==External links==
*Official site 
*London Assembly profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6206173" start="0" end="16" title="Joanne McCartney" label="Joanne McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="44" end="50" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q211931" start="55" end="73" title="Co-operative Party" label="Co-operative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="132" end="147" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054197" start="162" end="184" title="Enfield and Haringey (London Assembly constituency)" label="Enfield &amp;amp; Haringey"/>
<link wikidata="Q334155" start="212" end="222" title="Sadiq Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="226" end="241" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988627" start="285" end="307" title="Deputy Mayor of London" label="Deputy Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="417" end="431" title="employment law" label="employment law"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046108" start="475" end="492" title="Housing Ombudsman" label="Housing Ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210531" start="610" end="635" title="London Borough of Enfield" label="London Borough of Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997321" start="658" end="666" title="Edmonton, London" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887044" start="676" end="689" title="Palmers Green" label="Palmers Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054197" start="735" end="755" title="Enfield and Haringey (London Assembly constituency)" label="Enfield and Haringey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669841" start="763" end="786" title="2004 London Assembly election" label="2004 Assembly Elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888162" start="825" end="845" title="2006 United Kingdom local elections" label="2006 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669844" start="967" end="971" title="2008 London Assembly election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669846" start="1009" end="1022" title="2012 London Assembly election" label="2012 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160717" start="1074" end="1087" title="2016 London Assembly election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825197" start="1172" end="1201" title="Metropolitan Police Authority" label="Metropolitan Police Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q334155" start="1343" end="1353" title="Sadiq Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="1357" end="1372" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988627" start="1416" end="1438" title="Deputy Mayor of London" label="Deputy Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="1703" end="1718" title="Devolution" label="rail devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207689" start="1735" end="1750" title="Piccadilly Line" label="Piccadilly Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561657" start="1755" end="1768" title="child poverty" label="child poverty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723225" wikidata="Q749495" url="?curid=723225" title="Paul Du Chaillu">
<text>Paul Belloni Du Chaillu (July 31, 1831 (disputed)April 29, 1903) was a French-American traveler, zoologist, and anthropologist. He became famous in the 1860s as the first modern European outsider to confirm the existence of gorillas, and later the Pygmy people of central Africa. He later researched the prehistory of Scandinavia.

==Early life and parentage==
There are conflicting reports of both the year and place of Du Chaillu&#x27;s birth. The year is variously given as 1831 (the consensus of modern scholars), 1835, or 1839; the date when given is July 31. Accounts usually cite either Paris or New Orleans as his likely place of birth. A contemporary obituary quotes a statement made by Du Chaillu referring to &quot;the United States, my country by adoption, and ... France, my native land.&quot; His entry in the 1901-1902 edition of &quot;Marquis Who&#x27;s Who&quot; — which was based on information he supplied directly to the editors — says 1838 in New Orleans. His grave marker identifies his place of birth as Louisiana, and the year as 1839.

Edward Clodd, Du Chaillu&#x27;s friend, told the story differently in his memoirs. Clodd mentioned New York as another claimed location, but asserted that Du Chaillu&#x27;s true birthplace was the French Indian Ocean island territory of Île Bourbon (now called Réunion). He further claimed that du Chaillu&#x27;s mother was a mulatto woman. In 1979, historian Henry H. Bucher presented evidence to back Clodd&#x27;s view, including records of Du Chaillu&#x27;s father. Bucher argued that Du Chaillu, as a member of the European scientific community, would have tried to obfuscate or conceal the family history that would have labeled him a quadroon. In the 19th century atmosphere of scientific racism, great apes and Sub-Saharan Africans were often considered to both have small cranial capacity, and thus be innately unable to achieve civilization; Du Chaillu&#x27;s credibility as a scientist and explorer would have suffered as a result. Indeed, comments in a letter by Du Chaillu&#x27;s contemporary, the ethnologist of Africa Mary Kingsley, indicate that at least some scientists who thought poorly of Du Chaillu knew of his ancestry or other discrediting information about him.

In his youth, he accompanied his father, a French trader in the employment of a Parisian firm, to the west coast of Africa where, at a station on the Gabon, he was educated by missionaries and acquired an interest in and knowledge of the country, its natural history, its natives, and their languages before emigrating to the U.S. in 1852.

==Africa==
He was sent in 1855 by the Academy of Natural Sciences at Philadelphia on an African expedition. Until 1859, he explored the regions of West Africa in the neighborhood of the equator, gaining considerable knowledge of the delta of the Ogooué River and the estuary of the Gabon. During his travels from 1856 to 1859, he observed numerous gorillas, known to non-locals in prior centuries only from an unreliable and ambiguous report credited to Hanno the Navigator of Carthage in the 5th century BC and known to scientists in the preceding years only by a few skeletons. He brought back dead specimens and presented himself as the first white European person to have seen them.

A subsequent expedition, from 1863 to 1865, enabled him to confirm the accounts given by the ancients of a pygmy people inhabiting the African forests. Du Chaillu sold his hunted gorillas to the Natural History Museum in London and his &quot;cannibal skulls&quot; to other European collections; a fine cased group shot by Du Chaillu may be seen in the Ipswich Museum in Suffolk, England. Narratives of both expeditions were published, in 1861 and 1867 respectively, under the titles &quot;Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa, with Accounts of the Manners and Customs of the People, and of the Chace of the Gorilla, Crocodile, and other Animals&quot;; and &quot;A Journey to Ashango-land, and further penetration into Equatorial Africa&quot;. While in Ashango Land in 1865, he was elected King of the Apingi tribe. A later narrative, &quot;The Country of the Dwarfs&quot; was published in 1872.

At the time, he was in great demand on the public lecture circuits of New York, London, and Paris. Although there were initial challenges of his accounts, they came to be accepted, although &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; speculated that &quot;possibly some of the adventures he described as happening to himself were reproductions of the hunting stories of natives.&quot;

In addition to his zoological work on gorillas, Du Chaillu collected and identified a number of new species to science. He was the first person to scientifically describe the giant otter shrew (&quot;Potamogale velox&quot;), taking precedence over John Edward Gray&#x27;s description of the same animal as a mouse instead. He also collected the type specimens for the southern needle-clawed bushbaby (&quot;Euoticus elegantulus&quot;), the hammer-headed bat (&quot;Hypsignathus monstrosus&quot;), and the African pygmy squirrel (&quot;Myosciurus pumilio&quot;), all West African species. Despite not being an ornithological collector, he collected the types specimens for thirty-nine valid species of African birds. Du Chaillu collected the type series of &quot;Amnirana albolabris&quot; (Hallowell, 1856) from Gabon.

==Northern Europe==
After some years&#x27; residence in America, during which he wrote several books for the young based on his African adventures, Du Chaillu turned his attention to northern Europe. After a visit to northern Norway in 1871, over the following five years, he made a study of customs and antiquities in Sweden, Norway, Lapland and Northern Finland. He published in 1881 &quot;The Land of the Midnight Sun&quot; (dedicated to his friend Robert Winthrop of New York), as a series of Summer and Winter Journeys, in two volumes.

His 1889 work &quot;The Viking Age&quot;, also in two volumes, was a very broad study of the early history, manners, and customs of the ancestors of the English-speaking nations. He labored for eight and a half years and carefully read hundreds of Sagas that describe the life of the people who inhabited the Scandinavian peninsula from the Stone Age to the Middle Ages (including literary remains). This scholarly work demonstrates what is now generally recognized, the importance of the Norse, including Norway, Sweden, and Denmark to the cultural dimension and transformation of British Isles during the fifth to eleventh centuries. This view was then unfamiliar and was ridiculed by many of his contemporaries, including Canon Isaac Taylor. This book, in two volumes, is now a very collectible item. In 1900, he also published &quot;The Land of the Long Night&quot;.

==Personal life==

Du Chaillu was a friend of Edward Clodd and was present at one of Clodd&#x27;s Whitsun gatherings at Strafford House, Aldeburgh, Suffolk, in company with John Rhys, Grant Allen, York Powell and Joseph Thomson. He was a member along with a variety of mostly literary figures in author J. M. Barrie&#x27;s amateur cricket team, the &quot;Allahakbarries&quot;.

He died following a stroke of paralysis at St. Petersburg, while on a scholarly visit to Russia as part of his research on the Scandinavian peoples. He is interred at Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx, New York City.

==References==

* Obituary of Paul Du Chaillu, &quot;The Times&quot;, 1 May 1903.
* R.A.D. Markham, &quot;A Rhino in High Street&quot; (Ipswich 1991). (Illustration of gorillas).
* .
* .

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q749495" start="0" end="23" title="Paul Du Chaillu" label="Paul Belloni Du Chaillu"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="97" end="106" title="zoologist" label="zoologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="112" end="126" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36611" start="224" end="231" title="gorilla" label="gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="248" end="253" title="Pygmy" label="Pygmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="264" end="278" title="central Africa" label="central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297771" start="304" end="329" title="prehistory of Scandinavia" label="prehistory of Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="603" end="614" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040912" start="851" end="873" title="Marquis Who&amp;#x27;s Who" label="Marquis Who&amp;#x27;s Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="1027" end="1036" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342331" start="1061" end="1073" title="Edward Clodd" label="Edward Clodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1160" end="1168" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="1265" end="1277" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="1298" end="1309" title="Île Bourbon" label="Île Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="1322" end="1329" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="1387" end="1394" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q56575424" start="1701" end="1709" title="quadroon" label="quadroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="1745" end="1762" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="1779" end="1799" title="Sub-Saharan Africans" label="Sub-Saharan Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030681" start="1841" end="1857" title="cranial capacity" label="cranial capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q235525" start="2093" end="2106" title="Mary Kingsley" label="Mary Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503114" start="2397" end="2402" title="Gabon Estuary" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822400" start="2626" end="2653" title="Academy of Natural Sciences" label="Academy of Natural Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2657" end="2669" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="2735" end="2746" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q750021" start="2834" end="2846" title="Ogooué River" label="Ogooué River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36611" start="2936" end="2943" title="gorilla" label="gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q296478" start="3042" end="3061" title="Hanno the Navigator" label="Hanno the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="3065" end="3073" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="3383" end="3388" title="pygmy" label="pygmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="3471" end="3493" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="3518" end="3526" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329546" start="3628" end="3642" title="Ipswich Museum" label="Ipswich Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="3646" end="3653" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="4380" end="4403" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q474780" start="4737" end="4754" title="giant otter shrew" label="giant otter shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="4810" end="4826" title="John Edward Gray" label="John Edward Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365863" start="4930" end="4961" title="southern needle-clawed bushbaby" label="southern needle-clawed bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q304912" start="5002" end="5019" title="hammer-headed bat" label="hammer-headed bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q387695" start="5067" end="5089" title="African pygmy squirrel" label="African pygmy squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q62132" start="5716" end="5723" title="Lapland (region)" label="Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062340" start="5833" end="5848" title="Robert Winthrop (banker)" label="Robert Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q73169" start="6232" end="6254" title="Scandinavian peninsula" label="Scandinavian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="6264" end="6273" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6281" end="6292" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="6412" end="6417" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="6505" end="6518" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12182179" start="6654" end="6666" title="Isaac Taylor (canon)" label="Isaac Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342331" start="6841" end="6853" title="Edward Clodd" label="Edward Clodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="6893" end="6900" title="Whitsun" label="Whitsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077402" start="6932" end="6941" title="Aldeburgh" label="Aldeburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="6943" end="6950" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050565" start="6968" end="6977" title="John Rhys" label="John Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q725248" start="6979" end="6990" title="Grant Allen" label="Grant Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499166" start="6992" end="7003" title="York Powell" label="York Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351577" start="7008" end="7022" title="Joseph Thomson (explorer)" label="Joseph Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="7098" end="7110" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="7126" end="7133" title="cricket (sport)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730347" start="7150" end="7164" title="Allahakbarries" label="Allahakbarries"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="7216" end="7230" title="Saint Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000666" start="7340" end="7357" title="Woodlawn Cemetery (Bronx)" label="Woodlawn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="7361" end="7370" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7372" end="7385" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="7441" end="7450" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723229" wikidata="Q781336" url="?curid=723229" title="Dick Armey">
<text>Richard Keith Armey (; born July 7, 1940) is an American economist and politician. He was a U.S. Representative from Texas&#x27;s (1985–2003) and House Majority Leader (1995–2003). He was one of the engineers of the &quot;Republican Revolution&quot; of the 1990s, in which Republicans were elected to majorities of both houses of Congress for the first time in four decades. Armey was one of the chief authors of the Contract with America. Armey is also an author and former economics professor. After his retirement from Congress, he has worked as a consultant, advisor, and lobbyist.

==Early life, education and career==
Armey was born on July 7, 1940, in the farming town of Cando, North Dakota, the son of Marion (née Gutschlag) and Glenn Armey. He grew up in a rural area. He graduated from Jamestown College with a Bachelor of Arts and then received a Master of Arts from the University of North Dakota and a PhD in economics from the University of Oklahoma. Armey is a member of the Pi Kappa Alpha fraternity.

Armey served on the economics faculty at the University of Montana from 1964 to 1965. He was an assistant professor of economics at West Texas State (now West Texas A&amp;M University) from 1967 to 1968, at Austin College from 1968 to 1972, and at North Texas State (now the University of North Texas) from 1972 to 1977. He served as chairman of the economics department at North Texas State University from 1977 to 1983.

Armey has been married twice. His first marriage ended in divorce, but resulted in three children. Even though she called off the wedding three times, he married his second wife, Susan Armey, who already had two children.

==U.S. House of Representatives==

Armey was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1984 in Texas&#x27;s 26th congressional district, narrowly defeating freshman congressman Tom Vandergriff. Armey was one of six freshmen Republican Party congressmen elected from Texas in 1984 who were known as the Texas Six Pack. He would never face another contest anywhere near that close, and was reelected eight more times, never dropping below 68 percent of the vote. His strongest performance was in 1998, when the Democrats didn&#x27;t field a candidate and Armey defeated a Libertarian with 88 percent of the vote. This mirrored the growing Republican trend in his district.

In his early years in Congress, Armey was influenced by Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises.

===The Republican Revolution and party leadership===
In 1994, Armey, then House Republican Conference Chairman, joined Minority Whip Newt Gingrich in drafting the Contract with America. Republican members credited this election platform with the Republican takeover of Congress (the Republican Revolution). Gingrich became Speaker of the United States House of Representatives, and Armey became Gingrich&#x27;s second-in-command as House Majority Leader. Gingrich delegated to Armey an unprecedented level of authority over scheduling legislation on the House floor, a power traditionally reserved to the Speaker.

In 1995, Armey referred to openly gay Congressman Barney Frank as &quot;Barney Fag&quot;. Armey said it was a slip of the tongue. Frank did not accept Armey&#x27;s explanation, saying, &quot;I turned to my own expert, my mother, who reports that in 59 years of marriage, no one ever introduced her as Elsie Fag.&quot;

=== Leadership challenges ===
In the summer of 1997, several House Republicans attempted to replace Gingrich as Speaker. The attempted &quot;coup&quot; began on July 9 with a meeting between Republican conference chairman John Boehner of Ohio and Republican leadership chairman Bill Paxon of New York. According to their plan, House Majority Leader Armey, House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, Boehner, and Paxon were to present Gingrich with an ultimatum: resign, or be voted out. Under the new plan, Paxon was to replace Gingrich as Speaker. However, Armey balked at the proposal, and told his chief of staff to warn Gingrich about the coup. On July 11, Gingrich met with senior Republican leadership to assess the situation. He explained that under no circumstance would he step down. If he were voted out, there would be a new election for Speaker, which would allow for the possibility that Democrats and dissenting Republicans would vote in Dick Gephardt as Speaker. Paxon resigned his post, feeling that he had not handled the situation correctly. Paxon later considered, then rejected, a challenge to Armey&#x27;s post as majority leader, and did not run for re-election in 1998.

Republicans suffered heavy losses in the 1998 elections, but remained the majority party in the House. Armey had to defeat a challenge for his majority leader post from Steve Largent of Oklahoma, a member of the Republican class of 1994. Although Armey was not popular in the Republican caucus, Largent was thought to be too conservative for some moderate Republicans, and Armey won on the third ballot.

Gingrich had already resigned as Speaker in the aftermath of the 1998 election, with Bob Livingston of Louisiana chosen by the party to serve as his replacement. Before the new Congress convened in January, however, Livingston announced he would not serve as Speaker, following the revelation of an extramarital affair. Armey initially seemed to have the inside track to become Speaker; as majority leader, he was the number-two Republican in the chamber. However, he was still badly wounded from Largent&#x27;s challenge, and opted not to run. The post eventually went to Chief Deputy Whip Dennis Hastert of Illinois.

=== Later congressional career ===

Armey served another four years before announcing his retirement in 2002.

In his later terms in office, Armey feuded with Focus on the Family leader James Dobson. Armey wrote, &quot;As Majority Leader, I remember vividly a meeting with the House leadership where Dobson scolded us for having failed to &#x27;deliver&#x27; for Christian conservatives, that we owed our majority to him, and that he had the power to take our jobs back. This offended me, and I told him so.&quot; Armey states that Focus on the Family targeted him politically after the incident, writing, &quot;Focus on the Family deliberately perpetuates the lie that I am a consultant to the ACLU.&quot; Armey has also said that &quot;Dobson and his gang of thieves are real nasty bullies.&quot;

In Armey&#x27;s final term, he was named chairman of the United States House Committee on Homeland Security and was the primary sponsor of the legislation that created the Department of Homeland Security. After Armey&#x27;s retirement, fellow Texan Tom DeLay was elevated to Armey&#x27;s Majority Leader position. Armey&#x27;s son, Scott, ran for his father&#x27;s seat in the 2002 election, but lost in the Republican Party runoff to Michael C. Burgess, who would go on to hold the strongly Republican 26th District for the GOP in November.

One of Armey&#x27;s former Congressional staff members, Dade Phelan, was elected in 2014 to the Texas House of Representatives as a Republican, representing the Beaumont area in House District 21. In January 2021, Phelan was elected the 76th Speaker of the Texas House of Representatives.

==Advisor and lobbyist==

===DLA Piper===
After leaving office, Armey joined the Washington office of the law firm DLA Piper as a senior policy advisor. Armey was also the firm&#x27;s co-chairman of its Homeland Security Task Force. In 2009, Armey&#x27;s FreedomWorks group launched a campaign against health care reform proposals, accusing the Obama administration of attempting to &quot;socialize medicine&quot;. DLA Piper was concerned about the conflict of interest, particularly since their clients were spending millions in advertising and lobbying money to support the passage of health care reform, and FreedomWorks was linked to demonstrations at town hall forums where health care reform was being discussed. Amid what &quot;Politico&quot; called &quot;the health care flap&quot;, DLA Piper asked Armey to resign in August 2009, and he left the firm.

===FreedomWorks===
In 2003, Armey became co-chairman of Citizens for a Sound Economy, which in 2004 merged with Empower America to become FreedomWorks. The group&#x27;s name was derived from a common Armey saying: &quot;Freedom works. Freedom is good policy and good politics.&quot; FreedomWorks is a conservative non-profit organization based in Washington D.C. In his role as chairman, Armey was a national political figure. He traveled widely, meeting with activists and legislators. In 2005, he testified before the President&#x27;s Advisory Panel on Tax Reform and debated Governor of Colorado Bill Owens on a tax increase ballot measure. The Center for Public Integrity reported that Armey was paid $500,000 per year and flew first class, along with other FreedomWorks employees, for work travel.

On December 3, 2012 &quot;Mother Jones&quot; reported that Armey, in an email on November 30 to Matt Kibbe, president of FreedomWorks Inc., resigned his positions as chairman and trustee of FreedomWorks and severed all his ties to that organization, effective immediately. &quot;Mother Jones&quot; reported that Armey&#x27;s reasons for resigning were &quot;matters of principle. It&#x27;s how you do business as opposed to what you do. But I don&#x27;t want to be the guy to create problems.&quot; The Associated Press reported that in September 2012, Armey agreed to resign by November 2012 in exchange for $8 million in consulting fees paid in annual $400,000 installments.

On December 25, 2012, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; reported that Armey had escorted Matt Kibbe and FreedomWorks&#x27; Vice President Adam Brandon out of the FreedomWorks offices with the help of an armed guard on September 4, 2012. Armey reportedly wanted FreedomWorks to support Todd Akin after his controversial &quot;legitimate rape&quot; comments.

==Political positions==

===Economy and taxation===
As a free-market economist influenced by the ideas of Milton Friedman, Armey favored relatively open immigration and advocated for free trade. Armey was one of Congress&#x27;s fervent supporters of privatization of Social Security and phasing-out of farm subsidies. He was a strong supporter of replacing the progressive tax with a flat tax. Armey was very critical of a competing tax reform proposal that would replace the current system with a national sales tax, the FairTax. During his time in Congress, Armey conceived the Base Realignment and Closure Commission that became responsible for closing military bases as a cost-cutting measure. After his retirement from Congress, he told &quot;The New York Times&quot;: &quot;A lot of people say if you cut defense, you&#x27;re demonstrating less than a full commitment to our nation&#x27;s security, and that&#x27;s baloney.&quot;

===Health care===
In 1999, Armey sponsored the Fair Care for the Uninsured Act, something that would later be proposed by Mark Kennedy after Armey left Congress. It proposed using tax credits to offset the cost of health insurance, allowing individuals to go outside the workplace to obtain private health coverage directly from an insurance company, and the creation of a &quot;safety net&quot; for the uninsured. The law never made it through Congress, but some of these concepts did make it into the Massachusetts health care reform of 2006 and from there into the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in 2010. Armey is a vocal opponent of the individual mandate to purchase health benefits. He also voiced public opposition to the individual mandate when it was proposed by First Lady Hillary Clinton during the contentious national health care reform debate of 1993 and 1994.

===Foreign policy===
In 2006, Michael Isikoff&#x27;s book &quot;Hubris&quot; included Armey as an on-the-record source, who said he was initially reluctant to support the Bush administration&#x27;s call for war with Iraq, and that he had warned President George W. Bush that such a war might be a &quot;quagmire&quot;. Armey said that the intelligence presented to him in support of the war appeared questionable, but he gave Bush the benefit of the doubt. According to Barton Gellman, former Vice President Dick Cheney told Armey that Saddam Hussein&#x27;s family had direct ties to Al-Qaeda and that Saddam was developing miniature nuclear weapons. Armey then voted for the Iraq War, but after it became clear this was not true, stated that he &quot;deserved better from Cheney than to be bullshitted by him.&quot; Robert Draper&#x27;s &quot;Dead Certain: The Presidency of George W. Bush&quot; recounts a conversation in late summer 2002 between Armey and Cheney. Armey insisted that American forces would get &quot;mired down&quot; in Iraq if they invaded, but Cheney offered this assurance: &quot;They&#x27;re going to welcome us. It&#x27;ll be like the American army going through the streets of Paris. They&#x27;re sitting there ready to form a new government. The people will be so happy with their freedoms that we&#x27;ll probably back ourselves out of there within a month or two.&quot;

On May 1, 2002, on MSNBC&#x27;s &quot;Hardball with Chris Matthews&quot;, Armey called for Palestinians to be expelled from the Palestinian Occupied Territories. Armey, a staunch supporter of Israel, repeatedly said that he would be &quot;content&quot; with Israel completely taking over all of the Palestinian Occupied Territories and transferring the Palestinian population out. He further stated that the Palestinians could then build their state in the &quot;many Arab nations that have many hundreds of thousands of acres of land&quot;.

==Books==
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Dick Armey political contributions from &quot;Influence Explorer&quot; at the Sunlight Foundation
*Richard K. Armey Collection and Photograph Series at the Carl Albert Center
* at FreedomWorks
* Armey in Exile, Luke Mullins, &quot;The Washingtonian&quot;, June 26, 2013</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q781336" start="0" end="19" title="Dick Armey" label="Richard Keith Armey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="92" end="111" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508632" start="146" end="167" title="Party Leaders of the United States House of Representatives" label="House Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="222" end="243" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="273" end="284" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="330" end="338" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689146" start="417" end="438" title="Contract with America" label="Contract with America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999201" start="679" end="698" title="Cando, North Dakota" label="Cando, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146207" start="797" end="814" title="Jamestown College" label="Jamestown College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="822" end="838" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="859" end="873" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q968559" start="883" end="909" title="University of North Dakota" label="University of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="942" end="964" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238185" start="991" end="1005" title="Pi Kappa Alpha" label="Pi Kappa Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="1064" end="1085" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986651" start="1173" end="1202" title="West Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="West Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823037" start="1226" end="1240" title="Austin College" label="Austin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q860527" start="1294" end="1319" title="University of North Texas" label="University of North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1725" end="1763" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707377" start="1775" end="1815" title="Texas&amp;#x27;s 26th congressional district" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s 26th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q547107" start="1857" end="1872" title="Tom Vandergriff" label="Tom Vandergriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707998" start="1982" end="1996" title="Texas Six Pack" label="Texas Six Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="2408" end="2426" title="Austrian economics" label="Austrian economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="2427" end="2443" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Ludwig von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508632" start="2565" end="2578" title="Party whips of the United States House of Representatives" label="Minority Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q182788" start="2579" end="2592" title="Newt Gingrich" label="Newt Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689146" start="2609" end="2630" title="Contract with America" label="Contract with America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771218" start="2692" end="2723" title="U.S. House election, 1994" label="Republican takeover of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="2729" end="2750" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="2769" end="2822" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508632" start="2878" end="2899" title="House Majority Leader" label="House Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q537287" start="3111" end="3123" title="Barney Frank" label="Barney Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975772" start="3140" end="3143" title="Faggot (slang)" label="Fag"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702" start="3602" end="3614" title="John Boehner" label="John Boehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="3618" end="3622" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639996" start="3658" end="3668" title="Bill Paxon" label="Bill Paxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3672" end="3680" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508632" start="3736" end="3755" title="Party whips of the United States House of Representatives" label="House Majority Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q180390" start="3756" end="3765" title="Tom DeLay" label="Tom DeLay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209677" start="4320" end="4333" title="Dick Gephardt" label="Dick Gephardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q923029" start="4603" end="4617" title="United States House of Representatives elections, 1998" label="1998 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q332247" start="4731" end="4744" title="Steve Largent" label="Steve Largent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="4748" end="4756" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q888069" start="5052" end="5066" title="Bob Livingston" label="Bob Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="5070" end="5079" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="5576" end="5584" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435085" start="5746" end="5765" title="Focus on the Family" label="Focus on the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q955266" start="5773" end="5785" title="James Dobson" label="James Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116393" start="5950" end="5959" title="Christianity in the United States" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="6282" end="6286" title="ACLU" label="ACLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495355" start="6444" end="6494" title="United States House Committee on Homeland Security" label="United States House Committee on Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924011" start="6530" end="6541" title="Homeland Security Act" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="6559" end="6590" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="6812" end="6818" title="runoff election" label="runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q539521" start="6822" end="6840" title="Michael C. Burgess" label="Michael C. Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160981" start="6957" end="6976" title="Congressional staff" label="Congressional staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18630886" start="6986" end="6997" title="Dade Phelan" label="Dade Phelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="7026" end="7056" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="Texas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="7091" end="7099" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154482" start="7335" end="7344" title="DLA Piper" label="DLA Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740939" start="7475" end="7487" title="FreedomWorks" label="FreedomWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="7565" end="7585" title="Obama administration" label="Obama administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082008" start="7609" end="7627" title="socialized medicine" label="socialize medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="7669" end="7689" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109740" start="7955" end="7963" title="Politico (newspaper)" label="Politico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122768" start="8138" end="8166" title="Citizens for a Sound Economy" label="Citizens for a Sound Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740939" start="8194" end="8209" title="Empower America" label="Empower America"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8429" end="8444" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q29514964" start="8660" end="8680" title="Governor of Colorado" label="Governor of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q651820" start="8681" end="8691" title="Bill Owens (Colorado politician)" label="Bill Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830038" start="8730" end="8757" title="Center for Public Integrity" label="Center for Public Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q851510" start="8912" end="8924" title="Mother Jones (magazine)" label="Mother Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788900" start="8982" end="8992" title="Matt Kibbe" label="Matt Kibbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="9389" end="9405" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q772086" start="9847" end="9856" title="Todd Akin" label="Todd Akin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293884" start="9887" end="9902" title="Rape and pregnancy statement controversies in the 2012 United States elections" label="legitimate rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="9977" end="9998" title="free-market economics" label="free-market economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="10026" end="10041" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="10103" end="10113" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10170" end="10183" title="Social Security debate (United States)#Privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="10187" end="10202" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q396268" start="10222" end="10236" title="Agricultural subsidy" label="farm subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="10281" end="10296" title="progressive tax" label="progressive tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q825846" start="10304" end="10312" title="flat tax" label="flat tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q114834" start="10442" end="10449" title="FairTax" label="FairTax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="10500" end="10539" title="Base Realignment and Closure Commission" label="Base Realignment and Closure Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="10576" end="10589" title="military base" label="military base"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10668" end="10686" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900180" start="10979" end="10991" title="Mark Kennedy (politician)" label="Mark Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062630" start="11037" end="11048" title="tax credits" label="tax credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="11071" end="11087" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784440" start="11360" end="11392" title="Massachusetts health care reform" label="Massachusetts health care reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="11425" end="11467" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025316" start="11510" end="11528" title="individual mandate" label="individual mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="11652" end="11667" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831354" start="11775" end="11790" title="Michael Isikoff" label="Michael Isikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="11916" end="11935" title="George W. Bush administration" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="11952" end="11965" title="Iraq War" label="war with Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="12000" end="12014" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865622" start="12215" end="12229" title="Barton Gellman" label="Barton Gellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="12253" end="12264" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="12281" end="12295" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="12329" end="12337" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790993" start="12358" end="12394" title="Iraq and weapons of mass destruction" label="developing miniature nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="12421" end="12429" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343629" start="12562" end="12575" title="Robert Draper" label="Robert Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="12784" end="12788" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="13163" end="13168" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127348" start="13182" end="13210" title="Hardball with Chris Matthews" label="Hardball with Chris Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="13235" end="13247" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="13272" end="13304" title="Palestinian Occupied Territories" label="Palestinian Occupied Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640493" start="13821" end="13840" title="Sunlight Foundation" label="Sunlight Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148823" start="13899" end="13917" title="Carl Albert Center" label="Carl Albert Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740939" start="13923" end="13935" title="FreedomWorks" label="FreedomWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773648" start="13974" end="13991" title="The Washingtonian (magazine)" label="The Washingtonian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723233" wikidata="Q186532" url="?curid=723233" title="Finland national football team">
<text>The Finland national football team (, ) represents Finland in men&#x27;s international football competitions and is controlled by the Football Association of Finland, the governing body for football in Finland, which was founded in 1907. The team has been a member of FIFA since 1908 and a UEFA member since 1957.

Finland had never qualified for a major tournament until securing a spot at UEFA Euro 2020. After decades of average results and campaigns, the nation made progress in the 2000s, achieving notable results against established European teams and reaching a peak of 33rd in the FIFA World Rankings in 2007. Afterward, their performances and results declined, drawing them to their all-time low of 110th in the FIFA Rankings in 2017. Seven years after their all-time low in the FIFA Rankings, as of July 2024, they sit at 63rd place in the overall ranking.

==History==
===Early history===
The Football Association of Finland was founded in 1907 and became a member of FIFA the next year. At the time, Finland was an autonomous grand duchy ruled by the Russian Emperors. Finland played its first international on 22 October 1911, as Sweden beat the Finns at the Eläintarha Stadium in Helsinki. Finland participated the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm, beating Italy and the Russian Empire, but losing the bronze medal match against the Netherlands.

=== Period of dispersion ===

After the 1918 Civil War, the Finnish sports movement was divided into the right-wing Finnish Gymnastics and Sports Federation (SVUL) and the leftist Finnish Workers&#x27; Sports Federation (TUL), Finnish Football Association was a member of the SVUL. Both sides had their own championship series, and between 1919 and 1939 the Finland national team was selected of the Football Association players only. The Finnish Workers&#x27; Sports Federation football team in turn, participated in the competitions of the international labour movement.

However, since the late 1920s several top footballers defected from TUL and joined the Football Association to be eligible for the national team. During the 1930s, these ″defectors″ formed the spine of the national team. For example, the Finland squad at the 1936 Summer Olympics was composed of eight former TUL players. In 1937, Finland participated the FIFA World Cup qualification for the first time, losing all three matches against Sweden, Germany and Estonia.

Since 1939, TUL players were selected for the national team and finally, in 1956, the TUL and Football Association series were merged.

=== Post-war years ===
The 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki saw the Finnish hosts lose to Austria in the first round. Finland did, however, win the unofficial Nordic championship in 1964 and 1966.

Finland also took part in European Championship qualifying since the 1968 event, but had to wait for its first win until 1978.

===Late 20th century===
Finland missed out on qualification for Euro 1980 by just a point and for the 1986 World Cup by two points. Finland was invited to take part in the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow after many Western countries announced they would boycott the games, but failed to progress from its group.

By the mid-1990s Finland started to have more players in high-profile European leagues, led by Ajax superstar Jari Litmanen. In 1996, Euro 1992-winning coach Richard Møller Nielsen was hired to take Finland to the 1998 World Cup. The team enjoyed mixed fortunes in the campaign, the high points of which were a draw and a win away to Norway and Switzerland respectively. Going into the last match, Finland would have needed a win at home to Hungary to earn a place in the play-offs. They led the game 1–0 going into injury time, but scored an own goal, and their qualification campaign was over. Møller Nielsen also tried to lead Finland to Euro 2000. In this campaign, the Finns recorded a sensational win away to Turkey, but couldn&#x27;t compete with Germany and Turkey in the long run.

Antti Muurinen succeeded Møller Nielsen as coach in 2000. He had arguably the most talented group of Finnish players ever at his disposal, including players such as Antti Niemi, Sami Hyypiä, Teemu Tainio and Mikael Forssell in addition to the legendary Litmanen. The team also performed quite well under him in qualification for the 2002 World Cup despite a difficult draw, earning two draws against Germany and a home draw with England as well as beating Greece 5–1 in Helsinki. In the end, however, England and Germany proved too strong, and the Finns finished third in the group, but were the only team in that group not to lose at home. Hopes were high going into qualification for Euro 2004 after the promising last campaign and friendly wins over the likes of Norway, Belgium and Portugal (which seen the Finns jump from 40th to 30th in the Elo ranking). However, Finland started the campaign by losing to Wales and Yugoslavia (later Serbia and Montenegro, now two separate nations). These losses were followed by two defeats by Italy, and a 3–0 home win over Serbia and Montenegro was little consolation, as the Finns finished fourth in the group. In qualification for the 2006 World Cup Finland failed to score a single point in six matches against the top three teams in their group, the Netherlands, the Czech Republic and Romania. Muurinen was sacked in June 2005, and he was replaced by caretaker Jyrki Heliskoski, but results didn&#x27;t improve.

===Recent history===

In August 2005, it was announced that Englishman Roy Hodgson would become the new Finland coach in 2006, and he started the job in January of that year. Hodgson stepped down as manager after they failed to qualify for Euro 2008.

Hodgson&#x27;s replacement was a Scotsman, Stuart Baxter, who signed a contract until the end of the 2012 European Championship qualification campaign. In the Euro 2008 qualifying Finland needed to win their last qualifying game away to Portugal to qualify for their first major football tournament. However, the match ended 0–0 meaning the team missed out on qualification to the tournament, with Finland ending the group stage with 24 points and Portugal with 27 points. However, the performance in qualifying led to the Finns gaining their best-ever FIFA world ranking to date at 33rd.

The 2010 World Cup qualifying campaign under new head coach Stuart Baxter saw Finland again finish third in their group with five wins, three draws and two defeats. They were the only team in qualifying not to lose to eventual 3rd-place finishers Germany; in both the home and away matches Finland had led Germany only to concede late equalizers.

====Mixu Paatelainen era (2011–2015)====
During the Euro 2012 qualifying, head coach Baxter was sacked, and on 31 March 2011 he was replaced by former national team player Mixu Paatelainen. Paatelainen started his tenure with a win against San Marino, only to be followed by a 5–0 loss against Sweden. Finland eventually finished fourth in its group with only three wins, two of them against San Marino.

Paatelainen&#x27;s deal with the Finnish FA extended until 2016, covering the UEFA Euro 2012 qualifiers, and also the next 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification and the UEFA Euro 2016 qualifiers. As Finland was already eliminated from UEFA Euro 2012, his main task was to renew the national team with a generation switch, and try to qualify for one or more of the tournaments during his projected tenure as Finland&#x27;s head coach. This included ultimately leaving out Jari Litmanen, team&#x27;s long-served captain and &quot;The King of Finnish Football&quot;.

In the 2014 World Cup qualifying campaign, Finland&#x27;s best result was a 1–1 draw at reigning world champions Spain. They finished third in the five-team Group I, behind Spain and France. On 14 June 2015, Paatelainen was sacked following his fourth defeat in a row during the Euro 2016 qualifying campaign. Finland eventually finished fourth in Euro 2016 qualifying under guidance of a caretaker manager Markku Kanerva. They achieved a somewhat noteworthy result; Joel Pohjanpalo&#x27;s goal gave the Finns a 1–0 win at former European champions Greece, who had reached the second round of the 2014 World Cup and were the top seeds of their qualifying group.

Paatelainen had stucked with his preferred formation of 4–3–2–1, which he had named &quot;joulukuusi&quot; – a Christmas tree – due to its shape. With the bad results while insistently using the same formation, and his defensive statements to media, he gained a negative reputation among the supporters and the media, and his time as the national team head coach is still remembered mainly for joulukuusi.

====Hans Backe (2016)====
On 12 August 2015, Swedish Hans Backe was named the new manager, starting on 1 January 2016. His first official match with the team was held on 10 January 2016, and ended in a 3–0 defeat by Sweden. On 12 December 2016, Backe was fired during the 2018 World Cup qualifying campaign, and a former assistant and caretaker Markku Kanerva was named the new head coach. Finland did not win a single game during Backe&#x27;s time as head coach. His record during 2016 was nine defeats and two draws.

===Markku Kanerva era (2016–2024)===
Finland&#x27;s peak of 33rd in the FIFA ranking in 2007, had demoted to 110th as of 2017. As UEFA created a new competition, UEFA Nations League, to largely replace international friendlies, Finland were placed in the League C in the first 2018–19 edition due to a low ranking place. Kanerva had renewed the roster, as veterans including Perparim Hetemaj, Niklas Moisander and Alexander Ring, had announced their retirement from international duty. Roman Eremenko was also not available for national team anymore due to a competition ban. With a help of goalscoring by Teemu Pukki and saves by captain goalkeeper Lukas Hradecky, Finland won their League C Group 2, on top of Hungary, Greece and Estonia, and won a promotion to League B for the next edition of UEFA Nations League.

Kanerva continued to get outstanding results with the team in the UEFA Euro 2020 qualification, and on 15 November 2019, Finland qualified to the country&#x27;s first ever major tournament, UEFA Euro 2020, after defeating Liechtenstein 3–0, and finishing as the Group J runner-up behind Italy. The successful qualifying campaign was aided by a distinctive performance of Teemu Pukki, who scored ten goals in ten qualifying matches. However, the final tournament was postponed to the summer 2021 due to COVID-19 pandemic.

Later in the Autumn 2020, the second edition of UEFA Nations League started, and Finland was drawn in the Group 4 with Wales, Ireland and Bulgaria. They defeated both Ireland and Bulgaria home and away, but lost both games against Wales and finished 2nd in the group and missed the promotion to next season&#x27;s League A.

On 12 June 2021 in the UEFA Euro 2020 tournament, Finland had their first victory on their debut in a major tournament finals against Denmark. Joel Pohjanpalo scored the only goal, a header in a 1–0 win to grant his country their first goal and the first win in a major competition. The game was interrupted by a tragic heart attack suffered by Denmark midfielder Christian Eriksen, which he luckily survived. Unfortunately, having lost the next two games against both Russia and Belgium, Finland finished third in the group and was knocked out at the group stage alongside fellow debutants North Macedonia.

Finland failed to qualify for the 2022 FIFA World Cup, even though Pukki continued with his scoring streak with 6 goals in the qualifiers. They were drawn in the Group D, with France, Ukraine, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kazakhstan, finished 3rd and missed the second round qualification play-offs. The long-served defenders Jukka Raitala, Paulus Arajuuri and Joona Toivio announced their retirement from international football after the qualifiers.

Having secured their spot in the Nations League B, Finland was drawn in the 2022–23 UEFA Nations League B Group 3 with Bosnia, Romania and Montenegro. They had a mediocre record of two wins, two draws and two losses, and defended their place in the League B again as the group&#x27;s runners-up, falling behind the group winner Bosnia and Herzegovina.

After the successful qualifying to previous European tournament, the team and the country had high hopes when starting the UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying campaign. Finland started expectedly with an away loss to Denmark, but won the next three games in a row against Northern Ireland away in March, and Slovenia and San Marino at home in June, with zero conceded goals in these three games. They continued with an away win against Kazakhstan in September, but lost the next three games against Denmark at home, Slovenia away and Kazakhstan at home. The loss to Kazakhstan occurred with two conceded goals late in the game after Finland was already leading 1–0 before. The defeat also took away the possibility for direct qualifying. Finland ended the qualifying campaign with two wins in the last two matches, including 4–0 victory over Northern Ireland at home in November, and finished third in the group. As having placed among the best runner-ups in the previous Nations League, and with a help of overlapping results in other games, Finland had secured their place in the UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying play-offs. In March 2024, in the first decisive play-off match against Wales away, Finland were destroyed 4–1 and were definitely left out of the UEFA Euro 2024 tournament.

After a run of mediocre results and the lack of reaching out the best potential out of the team, the speculations had started about the extension of Kanerva&#x27;s contract as his previous deal was going to expire soon. However, during Kanerva&#x27;s seven-year spell, Finland had ascended in FIFA rankings and as of Summer 2024, were sitting at the 63rd place. During the recent years, the national team roster had undergone a relatively large renovation by Kanerva. He had successfully called-up new younger generation players to the roster, including Kaan Kairinen, Benjamin Källman, Oliver Antman, Daniel Håkans and Matti Peltola.

On 17 June 2024, after some ambiguous comments by the Finnish FA president Ari Lahti, it was announced by the FA that Markku Kanerva will continue as the manager of the team until the end of the 2026 FIFA World Cup qualification and for the possible final tournament. The assistant coaches Mika Nurmela and Toni Korkeakunnas would be replaced by Jani Honkavaara, and by former long-time national team players Teemu Tainio and Tim Sparv. Kanerva, with his new staff, was first set to start preparing the team for the upcoming 2024–25 UEFA Nations League B, where Finland would face England, Ireland and Greece in the Group 2, starting in September. Finland lost both games against Greece and England away with apathetic performances, which signaled outside that Kanerva had a very little more to give for this team anymore. According to Helsingin Sanomat, Kanerva is only a puppet leader of the national team until the 2024 Veikkausliiga season is finished and then a current assistant coach Jani Honkavaara, also a current manager of Veikkausliiga club KuPS, can be named a sole head coach of the national team who then later allegedly declined the job offer. There is also a conflict of interest of Finnish FA president Ari Lahti, who happens to be also the owner of KuPS. Finland finished the Nations League campaign at the bottom of the group after six losses with a 2–13 goal difference, and were relegated straight to the League C. On 22 November, the board of the Finnish FA released head coach Kanerva from his contract.

===Jacob Friis (2025–present)===
On 20 January 2025, the Finnish FA announced that Danish coach Jacob Friis was named the new manager of the Finland national team, on a three-year deal with an option for the possible UEFA Euro 2028 final tournament.

==Home stadiums==
Most of Finland&#x27;s home matches are played at the Helsinki Olympic Stadium in the capital, Helsinki. It has been Finland&#x27;s principal home stadium ever since its construction was completed in 1938. Before that, Pallokenttä in Helsinki was mainly used.

During 2000s and 2010s, some qualifying matches against lower profile opponents and some friendlies were hosted at the Tampere Stadium in Tampere, and Veritas Stadion in Turku. Helsinki&#x27;s Bolt Arena, which has artificial turf, is also used for some friendlies and qualifiers. During the reconstruction of Helsinki Olympic Stadium between 2016 and 2020, Tampere Stadium served as the main stadium for qualifying games.

The team returned permanently to Helsinki Olympic Stadium in 2020, after the delayed reconstruction and renovation was finished, but had to play some of the first games without an audience due to pandemic.

In the five home matches during the UEFA Euro 2024 qualification campaign, Huuhkajat had the record audience average of 31,406 (157,029 in total), which corresponds to around 97 per cent of the stadium&#x27;s full capacity.

== Kits and crest ==
Finland&#x27;s kit are currently supplied by American brand Nike. They replaced German company Adidas, who supplied Finland&#x27;s kits between 1979 and 2013.

===Kit sponsorship===
==Results and fixtures==

The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.


===2024===



===2025===



==Coaching staff==

===Coaching history===

==Players==

===Current squad===
The following players were called up for UEFA Nations League matches against Republic of Ireland and Greece on 14 and 17 November 2024, respectively.

&quot;Caps and goals as of 17 November 2024, after the match against .&quot;










===Recent call-ups===
The following players have been called up for the team within the last twelve months and are still available for selection.
 ILL



 INJ
 ILL
 WD


 INJ

;Notes
*INJ = Withdrew due to an injury
*ILL = Withdrew due to an illness
*WD = Withdrew due to a non-injury issue
*PRE = Preliminary squad / standby
*RET = Retired from international duty
==Player records==

===Most appearances===

===Top goalscorers===

==Competitive record==

===FIFA World Cup===
===UEFA European Championship===


===UEFA Nations League===
===Olympic Games===
===Nordic Football Championship===
===Baltic Cup===
==Head-to-head record==
This list is Finland national team complete records, both friendlies and competitive matches.



==Honours==
===Regional===
* Baltic Cup
** Runners-up (1): 2012
** Third-place (1): 2014
* Nordic Football Championship
** Champions (1): 2000–01

===Friendly===
* King&#x27;s Cup
** Runners-up (2): 2000, 2013
* Cyprus International Football Tournament
** Champions (1): 2005

==See also==

*Finland men&#x27;s national under-21 football team
*Finland men&#x27;s national under-19 football team
*Finland men&#x27;s national under-18 football team
*Finland men&#x27;s national under-17 football team
*Finland men&#x27;s national under-16 football team
*Finland women&#x27;s national football team
*Finland women&#x27;s national under-20 football team
*Finland women&#x27;s national under-17 football team
*Football in Finland
*Finnish &quot;Workers&quot; football team
*Åland official football team
*Sápmi football team

==References==
==External links==
* Finland at FIFA
* Finland at UEFA
* RSSSF archive of results 1911–present
* RSSSF archive of most capped players and highest goalscorers
* RSSSF archive of coaches
* The Finnish National Team Supporters&#x27; Association
* Reports for all official matches
* Russian fan site about Finnish football and national team </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186532" start="4" end="34" title="Finland national football team" label="Finland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="51" end="58" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="87" end="95" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q474947" start="134" end="165" title="Football Association of Finland" label="Football Association of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740753" start="190" end="209" title="football in Finland" label="football in Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="268" end="272" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="290" end="294" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="391" end="405" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="UEFA Euro 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="590" end="609" title="FIFA Men&amp;#x27;s World Rankings" label="FIFA World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q474947" start="905" end="936" title="Football Association of Finland" label="Football Association of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="980" end="984" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="1028" end="1050" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="autonomous grand duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618625" start="1064" end="1080" title="Emperor of Russia" label="Russian Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="1144" end="1150" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11857642" start="1173" end="1191" title="Eläintarha Stadium" label="Eläintarha Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="1230" end="1250" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="1273" end="1278" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253316" start="1287" end="1301" title="Russian Empire national football team" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="1349" end="1360" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="1408" end="1417" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138867" start="1543" end="1582" title="Finnish Workers&amp;#x27; Sports Federation" label="Finnish Workers&amp;#x27; Sports Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18681138" start="1802" end="1855" title="Finnish Workers&amp;#x27; Sports Federation football team" label="Finnish Workers&amp;#x27; Sports Federation football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="2196" end="2216" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="2383" end="2390" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q186914" start="2395" end="2402" title="Estonia national football team" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="2568" end="2588" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="2631" end="2638" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282377" start="2700" end="2719" title="Nordic Football Championship" label="Nordic championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="2808" end="2818" title="1968 UEFA European Football Championship" label="1968 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q182196" start="2931" end="2940" title="1980 UEFA European Football Championship" label="Euro 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="2969" end="2983" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="3039" end="3059" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="3274" end="3278" title="Ajax Amsterdam" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q209650" start="3289" end="3302" title="Jari Litmanen" label="Jari Litmanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="3313" end="3322" title="1992 UEFA European Football Championship" label="Euro 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274343" start="3337" end="3359" title="Richard Møller Nielsen" label="Richard Møller Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="3393" end="3407" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="3513" end="3519" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="3524" end="3535" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="3620" end="3627" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="3820" end="3829" title="2000 UEFA European Football Championship" label="Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="3894" end="3900" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497141" start="3970" end="3984" title="Antti Muurinen" label="Antti Muurinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q351254" start="4135" end="4146" title="Antti Niemi (footballer)" label="Antti Niemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192840" start="4148" end="4159" title="Sami Hyypiä" label="Sami Hyypiä"/>
<link wikidata="Q316501" start="4161" end="4173" title="Teemu Tainio" label="Teemu Tainio"/>
<link wikidata="Q342530" start="4178" end="4193" title="Mikael Forssell" label="Mikael Forssell"/>
<link wikidata="Q494961" start="4281" end="4294" title="2002 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="4303" end="4317" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="4399" end="4406" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="4426" end="4432" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4542" end="4551" title="2002 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)#UEFA Group 9" label="the group"/>
<link wikidata="Q19622" start="4638" end="4651" title="2004 UEFA European Football Championship qualifying" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="4656" end="4665" title="2004 UEFA European Football Championship" label="Euro 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="4882" end="4887" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="4892" end="4902" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5114" end="5123" title="2004 European Football Championship (qualifying)#Group 9" label="the group"/>
<link wikidata="Q155069" start="5128" end="5141" title="2006 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="5150" end="5164" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5250" end="5261" title="2006 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)#Group 1" label="their group"/>
<link wikidata="Q483868" start="5284" end="5298" title="Czech Republic national football team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="5303" end="5310" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q777771" start="5379" end="5395" title="Jyrki Heliskoski" label="Jyrki Heliskoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q203781" start="5502" end="5513" title="Roy Hodgson" label="Roy Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q715348" start="5726" end="5739" title="Stuart Baxter" label="Stuart Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="5784" end="5810" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="2012 European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068414" start="5842" end="5862" title="UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying Group A" label="Euro 2008 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q939901" start="6277" end="6311" title="2010 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 4" label="2010 World Cup qualifying campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q752354" start="6673" end="6693" title="UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying Group E" label="Euro 2012 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q555595" start="6793" end="6809" title="Mixu Paatelainen" label="Mixu Paatelainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185350" start="6861" end="6871" title="San Marino national football team" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q474947" start="7059" end="7069" title="Football Association of Finland" label="Finnish FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q244276" start="7149" end="7182" title="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q12342217" start="7191" end="7216" title="UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying" label="UEFA Euro 2016 qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="7257" end="7271" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="UEFA Euro 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q209650" start="7493" end="7506" title="Jari Litmanen" label="Jari Litmanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q847812" start="7594" end="7628" title="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group I" label="2014 World Cup qualifying campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="7700" end="7705" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="7770" end="7776" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q15807023" start="7866" end="7886" title="UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying Group F" label="Euro 2016 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q15807023" start="7935" end="7955" title="UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying Group F" label="Euro 2016 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626897" start="7994" end="8008" title="Markku Kanerva" label="Markku Kanerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q127797" start="8054" end="8069" title="Joel Pohjanpalo" label="Joel Pohjanpalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="8136" end="8142" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q965131" start="8710" end="8720" title="Hans Backe" label="Hans Backe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730976" start="8929" end="8963" title="2018 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group I" label="2018 World Cup qualifying campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="9249" end="9261" title="FIFA ranking" label="FIFA ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="9307" end="9311" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980635" start="9339" end="9358" title="UEFA Nations League" label="UEFA Nations League"/>
<link wikidata="Q40502121" start="9432" end="9440" title="2018–19 UEFA Nations League C" label="League C"/>
<link wikidata="Q531576" start="9552" end="9568" title="Perparim Hetemaj" label="Perparim Hetemaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q128920" start="9570" end="9586" title="Niklas Moisander" label="Niklas Moisander"/>
<link wikidata="Q547529" start="9591" end="9605" title="Alexander Ring" label="Alexander Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q353074" start="9663" end="9677" title="Roman Eremenko" label="Roman Eremenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q366753" start="9783" end="9794" title="Teemu Pukki" label="Teemu Pukki"/>
<link wikidata="Q713627" start="9827" end="9841" title="Lukas Hradecky" label="Lukas Hradecky"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="9889" end="9896" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="9898" end="9904" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q186914" start="9909" end="9916" title="Estonia national football team" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q72676394" start="9958" end="9970" title="2020–21 UEFA Nations League B" label="next edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q23688132" start="10062" end="10090" title="UEFA Euro 2020 qualification" label="UEFA Euro 2020 qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="10186" end="10200" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="UEFA Euro 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q186690" start="10218" end="10231" title="Liechtenstein national football team" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q59348852" start="10258" end="10265" title="UEFA Euro 2020 qualifying Group J" label="Group J"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="10283" end="10288" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q366753" start="10367" end="10378" title="Teemu Pukki" label="Teemu Pukki"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="10498" end="10515" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q72676394" start="10624" end="10631" title="2020–21 UEFA Nations League B" label="Group 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="10637" end="10642" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="10644" end="10651" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180845" start="10656" end="10664" title="Bulgaria national football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="10866" end="10880" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="UEFA Euro 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="10977" end="10984" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q127797" start="10986" end="11001" title="Joel Pohjanpalo" label="Joel Pohjanpalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q294951" start="11207" end="11224" title="Christian Eriksen" label="Christian Eriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q726080" start="11312" end="11318" title="Russia national football team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="11323" end="11330" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188568" start="11434" end="11449" title="North Macedonia national football team" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q284163" start="11486" end="11505" title="2022 FIFA World Cup" label="2022 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q86680156" start="11614" end="11621" title="2022 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group D" label="Group D"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="11628" end="11634" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q170403" start="11636" end="11643" title="Ukraine national football team" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181190" start="11645" end="11667" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q183468" start="11672" end="11682" title="Kazakhstan national football team" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q327479" start="11776" end="11789" title="Jukka Raitala" label="Jukka Raitala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302918" start="11791" end="11806" title="Paulus Arajuuri" label="Paulus Arajuuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359355" start="11811" end="11823" title="Joona Toivio" label="Joona Toivio"/>
<link wikidata="Q109385287" start="11978" end="12007" title="2022–23 UEFA Nations League B" label="2022–23 UEFA Nations League B"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="12029" end="12036" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q189018" start="12041" end="12051" title="Montenegro national football team" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672702" start="12378" end="12403" title="UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying" label="UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="12517" end="12533" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172221" start="12553" end="12561" title="Slovenia national football team" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185350" start="12566" end="12576" title="San Marino national football team" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q112182964" start="13327" end="13362" title="UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying play-offs" label="UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying play-offs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098367" start="13499" end="13513" title="UEFA Euro 2024" label="UEFA Euro 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q18632885" start="14081" end="14094" title="Kaan Kairinen" label="Kaan Kairinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23869556" start="14096" end="14112" title="Benjamin Källman" label="Benjamin Källman"/>
<link wikidata="Q62596606" start="14114" end="14127" title="Oliver Antman" label="Oliver Antman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104912131" start="14129" end="14142" title="Daniel Håkans" label="Daniel Håkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016557" start="14147" end="14160" title="Matti Peltola" label="Matti Peltola"/>
<link wikidata="Q11852486" start="14238" end="14247" title="Ari Lahti" label="Ari Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q56377818" start="14358" end="14391" title="2026 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="2026 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q649776" start="14453" end="14465" title="Mika Nurmela" label="Mika Nurmela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581952" start="14470" end="14487" title="Toni Korkeakunnas" label="Toni Korkeakunnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17320972" start="14509" end="14524" title="Jani Honkavaara" label="Jani Honkavaara"/>
<link wikidata="Q316501" start="14572" end="14584" title="Teemu Tainio" label="Teemu Tainio"/>
<link wikidata="Q249485" start="14589" end="14598" title="Tim Sparv" label="Tim Sparv"/>
<link wikidata="Q118930002" start="14688" end="14717" title="2024–25 UEFA Nations League B" label="2024–25 UEFA Nations League B"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="14744" end="14751" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q366921" start="14999" end="15016" title="Helsingin Sanomat" label="Helsingin Sanomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q382324" start="15216" end="15220" title="KuPS" label="KuPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11852486" start="15384" end="15393" title="Ari Lahti" label="Ari Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061470" start="15788" end="15799" title="Jacob Friis" label="Jacob Friis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37417257" start="15909" end="15923" title="UEFA Euro 2028" label="UEFA Euro 2028"/>
<link wikidata="Q332219" start="16015" end="16039" title="Helsinki Olympic Stadium" label="Helsinki Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736268" start="16180" end="16191" title="Töölön Pallokenttä" label="Pallokenttä"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419146" start="16341" end="16356" title="Tampere Stadium" label="Tampere Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="16360" end="16367" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004864" start="16373" end="16388" title="Veritas Stadion" label="Veritas Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="16392" end="16397" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139227" start="16415" end="16425" title="Bolt Arena" label="Bolt Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="16437" end="16452" title="artificial turf" label="artificial turf"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672702" start="16889" end="16917" title="UEFA Euro 2024 qualification" label="UEFA Euro 2024 qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="17159" end="17163" title="Nike, Inc" label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="17194" end="17200" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="17611" end="17630" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="17635" end="17641" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q390920" start="18532" end="18542" title="Baltic Cup (football)" label="Baltic Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q786881" start="18562" end="18566" title="2012 Baltic Cup" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q15207114" start="18587" end="18591" title="2014 Baltic Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282377" start="18594" end="18622" title="Nordic Football Championship" label="Nordic Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529688" start="18641" end="18648" title="2000–01 Nordic Football Championship" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q278545" start="18667" end="18682" title="King&amp;#x27;s Cup (Thailand)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805777" start="18702" end="18706" title="2000 King&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305808" start="18708" end="18712" title="2013 King&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243780" start="18715" end="18755" title="Cyprus International Football Tournament" label="Cyprus International Football Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q614987" start="18795" end="18845" title="Finland national under-21 football team" label="Finland men&amp;#x27;s national under-21 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450492" start="18847" end="18897" title="Finland national under-19 football team" label="Finland men&amp;#x27;s national under-19 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q15408036" start="18899" end="18949" title="Finland national under-18 football team" label="Finland men&amp;#x27;s national under-18 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679510" start="18951" end="19001" title="Finland national under-17 football team" label="Finland men&amp;#x27;s national under-17 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q18681059" start="19003" end="19053" title="Finland national under-16 football team" label="Finland men&amp;#x27;s national under-16 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q847121" start="19055" end="19098" title="Finland women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Finland women&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q17307141" start="19100" end="19152" title="Finland women&amp;#x27;s national under-20 football team" label="Finland women&amp;#x27;s national under-20 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16595798" start="19154" end="19206" title="Finland women&amp;#x27;s national under-17 football team" label="Finland women&amp;#x27;s national under-17 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740753" start="19208" end="19227" title="Football in Finland" label="Football in Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18681138" start="19229" end="19270" title="Finnish Workers&amp;#x27; Sports Federation football team" label="Finnish &amp;quot;Workers&amp;quot; football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996890" start="19272" end="19300" title="Åland official football team" label="Åland official football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047912" start="19302" end="19321" title="Sápmi football team" label="Sápmi football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="19370" end="19374" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="19388" end="19392" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723234" wikidata="Q1331188" url="?curid=723234" title="Dee Doocey">
<text>Elizabeth Deirdre Doocey, Baroness Doocey, (née O&#x27;Keefe; born 2 May 1948) is a British Liberal Democrat politician and businesswoman. A former chair of the London Assembly, she was created a life peer in 2010 and is now the inaugural chair of the House of Lords Finance Committee.

== Early political and business career ==
Prior to her election to the London Assembly, she ran a management consulting business, DD Enterprises. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, Dee Doocey was the Director of Finance at Liberal Party headquarters. She served as a Liberal councillor in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames from 1986 to 1994, and was chair of the council&#x27;s Housing Committee. She served as election agent for Vince Cable in her home constituency of Twickenham from 1992–2015.

== London politics ==
Doocey was a member of the London Assembly from 2004–12. She was originally elected as the fifth person on the Liberal Democrat party list, as a London-wide member of the Assembly. She was re-elected for a second term in 2008 but did not contest the 2012 election. She was chair of the London Assembly from 2010–11, and Deputy Chair from 2011–12. From 2004 to 2010 and again from 2011–12, she was chair of the Assembly&#x27;s Economic Development, Culture, Sport &amp; Tourism Committee (renamed the Economy, Culture and Sport Committee in May 2011), which was the lead Committee monitoring preparations for the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2012 Summer Paralympics in London.

From 2005–12, Doocey was a member of the Metropolitan Police Authority, which oversaw the Metropolitan Police. She chaired the MPA&#x27;s Finance &amp; Resources Committee from 2011 to 2012, and also chaired the MPA&#x27;s Olympic &amp; Paralympic sub-committee. She represented the Mayor of London on the Home Office Olympic Security Board from 2008–12.

== Peerage ==
Dee Doocey was created a life peer on 21 December 2010, as Baroness Doocey, &quot;of Hampton in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames&quot; and sits on the Liberal Democrat benches in the House of Lords.[2] In 2016, the House of Lords appointed her as the inaugural chair of its new Finance Committee. The Committee controls the House of Lords’ internal budgets, commissioning the House&#x27;s annual financial plan and monitoring expenditure. As Chair of the Committee, Baroness Doocey is a member of the House of Lords Commission, which provides high-level strategic and political direction for the House Administration. The Commission and the Finance Committee arose from recommendations of the Lords Leader&#x27;s Group on Governance, of which Baroness Doocey was a member.

During the 2010-2015 Parliament, she was the Coalition Government&#x27;s representative on the Criminal Justice Board. She was also a member of the Joint Committee on the Draft Modern Slavery Bill [1], which comprised members of both the House of Commons and House of Lords, and which took written and oral evidence and made recommendations in a report to both Houses. She was a member of the House of Lords Refreshment Committee 2012 to 2015. In 2012, she was a member of the Draft Enhanced Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Bill (Joint Committee).

== Personal life ==
Born Elizabeth Deirdre O&#x27;Keefe in Drumcondra, Dublin, she married Jim Doocey and they have one son.

== References ==
== External links ==
* biography at the site of the House of Lords
* Dee Doocey biodata at Liberal Democrats&#x27; official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1331188" start="0" end="41" title="Dee Doocey" label="Elizabeth Deirdre Doocey, Baroness Doocey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44" end="47" title="Given name#Name at birth" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331188" start="48" end="60" title="Dee Doocey" label="O&amp;#x27;Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="92" end="108" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="161" end="176" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="514" end="527" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q32515" start="584" end="622" title="London Borough of Richmond upon Thames" label="London Borough of Richmond upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354552" start="711" end="725" title="election agent" label="election agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q244312" start="730" end="741" title="Vince Cable" label="Vince Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q875210" start="770" end="780" title="Twickenham (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="847" end="862" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669844" start="1041" end="1045" title="2008 London Assembly election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669846" start="1070" end="1083" title="2012 London Assembly election" label="2012 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="1432" end="1452" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182798" start="1457" end="1480" title="2012 Summer Paralympics" label="2012 Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825197" start="1534" end="1563" title="Metropolitan Police Authority" label="Metropolitan Police Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="1583" end="1602" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="1776" end="1791" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="1799" end="1810" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="1888" end="1897" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q766353" start="1948" end="1955" title="Hampton, London" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q32515" start="1963" end="2001" title="London Borough of Richmond upon Thames" label="London Borough of Richmond upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="2024" end="2040" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="2056" end="2070" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589267" start="2824" end="2843" title="Modern Slavery Act 2015" label="Modern Slavery Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261255" start="3271" end="3289" title="Drumcondra, Dublin" label="Drumcondra, Dublin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723237" wikidata="Q5212263" url="?curid=723237" title="Damian Hockney">
<text>Nicholas Richard Alexander Damian Hockney is a British former politician who was the leader of the One London party from 2005 to 2008. He was a Member of the London Assembly (AM) for Londonwide, and was also a member of the Metropolitan Police Authority 
from 2004 to 2008.

==Political background==
Previously a member of the Conservative Party, Hockney contested the constituency of Pendle for the Referendum Party at the 1997 general election, narrowly losing his deposit. He then moved to UKIP, for which he stood in Kensington and Chelsea at the 1999 by-election and the 2001 general election. He was the UKIP London Mayoral candidate in 2000, and in June 2004 he was elected as a London-wide Member of the London Assembly for UKIP.

On 30 January 2005, he announced that he was defecting to Veritas, the new party founded by ex-UKIP MEP Robert Kilroy-Silk. It was subsequently announced that he would serve as deputy leader of Veritas. On 29 July 2005, following the resignation of Kilroy-Silk, Hockney announced his resignation as deputy leader.

In September 2005, Hockney founded the One London Party with fellow London Assembly Member Peter Hulme-Cross.

In February 2008, the One London Party announced that Hockney would be its candidate in the 2008 Mayoral election. However, on 27 March 2008, Hockney announced that he was pulling out of the race to become the Mayor of London. He cited a lack of media opportunities for the candidates representing smaller parties as the reason, but confirmed that the party would still contest the Assembly election. One London won no seats, and he was not re-elected; the party was wound up later that year.

By profession, Hockney is a magazine publisher. He also once entered &quot;A Song for Europe&quot;, the UK preliminary round of the Eurovision Song Contest.

Hockney is distantly related to artist David Hockney.

==References==
==External links==
*One London website
*London Assembly biog
*Mayorwatch interview with Hockney</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5212263" start="0" end="41" title="Damian Hockney" label="Nicholas Richard Alexander Damian Hockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q160715" start="99" end="109" title="One London" label="One London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="158" end="173" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825197" start="224" end="253" title="Metropolitan Police Authority" label="Metropolitan Police Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="327" end="345" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050733" start="385" end="391" title="Pendle (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Pendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q278315" start="400" end="416" title="Referendum Party" label="Referendum Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="424" end="445" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="493" end="497" title="UK Independence Party" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119982" start="521" end="543" title="Kensington and Chelsea (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Kensington and Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995616" start="551" end="567" title="1999 Kensington and Chelsea by-election" label="1999 by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="576" end="597" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671126" start="615" end="629" title="2000 London mayoral election" label="London Mayoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669841" start="673" end="704" title="2004 London Assembly election" label="elected as a London-wide Member"/>
<link wikidata="Q162246" start="797" end="804" title="Veritas (political party)" label="Veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q333764" start="843" end="861" title="Robert Kilroy-Silk" label="Robert Kilroy-Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q160715" start="1093" end="1103" title="One London" label="One London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174782" start="1145" end="1162" title="Peter Hulme-Cross" label="Peter Hulme-Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011607" start="1257" end="1278" title="2008 London mayoral election" label="2008 Mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919296" start="1734" end="1751" title="A Song for Europe" label="A Song for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="1791" end="1814" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q159907" start="1856" end="1869" title="David Hockney" label="David Hockney"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723243" wikidata="Q83907" url="?curid=723243" title="Robert Dahl">
<text>Robert Alan Dahl (; December 17, 1915 – February 5, 2014) was an American political theorist and Sterling Professor of Political Science at Yale University. 

He established the pluralist theory of democracy—in which political outcomes are enacted through competitive, if unequal, interest groups—and introduced &quot;polyarchy&quot; as a descriptor of actual democratic governance. An originator of &quot;empirical theory&quot; and known for advancing behavioralist characterizations of political power, Dahl&#x27;s research focused on the nature of decision making in actual institutions, such as American cities. He is the most important scholar associated with the pluralist approach to describing and understanding both city and national power structures. 

In addition to his work on the descriptive theory of democracy, he was long occupied with the formulation of the constituent elements of democracy considered as a theoretical but realizable ideal. By virtue of the cogency, clarity, and veracity of his portrayal of some of the key characteristics of realizable-ideal democracy, as well as his descriptive analysis of the dynamics of modern pluralist-democracy, he is considered one of the greatest theorists of democracy in history.

==Biography==
Dahl was born in Inwood, Iowa but grew up in Skagway, Alaska. His paternal grandfather Iver Pedersen Dal immigrated to the US in 1865 from the farm Dal Vestre at Snåsavatnet outside Steinkjer. Robert Dahl was aware of his Norwegian roots all his life and visited the ancestral home several times.

As a young man, Dahl worked as a loose worker on the railroad in Skagway. This long-term contact with local people became decisively important for his political attitudes and research interests.

He received his undergraduate degree from the University of Washington in 1936 and his Ph.D. from Yale in 1940. Between 1938 and 1940 he was a member of the Socialist Party of America. 

After receiving his Ph.D., Dahl worked in the government in Washington DC and then volunteered for a spell in the US army. He served in Europe during World War II, was the leader of a small reconnaissance platoon in an infantry regiment, and earned a Bronze Star. He led a platoon that took part in a major offensive in November 1944.

After World War II, Dahl returned to Yale in 1946, where he was offered a temporary position teaching American government. The position became permanent, and Dahl remained at Yale his entire career, until his retirement in 1986. He was Eugene Meyer Professor of Political Science from 1955 to 1964, and Sterling Professor from 1964 to 1986. Dahl was departmental chair from 1957 to 1962.

Dahl served as president of the American Political Science Association in 1966/67.

Dahl was married to Mary Bartlett until her passing in 1970, and then to Ann Sale, a Presbyterian.

== Awards and honors==

Over his career, Dahl received many prestigious awards and prizes. 

* 1950 Guggenheim fellow

* 1955–1956 Fellow of the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences

* 1960 American Academy of Arts and Sciences 

* 1962 Dahl&#x27;s book &quot;Who Governs?&quot; is awarded the 1962 Woodrow Wilson Foundation Book Award.

* 1967 Fellow of the Center for Advanced Study in Behavioral Sciences

* 1972 National Academy of Sciences

* 1978 Guggenheim fellow

* 1990 Dahl&#x27;s work &quot;Democracy and Its Critics&quot; (1989) won the Woodrow Wilson Foundation Book Award.

* 1995 Dahl was the first recipient of the Johan Skytte Prize in Political Science in 1995.

* 2016 Robert A. Dahl Award was established in honor of Dr. Robert Dahl by the American Political Science Association in 2016.

* American Philosophical Society

* British Academy (as a corresponding fellow).

==Academic research==

===Early writings and pluralism===

In his doctoral thesis in 1940, Dahl critiqued &quot;corporate capitalism&quot; and state socialism as both exemplifying undemocratic traits, arguing for economic democracy and a form of democratic socialism. A similar theme recurred in his &quot;A Preface to Economic Democracy&quot; in 1985.

Dahl&#x27;s influential early books include &quot;A Preface to Democratic Theory&quot; (1956), &quot;Who Governs?&quot; (1961), and &quot;Pluralist Democracy in the United States&quot; (1967), which presented pluralistic explanations for political rule in the United States. 

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, he was involved in an academic disagreement with C. Wright Mills over the nature of politics in the United States. Mills held that America&#x27;s governments are in the grasp of a unitary and demographically narrow power elite. Dahl responded that there are many different elites involved, who have to work both in contention and in compromise with one another. If this is not democracy in a populist sense, Dahl contended, it is at least polyarchy (or pluralism). In perhaps his best known work, &quot;Who Governs?&quot; (1961), he examines the power structures (both formal and informal) in the city of New Haven, Connecticut, as a case study, and finds that it supports this view.

From the late 1960s onwards, his conclusions were challenged by scholars such as G. William Domhoff and Charles E. Lindblom (a friend and colleague of Dahl).

===Writing on democracy and polyarchies===
In &quot;Polyarchy&quot;, Dahl uses the term &quot;polyarchy&quot; to refer to actual cases of democracy and provides a comprehensive discussion of possible causes of polyarchy.
In his book, &quot;Democracy and Its Critics&quot;, Dahl clarifies his view about democracy. No modern country meets the ideal of democracy, which is as a theoretical utopia. More specifically, Dahl argued that five criteria could be used for evaluating how democratic a process is:
# Effective participation - All members ought to have equal and effective opportunities to make their views known to other members. 
# Voting equality - All members ought to have an equal and effective opportunity to vote, with votes counted as equal.
# Enlightened understanding - All members must have equal and effective opportunities to learn about the consequences and alternatives of a proposal. 
# Control of the agenda - All members must have the exclusive opportunity to choose if or how matters will be placed on the agenda. 
# Inclusion of adults - All or most of adult permanent residents should be given the full rights of the above four criteria.

However, as in his earlier book &quot;Polyarchy&quot;, Dahl held that some countries approximated those ideals and could be classified as &quot;polyarchies&quot; inasmuch as they had &quot;seven institutions, all of which must exist for a government to be classified as a polyarchy&quot;:
# Elected officials - &quot;Control over government decisions about policy is constitutionally vested in elected officials.&quot;
# Free and fair elections - &quot;Elected officials are chosen in frequent and fairly conducted elections in which coercion is comparatively uncommon.&quot;
# Inclusive suffrage - &quot;Practically all adults have the right to vote in the election of officials.&quot;
# Right to run for office - &quot;Practically all adults have the right to run for elective offices in the government, though age limits may be higher for holding office than for the suffrage.&quot;
# Freedom of expression - &quot;Citizens have a right to express themselves without the danger of severe punishment on political matters broadly defined, including criticism of officials, the government, the regime, the socioeconomic order, and the prevailing ideology.&quot;
# Alternative information - &quot;Citizens have a right to seek out alternative sources of information. Moreover, alternative sources of information exist and are protected by laws.&quot;
# Associational autonomy - &quot;citizens ... have a right to form relatively independent associations or organizations, including independent political parties and interest groups.&quot;

=== Conditions favourable for democratic institutions ===
In his book &quot;On Democracy&quot;, Dahl sets out five conditions that favor democratic institutions. He deems three of them essential and the remaining two solely favourable.

Essential condition for democracy:

# Control of military and police by elected officials
# Democratic beliefs and political culture 
# No strong foreign control hostile to democracy

Favourable conditions for democracy:

# A modern market economy and society 
# Weak subcultural pluralism

=== On the value of democracy ===
In his book &quot;On Democracy&quot;, Dahl addressed the question &quot;Why should we support democracy?&quot; and argued that &quot;democracy has
at least ten advantages&quot; relative to nondemocracies:

# Avoiding tyranny
# Essential rights
# General freedom
# Self determination
# Moral autonomy
# Human development
# Protecting essential personal interests
# Political equality
# Peace-seeking
# Prosperity

===Later writings===

In his later writing, Dahl examined democracy, in particular in the United States, with a critical view.

In &quot;How Democratic Is the American Constitution?&quot; (2001), Dahl argued that the US Constitution is much less democratic than it ought to be, given that its authors were operating from a position of &quot;profound ignorance&quot; about the future. However, he adds that there is little or nothing that can be done about this &quot;short of some constitutional breakdown, which I neither foresee nor, certainly, wish for.&quot;

In &quot;On Political Equality&quot; (2006), Dahl addresses the issue of equality and discusses how and why governments have fallen short of their democratic ideals. He assesses the contemporary political landscape in the United States.

==Major works==
The best known of Dahl&#x27;s works include:
* Dahl, Robert A. 1950. &quot;Congress and Foreign Policy&quot;. New York: Harcourt, Brace
* 
* Dahl, Robert A. (1957). &quot;The Concept of Power.&quot; Systems Research and Behavioral Science 2(3), 201–215.
* Dahl, Robert A. (1957). &quot;Decision-Making in a Democracy: The Supreme Court as a National Policy-Maker.&quot; Journal of Public Law 6: 279–295.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Full text.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Resources on Dahl and his research ==
* Baldwin, David, and Mark Haugaard (eds.). 2018. &quot;Robert A. Dahl: An Unended Quest&quot;. Routledge.
* Blokland, Hans Theodorus. 2011. &quot;Pluralism Democracy and Political Knowledge. Robert a Dahl and His Critics on Modern Politics&quot;. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
* Crothers, Charles H.G. 2015. &quot;Dahl, Robert A (1915–2014),&quot; pp. 655-60, in James Wright (ed.), &quot;International Encyclopaedia of Social and Behavioural Sciences&quot;, 2nd ed. Vol. 5, Elsevier. 
* Dahl, Robert A. 2005. &quot;After the Goldrush: Growing up in Skagway&quot;. Xlibris Corporation. [A description by Dahl of his days growing up in Alaska.]
* Dahl, Robert A., and Margaret Levi. 2009. “A Conversation with Robert A. Dahl&quot;. &quot;Annual Review of Political Science&quot; 12: 1-9
* Fabbrini, Sergio. 2003. &quot;Bringing Robert A. Dahl&#x27;s Theory of Democracy to Europe.&quot; &quot;Annual Review of Political Science&quot; 6:1: 119-137.
* Fisichella, Domenico. 2009. “Robert Dahl: The Democratic Polyarchy,” pp. 11-36, in Donatella Campus and Gianfranco Pasquino (eds.), &quot;Masters of Political Science&quot;. Colchester, UK: ECPR Press.
* Mayhew, David. 2018. &quot;A Biographical Memoir&quot;. National Academy of Sciences. 
* Shapiro, Ian, and Grant Reeher (eds.). 1988. &quot;Power, Inequality, and Democratic Politics: Essays in Honor of Robert A. Dahl&quot;. Westview Press.
* Utter, Glenn H. and Charles Lockhart (eds.). 2002. &quot;American Political Scientists: A Dictionary&quot; (2nd ed.) pp 75–78, online.
*Interview by Richard Snyder. 2007. &quot;Robert A. Dahl: Normative Theory, Empirical Research and Democracy,&quot; pp. 113–149, in Gerardo L. Munck and Richard Snyder, &quot;Passion, Craft, and Method in Comparative Politics&quot;. Baltimore, Md.: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

== See also ==
* Democracy
* Pluralism (political theory)

==References==
==External links==

* Robert A. Dahl in the Yale University website.
* Robert A. Dahl in the Encyclopædia Britannica.
* Annual Reviews Conversations Interview with Robert A. Dahl (video)
*Robert Alan Dahl Papers. Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83907" start="0" end="16" title="Robert Dahl" label="Robert Alan Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="74" end="92" title="Political philosophy" label="political theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q608197" start="97" end="136" title="Sterling Professor" label="Sterling Professor of Political Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="140" end="155" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850164" start="178" end="194" title="pluralism (political theory)" label="pluralist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="198" end="207" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q836853" start="318" end="327" title="polyarchy" label="polyarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q814451" start="453" end="466" title="behavioralism" label="behavioralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="1306" end="1313" title="Skagway, Alaska" label="Skagway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777782" start="1423" end="1434" title="Snåsavatnet" label="Snåsavatnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606901" start="1443" end="1452" title="Steinkjer (town)" label="Steinkjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="1801" end="1825" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="1912" end="1938" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist Party of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="2193" end="2204" title="Bronze Star Medal" label="Bronze Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="2699" end="2737" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="2951" end="2968" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059479" start="2996" end="3048" title="Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences" label="Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="3057" end="3094" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033196" start="3166" end="3191" title="Woodrow Wilson Foundation" label="Woodrow Wilson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="3283" end="3311" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033196" start="3416" end="3441" title="Woodrow Wilson Foundation" label="Woodrow Wilson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q738091" start="3498" end="3537" title="Johan Skytte Prize in Political Science" label="Johan Skytte Prize in Political Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="3627" end="3665" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="3678" end="3708" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q723551" start="3712" end="3727" title="British Academy" label="British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="3833" end="3839" title="thesis" label="thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760394" start="3971" end="3989" title="economic democracy" label="economic democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="4004" end="4024" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10719920" start="4213" end="4225" title="Who Governs?" label="Who Governs?"/>
<link wikidata="Q312837" start="4473" end="4488" title="C. Wright Mills" label="C. Wright Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q330963" start="4508" end="4537" title="politics in the United States" label="politics in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="4816" end="4824" title="populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q836853" start="4863" end="4872" title="polyarchy" label="polyarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850164" start="4877" end="4886" title="pluralism (political theory)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10719920" start="4927" end="4939" title="Who Governs?" label="Who Governs?"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="5029" end="5051" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q326996" start="5190" end="5208" title="G. William Domhoff" label="G. William Domhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q462573" start="5213" end="5232" title="Charles E. Lindblom" label="Charles E. Lindblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917561" start="9085" end="9129" title="How Democratic Is the American Constitution?" label="How Democratic Is the American Constitution?"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="9165" end="9180" title="US Constitution" label="US Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="12082" end="12091" title="Democracy" label="Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850164" start="12094" end="12122" title="Pluralism (political theory)" label="Pluralism (political theory)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723249" wikidata="Q6937200" url="?curid=723249" title="Murad Qureshi">
<text>Murad Qureshi (; born 27 May 1965) is a British Labour and Co-operative Party politician, and a former Member of the London Assembly.

==Early life and education==
Qureshi was born in Greater Manchester, but he was brought up in Westminster, London, where his parents moved in July 1965. He attended Quintin Kynaston School and graduated from the University of East Anglia with a degree in Development Studies in 1987, before undertaking an MSc in Environmental Economics at University College London, which he completed in 1993.

Qureshi is of Bangladeshi descent, and comes from a politically active family: his late father Mushtaq Qureshi was a Labour Party councillor in the City of Westminster and was a freedom fighter in the Bangladesh War of Liberation. His youngest sister, Papya Qureshi, was also a councillor in Westminster.

==Career==
Before becoming an Assembly Member, he worked in Housing and Regeneration for 15 years, helping establish housing associations and co-ops in the East End.

He was an Executive Committee member of SERA from 1994 to 2000 and a former board member of BRAC U.K, an international NGO seeking to alleviate poverty and empower the poor.

In 2018 it was reported that Jeremy Corbyn had intended to propose Qureshi for a peerage.

=== Politics ===
Qureshi was a councillor for Church Street on Westminster City Council from 1998 to 2006, and was elected on the Labour Party&#x27;s party list to the London Assembly at the 2004 Assembly election. He was re-elected at the 2008 election and again at the 2012 Assembly election. He failed to be re-elected at the 2016 election; because Labour gained constituency seats, it lost seats from its party list, which Qureshi was on.

In 2005, he was described as &quot;the only Muslim member&quot; of the London Assembly, although he supports Amartya Sen&#x27;s theory of plural identities and has criticised the practice of individuals &quot;defining themselves simply by their religion, without taking into account other key aspects of their identity&quot;.

Qureshi was Chair of the London Assembly&#x27;s Environment Committee and a Member of the Transport Committee. He was also a member of the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority, which oversees the London Fire Brigade between 2004–2012 and Chair of the Mayor&#x27;s London Waterways Commission, since its inception. From 2004 to 2006, Qureshi was a member of the Metropolitan Police Authority.

Under his chairmanship of the Environment Committee at the London Assembly, a body of work emerged against expansion of Heathrow airport work and its adverse environmental impact on Londoners&#x27; quality of life, particularly in west London suburbs, including reports &quot;Plane Speaking&quot; (2012) and &quot;Flights of Fancy&quot; (2010), plus consultation responses on the Government&#x27;s Draft Aviation Policy Framework (2012), and more recently against night flights.

&quot;Flights of Fancy&quot;, produced before the general election in May 2010, argued against Labour government keenness to have a third runway at Heathrow. Since losing that general election, the Labour Party has dropped its position on the expansion of Heathrow airport.

As an Assembly Member, he has undertaken rapporteurships into pedicabs (cycle rickshaws) and the loss of London&#x27;s playing fields. The latter report called for Sport England to be consulted on all applications for developments on playing fields measuring 0.2 hectares or more, a policy which has since been adopted by the Department for Communities and Local Government.

Qureshi lost his seat in 2016, but returned to the assembly in 2020 following the resignation of Fiona Twycross. He was third on the Labour list for the 2021 election, and was not re-elected. 

At the 2018 and 2022 local elections, Qureshi stood in Little Venice ward on Westminster City Council, but was unsuccessful on both occasions.

==Campaigns and activities==

Among his campaigns, Qureshi has called for the inclusion of Twenty20 cricket in the 2012 Olympic Games, a proposal which has received the backing of the London Assembly, and he has advocated the use of blue lines to mark the courses of London&#x27;s underground rivers.

He has called for Edgware Road tube station (Bakerloo Line) to be renamed &quot;Church Street Market&quot;, as this would end the confusion between that station and the namesake station on the Circle, District and Hammersmith &amp; City lines.

He has worked for many years to raise awareness of the crucial role of remittances in international development with his last letter in the &quot;Financial Times&quot; generating much debate. In 2004, remittances was the key topic on which he presented evidence before the House of Commons International Development Committee as part of a submission by the British Bangladeshi International Development Group.

In 2007, Qureshi hosted a meeting at City Hall which launched the Cambridge IGCSEs in Bangladesh, Pakistan and India Studies with Amartya Sen&#x27;s support. Qureshi closely follows political developments in South Asia, and was in Bangladesh for the parliamentary elections in December 2008.

He is Chairman of Capital SERA, the London branch of SERA. He contributes regular columns to the &quot;Morning Star&quot;, The &quot;China Daily&quot;, &quot;Tribune&quot; and the &quot;Westminster Extra&quot;.

Qureshi has a music record named after him, and has financially backed a British film &quot;Shongram&quot;, which is a romantic drama, set during the 1971 Bangladesh Liberation struggle.

== Personal life ==
Qureshi lists his recreations as &quot;football and cricket (playing and watching)&quot;.

==See also==
*British Bangladeshi
*List of British Bangladeshis
*List of ethnic minority politicians in the United Kingdom

==References==
==External links==
*Murad Qureshi on Twitter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6937200" start="0" end="13" title="Murad Qureshi" label="Murad Qureshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="48" end="54" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q211931" start="59" end="77" title="Co-operative Party" label="Co-operative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="117" end="132" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="184" end="202" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="229" end="240" title="City of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272447" start="300" end="323" title="Quintin Kynaston School" label="Quintin Kynaston School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045828" start="347" end="372" title="University of East Anglia" label="University of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="441" end="444" title="Master of Science" label="MSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q753291" start="448" end="471" title="Environmental Economics" label="Environmental Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="475" end="500" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="545" end="556" title="Bengali people" label="Bangladeshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="679" end="698" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="732" end="760" title="Bangladesh War of Liberation" label="Bangladesh War of Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8207109" start="954" end="973" title="housing association" label="housing association"/>
<link wikidata="Q562166" start="979" end="985" title="Housing cooperative" label="co-ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="993" end="1001" title="East End of London" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551556" start="1044" end="1048" title="Socialist Environment and Resources Association" label="SERA"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="1208" end="1221" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116695" start="1316" end="1329" title="Church Street (ward)" label="Church Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989145" start="1333" end="1357" title="Westminster City Council" label="Westminster City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="1438" end="1453" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669841" start="1461" end="1483" title="2004 London Assembly election" label="2004 Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669844" start="1510" end="1523" title="2008 London Assembly election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669846" start="1541" end="1563" title="2012 London Assembly election" label="2012 Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160717" start="1599" end="1612" title="2016 London Assembly election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="1823" end="1834" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670416" start="2180" end="2224" title="London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority" label="London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091309" start="2245" end="2264" title="London Fire Brigade" label="London Fire Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825197" start="2410" end="2439" title="Metropolitan Police Authority" label="Metropolitan Police Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="2972" end="3000" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="general election in May 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420781" start="3054" end="3078" title="Expansion of Heathrow Airport" label="third runway at Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362895" start="3259" end="3266" title="pedicab" label="pedicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q843265" start="3361" end="3374" title="Sport England" label="Sport England"/>
<link wikidata="Q601819" start="3523" end="3570" title="Department for Communities and Local Government" label="Department for Communities and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451124" start="3670" end="3684" title="Fiona Twycross" label="Fiona Twycross"/>
<link wikidata="Q24298997" start="3726" end="3739" title="2021 London Assembly election" label="2021 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866865" start="3774" end="3778" title="2018 Westminster City Council election" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q109283707" start="3783" end="3787" title="2022 Westminster City Council election" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q56295193" start="3822" end="3835" title="Little Venice (ward)" label="Little Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q868200" start="4002" end="4010" title="Twenty20" label="Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="4026" end="4044" title="2012 Olympic Games" label="2012 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="4095" end="4110" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910421" start="4178" end="4210" title="London&amp;#x27;s underground rivers" label="London&amp;#x27;s underground rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347608" start="4231" end="4272" title="Edgware Road tube station (Bakerloo Line)" label="Edgware Road tube station (Bakerloo Line)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130710970" start="4293" end="4313" title="Church Street Market" label="Church Street Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284426" start="4382" end="4398" title="Edgware Road tube station (Circle, District and Hammersmith &amp;amp; City lines)" label="namesake station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="4529" end="4540" title="remittances" label="remittances"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477868" start="4544" end="4569" title="international development" label="international development"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="4604" end="4619" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093950" start="4906" end="4915" title="City Hall, Southwark" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028304" start="4935" end="4944" title="Cambridge International Examinations" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242586" start="4945" end="4951" title="International General Certificate of Secondary Education" label="IGCSEs"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="5100" end="5110" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412850" start="5119" end="5142" title="2008 Bangladeshi general election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551556" start="5215" end="5219" title="Socialist Environment and Resources Association" label="SERA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948306" start="5265" end="5277" title="Morning Star (British newspaper)" label="Morning Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q851422" start="5295" end="5306" title="China Daily" label="China Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840487" start="5320" end="5327" title="Tribune (magazine)" label="Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025795" start="5348" end="5365" title="Westminster Extra" label="Westminster Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254174" start="5466" end="5474" title="Shongram" label="Shongram"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="5529" end="5550" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q259469" start="5687" end="5706" title="British Bangladeshi" label="British Bangladeshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564771" start="5708" end="5736" title="List of British Bangladeshis" label="List of British Bangladeshis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619050" start="5738" end="5795" title="List of ethnic minority politicians in the United Kingdom" label="List of ethnic minority politicians in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="5849" end="5856" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723254" wikidata="Q1778417" url="?curid=723254" title="ScottishPower">
<text>Scottish Power Limited, trading as ScottishPower, is a vertically integrated energy company based in Glasgow, Scotland. It is a subsidiary of Spanish utility firm Iberdrola.

ScottishPower is the distribution network operator for Central and Southern Scotland, Merseyside, North Wales and parts of Cheshire and Shropshire. It is also the transmission owner for the south of Scotland. The company also supplies electricity and gas to homes and businesses around the United Kingdom and generates power for supply to the grid. It owned PPM Energy in the United States, which has now been folded into Avangrid.

== History ==
=== Foundation ===
ScottishPower was formed in 1990, in preparation for the privatisation of the previously state-owned Scottish electricity industry the following year. Previously the UK government had privatised the English and Welsh electricity industry by splitting the market into 12 regional electricity companies (RECs) and two power generators. However, in Scotland, the industry was already organised on an integrated generation, distribution, and supply basis, and this integration survived the privatisation to become a model for the rest of the United Kingdom. ScottishPower was largely formed from the bigger of the two Scottish electricity boards, the South of Scotland Electricity Board, whilst the smaller, the North of Scotland Hydro Board, eventually became part of the Scottish &amp; Southern Energy Group (the nuclear power stations in Scotland were spun off into a third company, Scottish Nuclear, which was not sold off with ScottishPower and Scottish Hydro Electric, but was sold later as part of British Energy).

=== MANWEB and Southern Water ===
ScottishPower was the larger of the two Scottish energy companies and benefited from being both a generator and supplier of power. In 1995 it acquired the regional electricity company MANWEB, which supplied Merseyside, North Wales and parts of Cheshire. In 1996 the company diversified into the water supply business with the purchase of Southern Water (which was sold again in 2002).

When the supply of energy into British homes was opened up to competition, ScottishPower entered this market, taking market share from the previous gas supply monopoly British Gas and also gaining new market share in England and Wales.

=== Scottish Telecom ===
ScottishPower established the telecommunications company, Thus (originally known as Scottish Telecom) and then floated it on the London Stock Exchange in 2002.

=== PacifiCorp ===
In 2000, ScottishPower completed the acquisition of PacifiCorp, which supplies electricity in the western United States, which operates as Pacific Power (in the regulated energy industries of the states of Oregon, Washington, California), and as Rocky Mountain Power (in the regulated energy industries of the states of Idaho and Utah as well as both and central and eastern Wyoming (former Pacific Power territory), and southwestern Wyoming). In May 2005, ScottishPower announced that it had agreed to sell Pacificorp to MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company, a company controlled by Warren Buffett&#x27;s company, Berkshire Hathaway, for US$5.1 billion in cash and US$4.3 billion in debt and preferred stock. The successful completion of the deal was announced on 21 March 2006, after securing regulatory approvals. The deal did not include PPM Energy (which, as Pacificorp Power Marketing, was formerly the non-regulated subsidiary of Pacificorp).

=== Takeover bids ===
Following the announcement of its acquisition of PacifiCorp, the group&#x27;s share price rose but the company was now widely seen as vulnerable to a takeover. It was soon revealed that the German energy group E.ON, which also owns Powergen, was interested in a takeover. On 22 November 2005, the board rejected an offer from E.ON of 570 pence per share, which would have valued the group at £10.7 billion.

On 28 November 2006, the board of directors of ScottishPower agreed to an £11.6 billion takeover bid by the Spanish energy firm Iberdrola. The offer was formally approved by shareholders at an EGM on 30 March 2007, effectively creating Europe&#x27;s third largest utility company.

=== Recent history ===

On 24 November 2018, the British government&#x27;s energy regulator, the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem), appointed ScottishPower as Supplier of Last Resort for the failed domestic and business supplier Extra Energy. ScottishPower acquired all of Extra Energy&#x27;s 108,000 domestic customers and 21,000 business customers.

On Friday 9 October 2020, Ofgem appointed ScottishPower as Supplier of Last Resort for the failed domestic supplier Tonik Energy. Scottish Power acquired all of Tonik Energy&#x27;s 130,000 customers.

On Friday 5 December 2020, Ofgem appointed ScottishPower as Supplier of Last Resort for the failed domestic supplier Yorkshire Energy (also known as Daisy Energy). ScottishPower acquired all 74,000 domestic customers and a small number of non-domestic customers.

== Controversies and complaints ==
In April 2007, the energy regulator Ofgem urged customers of ScottishPower and EDF Energy to switch to a cheaper provider after the firms refused to cut prices in line with the rest of the industry.

In April 2008, Ofgem launched an investigation into allegations that ScottishPower abused their dominant market position relating to the electricity transmission network they own jointly in Scotland. Ofgem said it had launched its inquiry into Scottish Power and SSE under section 18 of the Competition Act, &quot;based on a formal complaint alleging abuse of a dominant position in the electricity generation sector arising from constrained capacity on the transmission network.&quot; The energy regulator believes that energy generators manipulate the power market for profit when supplies are tight because network operator National Grid has to pay utilities to turn their plants on or off to balance supply and demand. This resulted in companies deliberately shutting their plants down when supplies are tight in order to receive a higher payment to start up again, increasing the system balancing costs at the expense of consumers. Ofgem was alarmed that the cost of balancing the system increased from £70 million in 2007/08 to an estimated £238 million for 2008/09 and an expected £258 million in 2009/10, with most of the costs incurred in Scotland. In January 2009, Ofgem suspended the investigation, saying it would be more effective to deal with the wider problem than pursuing the specific case further.

In November 2012, the Information Commissioner&#x27;s Office (ICO) publicly listed ScottishPower as one of a number of companies that it had concerns about due to unsolicited telephone calls for marketing. The concerns were based on complaints. In response, ScottishPower said that it was working with the ICO to address any issues.

In early 2015, ScottishPower was temporarily banned from signing up new customers, due to long-standing and serious concerns regarding poor customer service, overdue bills and failure to implement rulings made by the Energy Ombudsman. The company&#x27;s failings continued to be highlighted in the press later in the year, with complaints levels 20 times those of their best-performing competitor

In April 2016, ScottishPower released a press release that an £18M agreement had been reached with Ofgem following their investigation into customer service standards.

In 2017, ScottishPower created controversy when they pursued a couple for a £4,300 debt despite the couple not owing ScottishPower any money and, moreover, not being customers of the firm. ScottishPower ignored letters from the couple, instead sending bailiffs to the home of the couple. It later transpired that the couple were in no debt to ScottishPower.

In 2020, &quot;The Observer&quot; gave ScottishPower an award for the year&#x27;s &quot;worst customer service&quot; for &quot;its singular pursuit of revenue&quot;, including sending bills, debt collectors&#x27; letters and the threat of bailiffs to people who did not use its services, then refusing to register their complaints.

In January 2021, the Consumers&#x27; Association magazine &quot;Which?&quot; ranked ScottishPower the worst-performing supplier for customer service and the second worst supplier overall in their annual review of energy suppliers.

== Operations ==
=== Energy Retail ===
The Energy Retail division contains ScottishPower Energy Retail Ltd which holds the gas and electricity supply licences.

At the end of September 2023, this division held an 8.7% share of the domestic electricity supply market and 7.5% share of the domestic gas supply market. This is the lowest market share held by the company since 2004.

Also included in this division is SP Dataserve Ltd which provides a range of metering services including data collection, analysis and revenue protection.

=== Energy Networks ===
The Energy Networks business contains three asset owning companies SP Transmission Ltd – holds the transmission licence for central and southern Scotland and owns the part of the Moyle Interconnector with Northern Ireland Electricity, SP Distribution Ltd – holds the distribution licence for central and southern Scotland and SP Manweb Plc – holds the distribution licence for North Wales, Merseyside, and Cheshire. A fourth asset management business SP Power Systems Ltd maintains and repairs the distribution networks on behalf of the owners and acts as the distribution network operator. The operation of the transmission grid is carried out by National Grid plc.

=== Energy Wholesale ===
Energy Wholesale contained two companies, ScottishPower Generation Ltd, which formerly generated 6,200 MW of electricity power in the United Kingdom using coal-fired thermal power stations, combined cycle power stations, hydro-electric schemes, pumped storage generation and were acquired by Drax in 2018. In 2006, ScottishPower Renewables (SPR) was granted permission to build Europe&#x27;s largest on-shore windfarm. The 322 MW / 140 turbine site cost an estimated £300m and covers approximately of moorland south of Glasgow. By 2014, SPR had a portfolio of over 1,250 MW of operating windfarms, including the recently expanded Whitelee with a total generation capacity of 539 MW, making it Europe&#x27;s largest windfarm. Also within this division is ScottishPower Energy Management Ltd which is responsible for buying and selling wholesale energy.

In 2005, the WWF named ScottishPower&#x27;s Cockenzie power station as the UK&#x27;s least carbon-efficient power station. It is now closed.

In 2007, the WWF named ScottishPower&#x27;s Longannet power station as the UK&#x27;s least carbon-efficient power station out of Europe&#x27;s top 30 worst polluting power stations in absolute terms. It ceased operation in 2016.

=== PPM Energy ===
PPM Energy Inc was previously the competitive arm of Pacificorp but was made a separate business in 2002. It was involved in renewable energy and gas storage, amongst other things, in the US. It is now part of Avangrid Renewables.

== See also ==

* Energy policy of Scotland
* Energy use and conservation in the United Kingdom
* Green electricity in the United Kingdom

== References ==
== External links ==
* ScottishPower corporate website
* ScottishPower customer website
* SP Energy Networks Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1778417" start="0" end="22" title="ScottishPower" label="Scottish Power Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="24" end="34" title="Trade name" label="trading as"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778417" start="35" end="48" title="ScottishPower" label="ScottishPower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="55" end="76" title="vertically integrated" label="vertically integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151621" start="77" end="91" title="energy company" label="energy company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="101" end="108" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437502" start="163" end="172" title="Iberdrola" label="Iberdrola"/>
<link wikidata="Q472093" start="196" end="225" title="distribution network operator" label="distribution network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053991" start="230" end="237" title="Central Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569048" start="242" end="259" title="South of Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Southern Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="261" end="271" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="273" end="284" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="298" end="306" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="311" end="321" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="338" end="356" title="National Grid (Great Britain)#Control of the grid" label="transmission owner"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="426" end="429" title="natural gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="551" end="564" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983823" start="597" end="605" title="Avangrid" label="Avangrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="698" end="711" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569049" start="1288" end="1323" title="South of Scotland Electricity Board" label="South of Scotland Electricity Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057530" start="1349" end="1378" title="North of Scotland Hydro Board" label="North of Scotland Hydro Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q493854" start="1410" end="1446" title="SSE plc" label="Scottish &amp;amp; Southern Energy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437877" start="1523" end="1539" title="Scottish Nuclear" label="Scottish Nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437783" start="1587" end="1610" title="Scottish Hydro Electric" label="Scottish Hydro Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q495830" start="1642" end="1656" title="British Energy" label="British Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257732" start="1849" end="1877" title="regional electricity company" label="regional electricity company"/>
<link wikidata="Q116031459" start="1878" end="1884" title="MANWEB" label="MANWEB"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="1901" end="1911" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="1938" end="1946" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="1989" end="1994" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570621" start="2032" end="2046" title="Southern Water" label="Southern Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925725" start="2248" end="2259" title="British Gas plc" label="British Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799478" start="2400" end="2404" title="Thus (company)" label="Thus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="2471" end="2492" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045479" start="2574" end="2584" title="PacifiCorp" label="PacifiCorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="2728" end="2734" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="2736" end="2746" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2748" end="2758" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="2842" end="2847" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="2852" end="2856" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="2897" end="2904" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="2956" end="2963" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840677" start="3044" end="3079" title="MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company" label="MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q47213" start="3105" end="3119" title="Warren Buffett" label="Warren Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q217583" start="3136" end="3154" title="Berkshire Hathaway" label="Berkshire Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045479" start="3543" end="3553" title="PacifiCorp" label="PacifiCorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q270223" start="3704" end="3708" title="E.ON" label="E.ON"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045727" start="3726" end="3734" title="Powergen" label="Powergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437502" start="4030" end="4039" title="Iberdrola" label="Iberdrola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422235" start="4095" end="4098" title="Extraordinary General Meeting" label="EGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349672" start="4281" end="4318" title="Office of Gas and Electricity Markets" label="Office of Gas and Electricity Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349672" start="5084" end="5089" title="Office of Gas and Electricity Markets" label="Ofgem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045865" start="5127" end="5137" title="EDF Energy" label="EDF Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q493854" start="5511" end="5514" title="SSE plc" label="SSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156315" start="5539" end="5554" title="Competition Act" label="Competition Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261121" start="5875" end="5888" title="National Grid (UK)" label="National Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662473" start="6587" end="6625" title="Information Commissioner&amp;#x27;s Office" label="Information Commissioner&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349672" start="7396" end="7401" title="Office of Gas and Electricity Markets" label="Ofgem"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="7840" end="7852" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993544" start="8222" end="8228" title="Which?" label="Which?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636206" start="9130" end="9150" title="Moyle Interconnector" label="Moyle Interconnector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058492" start="9156" end="9184" title="Northern Ireland Electricity" label="Northern Ireland Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q472093" start="9511" end="9540" title="distribution network operator" label="distribution network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465461" start="9599" end="9616" title="National Grid plc" label="National Grid plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="9810" end="9832" title="power stations" label="thermal power stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q900729" start="9834" end="9848" title="combined cycle" label="combined cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="9865" end="9879" title="hydro-electric" label="hydro-electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="9889" end="9903" title="pumped storage" label="pumped storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="10053" end="10061" title="windfarm" label="windfarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q130760" start="10080" end="10087" title="turbine" label="turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="10163" end="10170" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="10510" end="10513" title="WWF (conservation organization)" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139574" start="10541" end="10564" title="Cockenzie power station" label="Cockenzie power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673595" start="10683" end="10706" title="Longannet power station" label="Longannet power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045479" start="10941" end="10951" title="Pacificorp" label="Pacificorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="11013" end="11029" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983823" start="11098" end="11106" title="Avangrid" label="Avangrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377192" start="11138" end="11163" title="Energy policy of Scotland" label="Energy policy of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588955" start="11166" end="11215" title="Energy use and conservation in the United Kingdom" label="Energy use and conservation in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982663" start="11218" end="11257" title="Green electricity in the United Kingdom" label="Green electricity in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723255" wikidata="Q7894111" url="?curid=723255" title="Universal class (philosophy)">
<text>Universal class is a category derived from the philosophy of Hegel, redefined and popularized by Karl Marx. In Marxism it denotes that class of people within a stratified society for which, at a given point in history, self-interested action coincides with the needs of humanity as a whole.

== Hegel ==
Hegel believed that history was a movement tending towards the realization of &quot;freedom&quot; (although there is much debate over precisely what Hegel means by freedom) – which, in his own historical moment, he had held his own society to represent, or at least represent the beginning of. For Hegel, divisions and conflicts between people were the external appearance of the internal tensions which drive the development of Spirit. Conflict and its resolution were the ratchet by which human progress was driven steadily forwards – he once famously described Napoleon Bonaparte as &quot;the World Spirit on horseback&quot;. Accordingly: having arrived at the end of history, these divisions were to be reconciled by the new &quot;universal class&quot; of state bureaucrats, who acted at all times to reconcile conflicts of interest and acted only in the best interests of the entire society. He also believed in the universal class as an end product.

== Further reading ==
* Marx&#x27;s immediate analysis of the unrest in France, 1848-1850
* 18th Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, Marx, 1852
* The civil war in France, Marx, 1871</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7894111" start="0" end="15" title="Universal class (philosophy)" label="Universal class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="47" end="57" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="61" end="66" title="Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="97" end="106" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="111" end="118" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="135" end="140" title="Social class" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="324" end="331" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171014" start="778" end="785" title="ratchet (device)" label="ratchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="868" end="886" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218530" start="968" end="982" title="end of history" label="end of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="1064" end="1069" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q572700" start="1070" end="1081" title="bureaucrats" label="bureaucrats"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723258" wikidata="Q7174782" url="?curid=723258" title="Peter Hulme-Cross">
<text>Peter Hulme-Cross is a British politician who was a Member of the London Assembly (AM) for Londonwide from 2004 to 2008. He was also a member of the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority.

== Career ==
He was one of the United Kingdom Independence Party&#x27;s first two members of the London Assembly, having been elected to that body in the 2004 Assembly elections on the UKIP party list. On 31 January 2005 it was announced that he was defecting to the breakaway Veritas, along with fellow UKIP Assembly member Damian Hockney, although Hulme-Cross did not leave UKIP. Later that year, following a disappointing showing for Veritas in the 2005 General Election, Hockney and Hulme-Cross renamed their group on the London Assembly &quot;Veritas-UKIP&quot;. However, UKIP complained that this had been done without their consent and refused to renew Hulme-Cross&#x27;s membership.

Hulme-Cross and Hockney founded the One London Party on 1 September 2005 and renamed the London Assembly group &quot;One London&quot;.

In November 2005 he was rapporteur on the London Assembly Transport Committee report into the Public Carriage Office entitled &quot;Where to, Guv?&quot;

In October 2006 he was rapporteur on the London Assembly Environment Committee report into the provision of allotments in London entitled &quot;A Lot to Lose - London&#x27;s disappearing allotments&quot;. He subsequently launched an official GLA website detailing all allotment provision in London.

In March 2008 he was rapporteur on the London Assembly Transport Committee report into rogue minicabs entitled &quot;Tackling taxi touting in London&quot;. He and Hockney failed to keep their seats in the May 2008 elections.

Hulme-Cross has been a longstanding member of the Sylvan Debating Club.

==References==
==External links==
*One London Party website
*One London blog
*London Assembly biog</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7174782" start="0" end="17" title="Peter Hulme-Cross" label="Peter Hulme-Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="66" end="81" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670416" start="149" end="193" title="London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority" label="London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="227" end="260" title="United Kingdom Independence Party" label="United Kingdom Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="293" end="308" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669841" start="350" end="373" title="2004 London Assembly election" label="2004 Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q162246" start="473" end="480" title="Veritas (political party)" label="Veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212263" start="521" end="535" title="Damian Hockney" label="Damian Hockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q160715" start="924" end="934" title="One London" label="One London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563690" start="1118" end="1140" title="Private Hire" label="Public Carriage Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404694" start="1286" end="1296" title="Allotment (gardening)" label="allotments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563690" start="1565" end="1579" title="Private Hire" label="rogue minicabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098967" start="1754" end="1774" title="Sylvan Debating Club" label="Sylvan Debating Club"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723263" wikidata="Q4676782" url="?curid=723263" title="Acteonoidea">
<text>Acteonoidea is a superfamily of sea snails, or bubble snails, marine gastropod mollusks.

== Taxonomy ==

In the taxonomy of Bouchet &amp; Rocroi (2005), the superfamily Acteonoidea has been included into the informal group &quot;Lower Heterobranchia&quot; (Heterostropha &quot;sensu&quot; Ponder &amp; Warén, 1988), also known as the Allogastropoda.

Only one of analyses by Jörger et al. (2010) indicates the Acteonoidea sister to Nudipleura. This clade that had resulted repeatedly in molecular studies with still limited &quot;lower heterobranch&quot; taxon sampling, either in a derived position or as a basal offshoot within Euthyneura. A recent molecular phylogeny on Acteonoidea suggest a common origin with lower heterobranch Rissoelloidea and a sister group relationship to Nudipleura. While the basal position of Acteonoidea was commonly accepted, some authors doubted the basal position of Nudipleura, which was originally considered as a highly derived taxon, and suspect rate heterogeneity and deviant base composition as causing this unnatural grouping. Based on potential synapomorphies in the reproductive system (presence of a ciliary stripe within the ampulla, androdiaulic or triaulic pallial gonoduct), Ghiselin already suggested a relationship between Acteonoidea and Nudipleura. However, Acteonoidea form a well-supported &quot;lower heterobranch&quot; clade with Rissoelloidea, confirming results by Aktipis et al. and Dinapoli and Klussmann-Kolb. The latter authors also recovered Nudipleura as the first offshoot of Euthyneura, which is confirmed by Jörger et al. (2010) study. Salvini-Plawen and Steiner grouped Umbraculoidea with Nudipleura, but none of the recent molecular or morphological studies support such a relationship.

==Families==
The following five families have been recognized in the taxonomy of Bouchet &amp; Rocroi (2005):
* family Acteonidae d&#x27; Orbigny, 1843
*† family Acteonellidae Gill, 1871
* family Aplustridae Gray, 1847 - former name Hydatinidae has been declared invalid
* family Bullinidae Gray, 1850
*† family Zardinellidae Bandel, 1994

== Description ==
All acteonoids have a shell that resembles that of many prosobranchs. Some of the members are able to withdraw completely into the shell and to close the shell with an operculum, e.g. &quot;Acteon tornatilis&quot;.

== Anatomy ==
No defensive strategies are known from these animals although histological investigations show a highly glandular area in the mantle cavity and the mantle rim. The mantle rim glands, for example, are very conspicuous. These comprise large epithelial cells that are filled with a non-staining vacuole. The glandular area is highly folded. The cells appear to lie subepithelially due to their size. They alternate with small ciliated cells. The hypobranchial gland in the roof of the mantle cavity is small and consists of violet-staining epithelial cells indicating acid mucopolysaccharides.

== Feeding habits ==
Acteonidae and Aplustridae are carnivorous and mainly feed on polychaetes.

==References==
This article incorporates CC-BY-2.0 text from references.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4676782" start="0" end="11" title="Acteonoidea" label="Acteonoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="17" end="28" title="Taxonomic rank" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q381180" start="32" end="41" title="sea snail" label="sea snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="62" end="68" title="marine (ocean)" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="69" end="78" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="79" end="86" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355751" start="113" end="145" title="Taxonomy of the Gastropoda (Bouchet &amp;amp; Rocroi, 2005)" label="taxonomy of Bouchet &amp;amp; Rocroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430801" start="230" end="250" title="Lower Heterobranchia" label="Lower Heterobranchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576637" start="433" end="443" title="Nudipleura" label="Nudipleura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336371" start="735" end="748" title="Rissoelloidea" label="Rissoelloidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="1088" end="1102" title="synapomorphies" label="synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314316" start="1110" end="1129" title="reproductive system of gastropods" label="reproductive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="1790" end="1798" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355751" start="1823" end="1866" title="Taxonomy of the Gastropoda (Bouchet &amp;amp; Rocroi, 2005)" label="the taxonomy of Bouchet &amp;amp; Rocroi (2005)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823582" start="1877" end="1887" title="Acteonidae" label="Acteonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676775" start="1920" end="1933" title="Acteonellidae" label="Acteonellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175417" start="1954" end="1965" title="Aplustridae" label="Aplustridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175417" start="2038" end="2048" title="Bullinidae" label="Bullinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066701" start="2070" end="2083" title="Zardinellidae" label="Zardinellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003497" start="2138" end="2143" title="gastropod shell" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q940604" start="2172" end="2183" title="prosobranch" label="prosobranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480851" start="2284" end="2293" title="Operculum (gastropod)" label="operculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735118" start="2306" end="2323" title="Acteon tornatilis" label="Acteon tornatilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380786" start="2472" end="2478" title="mantle (mollusc)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="2585" end="2600" title="epithelial cell" label="epithelial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127702" start="2638" end="2645" title="vacuole" label="vacuole"/>
<link wikidata="Q180436" start="2769" end="2782" title="Cilium" label="ciliated cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q407553" start="2916" end="2934" title="mucopolysaccharide" label="mucopolysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18952" start="3021" end="3031" title="polychaete" label="polychaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q284742" start="3076" end="3078" title="Creative Commons licenses" label="CC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723267" wikidata="Q203193" url="?curid=723267" title="Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples' Region">
<text>The Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&#x27; Region (often abbreviated as SNNPR; ) was a regional state in southwestern Ethiopia. It was formed from the merger of five &quot;kililoch&quot;, called Regions 7 to 11, following the regional council elections on 21 June 1992. Its government was based in Hawassa.

The SNNPR bordered Kenya to the south (including a small part of Lake Turkana), the Ilemi Triangle (a region claimed by Kenya and South Sudan) to the southwest, Oromia region to the north and east. The capital city of the region was Hawassa. The region included major cities and towns like Wolaita Sodo, Arba Minch, Jinka, Dila, Boditi, Areka, Butajira, Welkite, Bonga, Hosaena and Worabe.

The region dissolved when Sidama Region, Southwest Ethiopia Region, South Ethiopia Regional State and Central Ethiopia Regional State emerged independently.

In June 2020, following the formation of the Sidama Region the region&#x27;s capital Hawassa is located outside of the boundaries of the region. The then regional government planned to move to a city within the region&#x27;s boundaries after two consecutive national electoral cycles. The largest cities in the region were Sodo with the population of 194,977 and Arba Minch with the population of 151,013.

The dissolution of the region was certain when on 18 August 2023 the South Ethiopia Regional State was created following the 2023 South Ethiopia Region referendum with remainder of the SNNPR becoming the Central Ethiopia Regional State.

==Demographics==
Based on the 2007 Census conducted by the Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia (CSA), the SNNPR regional state had an estimated total population of 14,929,548, of whom 7,425,918 were men and 7,503,630 women. 13,433,991 or 89.98% of the population are estimated to be rural inhabitants, while 1,495,557 or 10.02% are urban; this makes the SNNPR Ethiopia&#x27;s most rural region. With an estimated area of 105,887.18 square kilometers, this region has an estimated density of 141 people per square kilometer. For the entire region 3,110,995 households were counted, which results in an average for the region of 4.8 persons to a household, with urban households having on average 3.9 and rural households 4.9 people. The projected population for 2017 was 19,170,007.

In the previous census, conducted in 1994, the region&#x27;s population was reported to be 10,377,028 of whom 5,161,787 were men and 5,215,241 were women. At the time of the census, the rural population of the Region accounted for 93.2% of the total population. Semien Omo, Wolayita, and Gurage were the three zones with the highest population. The population is concentrated mostly in eastern, northern and central part of the SNNPR while the western and southern part of the region is sparsely populated.

The SNNPR Water Resources Bureau announced that as of the fiscal year ending in 2006, they had increased the area of the region that had access to drinkable water to 54% from 10 to 15% 15 years ago. In August 2008, the head of public relations for the Bureau, Abdulkerim Nesru, announced that 94 million birr had been spent to further increase the availability of drinkable water in the region from 58% in the previous year to 63.6%. Priority was given to certain zones, such as Sidama, Welayta and Gurage, as well as the Alaba special woreda and several resettlement areas.

Values for other reported common indicators of the standard of living for the SNNPR include the following: 10.7% of the inhabitants fall into the lowest wealth quintile; adult literacy for men is 57% and for women 22.4%; and the Regional infant mortality rate is 85 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, which is greater than the nationwide average of 77; at least half of these deaths occurred in the infants&#x27; first month of life.
===Religion===
===Ethnicities===

The SNNPR, being an amalgam of the main homelands of numerous ethnicities, contains over 45 indigenous ethnic groups:
;All ethnicities in region

The ethnicities native to the SNNPR, with percentages of the population as reported in the 2007 national census and organized by linguistic grouping, include: 
===Languages===
The 2007 census reported that the predominantly spoken mother tongue languages include Sidama (19.59%), Welayta (10.48%), Hadiya (8%), Gurage (7.13%), Gamo (6.9%), Kafa (5.36%) and Amharic (4.10%). Other languages spoken in the State include Kambaata, Melo, Gofa, Gedeo and Dime; because of the relatively few number of speakers of most of the languages in the region, the working language of the state is Amharic (the most widely spoken language in Ethiopia and formerly the only official language).

The 1994 census reported that the predominantly spoken languages include Sidamo (18%), Gurage (14.72%), Welayta (11.53%), Hadiya (8.53%), Kafa (5.22%), and Kambaata (4.35%). Other languages spoken in the State include Gamo, Melo, Gofa, and Gedeo.

Amharic is still the working language although most pupils get eight years of primary education in their home language and all secondary and further education is in English.

==Agriculture==

The CSA reported that for 2004–2005 100,338 tons of coffee were produced in the SNNPR, based on inspection records from the Ethiopian Coffee and Tea authority. This represents 44.2% of the total production in Ethiopia.

Farmers in the Region had an estimated total 7,938,490 head of cattle (representing 20.5% of Ethiopia&#x27;s total cattle), 3,270,200 sheep (18.8%), 2,289,970 goats (17.6%), 298,720 horses (19.7%), 63,460 mules (43.1%), 278,440 asses (11.1%), 6,586,140 poultry of all species (21.3%), and 726,960 beehives (16.7%).

Enset is a major indigenous local crop in the SNNPR.

==List of Chief Administrators ==

*Abate Kisho (SEPDM), 1992–2001
*Hailemariam Desalegn, 12 November 2001 – March 2006
*Shiferaw Shigute (SEPDM), March 2006 – July 2013
*Dessie Dalke, July 2013 – 2018
*Million Mathiwos, 2018 – 2019
*Erstu Yirdaw, 31 August 2019 – 18 August 2023

==Administrative zones==

The following table shows administrative zones and special woredas (an administrative subdivision which is similar to an autonomous area) is based on information from 2022; the list of second administrative level bodies maintained by the United Nations Geographic Information Working Group dates from 2002.

===Former zones===
*Keficho Shekicho Zone
*North Omo Zone

==See also==
*List of districts in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&#x27; Region

==References==
==External links==
*
*Map of Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&#x27; Region at UN-OCHA (PDF file)
*Map of Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples&#x27; Region at DPPA of Ethiopia (PDF file)
*Ethiopia&#x27;s Vanishing Tribes slideshow by &quot;Life&quot; magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203193" start="4" end="61" title="Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&amp;#x27; Region" label="Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&amp;#x27; Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q203193" start="84" end="89" title="Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&amp;#x27; Region" label="SNNPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057504" start="99" end="113" title="Regions of Ethiopia" label="regional state"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="130" end="138" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q755765" start="310" end="317" title="Hawassa" label="Hawassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="339" end="344" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q182719" start="385" end="397" title="Lake Turkana" label="Lake Turkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q973527" start="404" end="418" title="Ilemi Triangle" label="Ilemi Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="450" end="461" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q755765" start="553" end="560" title="Hawassa" label="Hawassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q673275" start="610" end="622" title="Wolaita Sodo" label="Wolaita Sodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q626861" start="624" end="634" title="Arba Minch" label="Arba Minch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110186" start="636" end="641" title="Jinka" label="Jinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q905423" start="643" end="647" title="Dila, Ethiopia" label="Dila"/>
<link wikidata="Q965112" start="649" end="655" title="Boditi" label="Boditi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788771" start="657" end="662" title="Areka" label="Areka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928812" start="664" end="672" title="Butajira" label="Butajira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110026" start="674" end="681" title="Welkite" label="Welkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q977149" start="683" end="688" title="Bonga" label="Bonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754082" start="690" end="697" title="Hosaena" label="Hosaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569881" start="702" end="708" title="Worabe" label="Worabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070673" start="737" end="750" title="Sidama Region" label="Sidama Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q109788993" start="752" end="777" title="South West Ethiopia Peoples&amp;#x27; Region" label="Southwest Ethiopia Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q122148951" start="779" end="808" title="South Ethiopia Regional State" label="South Ethiopia Regional State"/>
<link wikidata="Q122415622" start="813" end="844" title="Central Ethiopia Regional State" label="Central Ethiopia Regional State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070673" start="914" end="927" title="Sidama Region" label="Sidama Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q755765" start="954" end="961" title="Hawassa" label="Hawassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q673275" start="1192" end="1196" title="Sodo" label="Sodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q626861" start="1232" end="1242" title="Arba Minch" label="Arba Minch"/>
<link wikidata="Q122148951" start="1345" end="1374" title="South Ethiopia Regional State" label="South Ethiopia Regional State"/>
<link wikidata="Q116713486" start="1401" end="1438" title="2023 South Ethiopia Region referendum" label="2023 South Ethiopia Region referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122415622" start="1480" end="1511" title="Central Ethiopia Regional State" label="Central Ethiopia Regional State"/>
<link wikidata="Q190360" start="1573" end="1599" title="Central Statistical Agency (Ethiopia)" label="Central Statistical Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478427" start="2562" end="2572" title="Semien Omo Zone" label="Semien Omo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029709" start="2574" end="2582" title="Wolayita Zone" label="Wolayita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070678" start="2588" end="2594" title="Gurage Zone" label="Gurage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836970" start="2955" end="2970" title="Water supply and sanitation in Ethiopia" label="drinkable water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829448" start="3330" end="3350" title="Alaba special woreda" label="Alaba special woreda"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="3435" end="3453" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="3622" end="3643" title="infant mortality rate" label="infant mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="3916" end="3927" title="ethnicities" label="ethnicities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="3957" end="3970" title="ethnic groups" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q33786" start="4263" end="4269" title="Sidama language" label="Sidama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36943" start="4280" end="4287" title="Welayta language" label="Welayta"/>
<link wikidata="Q56613" start="4298" end="4304" title="Hadiya language" label="Hadiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q844307" start="4311" end="4317" title="Gurage languages" label="Gurage"/>
<link wikidata="Q56323" start="4327" end="4331" title="Gamo language" label="Gamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35481" start="4340" end="4344" title="Kafa language" label="Kafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="4357" end="4364" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35664" start="4418" end="4426" title="Kambaata language" label="Kambaata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813268" start="4428" end="4432" title="Melo language" label="Melo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56323" start="4434" end="4438" title="Gofa language" label="Gofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56622" start="4440" end="4445" title="Gedeo language" label="Gedeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35311" start="4450" end="4454" title="Dime language" label="Dime"/>
<link wikidata="Q33786" start="4751" end="4757" title="Sidamo language" label="Sidamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q844307" start="4765" end="4771" title="Gurage languages" label="Gurage"/>
<link wikidata="Q36943" start="4782" end="4789" title="Welayta language" label="Welayta"/>
<link wikidata="Q56613" start="4800" end="4806" title="Hadiya language" label="Hadiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35481" start="4816" end="4820" title="Kafa language" label="Kafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35664" start="4834" end="4842" title="Kambaata language" label="Kambaata"/>
<link wikidata="Q56323" start="4896" end="4900" title="Gamo language" label="Gamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813268" start="4902" end="4906" title="Melo language" label="Melo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56323" start="4908" end="4912" title="Gofa language" label="Gofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56622" start="4918" end="4923" title="Gedeo language" label="Gedeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="4926" end="4933" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="5170" end="5176" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q199075" start="5654" end="5659" title="Enset" label="Enset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5744" end="5755" title="Abate Kisho" label="Abate Kisho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186157" start="5757" end="5762" title="Southern Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement" label="SEPDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q381071" start="5776" end="5796" title="Hailemariam Desalegn" label="Hailemariam Desalegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381550" start="5829" end="5845" title="Shiferaw Shigute" label="Shiferaw Shigute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5879" end="5891" title="Dessie Dalke" label="Dessie Dalke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131194325" start="5911" end="5927" title="Million Mathewos" label="Million Mathiwos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5942" end="5954" title="Erstu Yirdaw" label="Erstu Yirdaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="6136" end="6151" title="autonomous area" label="autonomous area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6253" end="6304" title="United Nations Geographic Information Working Group" label="United Nations Geographic Information Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194654" start="6343" end="6364" title="Keficho Shekicho Zone" label="Keficho Shekicho Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478427" start="6366" end="6380" title="North Omo Zone" label="North Omo Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255311" start="6396" end="6478" title="List of districts in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&amp;#x27; Region" label="List of districts in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&amp;#x27; Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="6594" end="6597" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="6747" end="6772" title="Life magazine" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot; magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723268" wikidata="Q3119385" url="?curid=723268" title="Avianca Flight 011">
<text>Avianca Flight 011 was a Boeing 747-200BM Combi on an international scheduled passenger flight from Frankfurt to Bogotá via Paris, Madrid, and Caracas that crashed near Madrid on 27 November 1983. It took off from Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris at 22:25 on 26 November 1983 for Madrid Barajas Airport; take-off was delayed waiting for additional passengers from a Lufthansa flight due to a cancellation of the Paris-Frankfurt-Paris segment by Avianca for operational reasons.

During the instrument landing system (ILS) approach to runway 33, the 747 crashed on a hill approximately south east of the airport, killing 181 people, including 19 on-duty and four off-duty crew members. The 11 surviving passengers were seriously injured. The cause of the accident was judged to be pilot error, the captain having incorrectly determined the position of the plane. As of 2024, Avianca Flight 011 remains the second-deadliest aviation accident in Spanish territory (the deadliest being the Tenerife airport disaster), the deadliest accident in mainland Spain, and the deadliest accident in the history of Avianca.

== Background ==
The aircraft involved was a Boeing 747-200BM Combi that first flew in 1977 and was delivered to Scandinavian Airlines System the same year. The aircraft was registered as LN-RNA and was named &quot;Magnus Viking&quot;. It was leased to Avianca in 1982 and re-registered as HK-2910X. The aircraft was nicknamed &quot;Olafo&quot; by the airline&#x27;s employees. The aircraft was powered by four Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D-70A turbofan engines and was 6.3 years old at the time of the accident.

The captain was 58-year-old Tulio Hernández, who was one of Avianca&#x27;s most experienced pilots, having been with the airline for 32 years. He had logged a total of 23,215 flight hours, including 2,432 hours on the Boeing 747.

The first officer was 36-year-old Eduardo Ramírez, who had been with the airline for 10 years and had 4,384 flight hours, with 875 of them on the Boeing 747.

The flight engineer was 57-year-old Juan Laverde, another one of Avianca&#x27;s veteran pilots, who had been with the airline for 25 years and had 15,942 flight hours. He was the most experienced on the Boeing 747, having logged 3,676 hours on it. There were also two relief flight engineers on board: Daniel Zota and Julio Florez Camacho.

==Accident==
It was nighttime at the time of the accident, the meteorological conditions just before the crash consisted of a visibility of , and the wind was calm. About 20 minutes prior to the impact, the aircraft had obtained meteorological information on the weather conditions at Barajas from Avianca. The first contact with Spanish air traffic controllers had taken place at 23:31. At 00:03 the aircraft contacted Barajas again, and was cleared to land on runway 33; this was the air traffic controller&#x27;s last contact with the aircraft. The accident took place in the township of Mejorada del Campo, approximately southeast of the Madrid Airport. The time of the accident was approximately 00:06 on 27 November. The plane hit three different hills on its way down during the crash, with the third hill being the final impact. The debris of the airplane was widely scattered as a consequence of the impacts. The crash killed 158 passengers, 19 crew members, and four off-duty crew members. Miraculously, 11 passengers (6 women and 5 men) survived, but were seriously injured. Of the injured, nine were ejected from the airplane, a few of them still in their seats, and two claimed to have exited the aircraft by themselves. The aircraft was completely destroyed by the impact and ensuing fire. The airplane was equipped with a digital flight data recorder and a cockpit voice recorder, both of which were recovered on the day of the accident in good condition.

==Investigation==
The crash was investigated by the Spanish Civil Aviation Accident and Incident Investigation Commission (CIAIAC). 

There was no evidence of any anomalies in Paris prior to this flight. The crew had stayed in the city 72 hours after arriving on flight AV010 on the first day, 24 November 1983. The investigation also determined that the pilot-in-command and crew were properly licensed and qualified, as were the air traffic controllers. The aircraft carried a valid certificate of airworthiness, as well as a registration and maintenance certificate. The airplane was maintained in accordance with the prescribed maintenance program, and the navigation and approach aids were checked and found to be functioning correctly. In addition, there was no record of malfunctions in the controllers&#x27; communications or radar equipment, and no evidence was discovered of defects in the aircraft engines or systems.

==Notable people killed==

Victims include several notable people invited to the Colombian Government&#x27;s &quot;First meeting on Hispanoamerican culture&quot; (). Other notable victims were named in the &quot;New York Times&quot;.

* Jorge Ibargüengoitia – Mexican novelist
* Ángel Rama – Uruguayan writer, academic, and literary critic
* Rosa Sabater – Spanish pianist
* Manuel Scorza – Peruvian novelist, poet, and political activist
* Marta Traba – Argentine writer and art critic (Angel Rama was her husband)
* Ana Sixta Gonzalez de Cuadros, Colombian senator
* John Buckle - General Secretary of the Revolutionary Communist Party of Britain (Marxist-Leninist)

==See also==

* Japan Air Lines Flight 123
* Korean Air Flight 801
* American Airlines Flight 965
* Air Inter Flight 148
* List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft
* Prinair Flight 277
*Madrid runway disaster – another Spanish Aviation incident that occurred only 10 days later

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*Civil Aviation Accident and Incident Investigation Commission
** Report from the Ministry of Infrastructures, Spain .
** Transcript of the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3119385" start="0" end="18" title="Avianca Flight 011" label="Avianca Flight 011"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="25" end="47" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747-200BM Combi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054674" start="54" end="67" title="International flight" label="international"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="78" end="94" title="passenger flight" label="passenger flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="100" end="109" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="113" end="119" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="124" end="129" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="131" end="137" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="143" end="150" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="368" end="377" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q464020" start="492" end="517" title="instrument landing system" label="instrument landing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="782" end="793" title="pilot error" label="pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q223288" start="988" end="1013" title="Tenerife airport disaster" label="Tenerife airport disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="1186" end="1196" title="Maiden flight" label="first flew"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="1226" end="1254" title="Scandinavian Airlines System" label="Scandinavian Airlines System"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="1287" end="1297" title="Aircraft registration" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107978" start="1524" end="1552" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D-70A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146304" start="1626" end="1633" title="Pilot in command" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q123030" start="1857" end="1870" title="First officer (aviation)" label="first officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q432425" start="2016" end="2031" title="flight engineer" label="flight engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="2416" end="2430" title="Meteorology" label="meteorological"/>
<link wikidata="Q862632" start="2691" end="2713" title="air traffic controller" label="air traffic controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984852" start="2944" end="2962" title="Mejorada del Campo" label="Mejorada del Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="3690" end="3718" title="Flight recorder" label="digital flight data recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="3725" end="3747" title="Flight recorder" label="cockpit voice recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114752" start="3885" end="3946" title="Civil Aviation Accident and Incident Investigation Commission" label="Civil Aviation Accident and Incident Investigation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q41130" start="4992" end="5012" title="Jorge Ibargüengoitia" label="Jorge Ibargüengoitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211989" start="5034" end="5044" title="Ángel Rama" label="Ángel Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9070712" start="5097" end="5109" title="Rosa Sabater" label="Rosa Sabater"/>
<link wikidata="Q164967" start="5130" end="5143" title="Manuel Scorza" label="Manuel Scorza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902944" start="5196" end="5207" title="Marta Traba" label="Marta Traba"/>
<link wikidata="Q18173" start="5440" end="5466" title="Japan Air Lines Flight 123" label="Japan Air Lines Flight 123"/>
<link wikidata="Q485120" start="5469" end="5490" title="Korean Air Flight 801" label="Korean Air Flight 801"/>
<link wikidata="Q941612" start="5493" end="5521" title="American Airlines Flight 965" label="American Airlines Flight 965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631349" start="5524" end="5544" title="Air Inter Flight 148" label="Air Inter Flight 148"/>
<link wikidata="Q354069" start="5547" end="5608" title="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft" label="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715028" start="5611" end="5629" title="Prinair Flight 277" label="Prinair Flight 277"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728635" start="5631" end="5653" title="Madrid runway disaster" label="Madrid runway disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114752" start="5770" end="5831" title="Civil Aviation Accident and Incident Investigation Commission" label="Civil Aviation Accident and Incident Investigation Commission"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723281" wikidata="Q4649076" url="?curid=723281" title="A272 road">
<text>The A272 is a road in southeast England. It follows an approximate east–west route from near Heathfield, East Sussex to the city of Winchester, Hampshire.

==Route==
The eastern end of the A272 starts at a junction with the A267, north-west of the village of Cross-in-Hand, East Sussex. It heads west, crossing the A26 and A22 north of Uckfield, and continues through Newick before going over the border into West Sussex at a point east of Scaynes Hill. It then bypasses the town of Haywards Heath and continues west, crossing the main London-Brighton A23 road at Bolney.

The route continues, crossing the A24 and passing through a number of villages and small towns in West Sussex, such as Billingshurst, Petworth and Midhurst. It then crosses the county boundary into Hampshire and reaches Petersfield, where it crosses the A3 to the west of the town. The final section passes the National Trust property of Hinton Ampner and rises high on to the Hampshire downs, passing Cheesefoot Head, before descending to merge with the A31 at Chilcomb to the east of Winchester.

In former years, the A272 continued north-west from Winchester to Stockbridge, but this section has now been redesignated as the B3049. Today, after it re-emerges from the A31 to run north to the Winnall Roundabout, Junction 9 of the M3. Here it merges with the A34, passing east and north of Winchester (with limited access to the A33 northbound), before re-emerging near Littleton. It then runs NW along the Andover Road (formerly B3420), terminating at the A30 in the parish of Barton Stacey, an overall length of . To the north the B3420 continues across the River Test to Wherwell and Andover.

==Features==
The A272&#x27;s route is predominantly rural, despite being only from the centre of London at its nearest point. Most of it passes through countryside, villages and small towns, and the only built-up area of any size that it traverses is Haywards Heath and its surrounding villages. There is very little dual carriagewayjust three very short sections between Petworth and Midhurstand it therefore gives the driver an experience which is reminiscent of English country roads as they were in the middle of the 20th Century.

It has been said that the A272 follows part of the route that was taken by pilgrims travelling between the cathedral cities of Winchester and Canterbury. However, this is unlikely because, for most of its length, it passes through the low weald of Sussex. Prior to the development of modern roads, this was difficult for travellers, because of the extensive forest and tracts of low-lying marshy ground. The more likely route was the Pilgrims&#x27; Way, which followed the chalk escarpment of the North Downs.

==In popular culture==
The road is the subject of a book by the Dutch author Pieter Boogaart: &quot;A272 - An Ode to a Road&quot; (Pallas Athene, 2000).

The A272 is the subject of a chapter in W H Charnock&#x27;s book &quot;Mind over Motor&quot; describing in detail a car journey from Winchester to Petersfield.

The A272 is mentioned as part of the route Pablo Picasso will take as part of his bicycle ride in the first episode of Monty Python.

==See also==

*Great Britain road numbering scheme

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4649076" start="4" end="8" title="A272 road" label="A272"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="32" end="39" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258479" start="93" end="103" title="Heathfield, East Sussex" label="Heathfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="105" end="116" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="132" end="142" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="144" end="153" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975622" start="224" end="228" title="A267 road" label="A267"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212060" start="259" end="272" title="Cross-in-Hand" label="Cross-in-Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="274" end="285" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649072" start="315" end="318" title="A26 road" label="A26"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175829" start="323" end="326" title="A22 road" label="A22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018490" start="336" end="344" title="Uckfield" label="Uckfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428400" start="368" end="374" title="Newick" label="Newick"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="409" end="420" title="West Sussex" label="West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430656" start="440" end="452" title="Scaynes Hill" label="Scaynes Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q920646" start="483" end="497" title="Haywards Heath" label="Haywards Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="536" end="542" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="543" end="551" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337479" start="552" end="560" title="A23 road" label="A23 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459953" start="564" end="570" title="Bolney" label="Bolney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649056" start="607" end="610" title="A24 road (England)" label="A24"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="671" end="682" title="West Sussex" label="West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148483" start="692" end="705" title="Billingshurst" label="Billingshurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526099" start="707" end="715" title="Petworth" label="Petworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700135" start="720" end="728" title="Midhurst" label="Midhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="771" end="780" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247815" start="793" end="804" title="Petersfield" label="Petersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577223" start="827" end="829" title="A3 road (Great Britain)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="884" end="898" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316888" start="911" end="924" title="Hinton Ampner" label="Hinton Ampner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="950" end="959" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253315" start="960" end="965" title="downland" label="downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209286" start="975" end="990" title="Cheesefoot Head" label="Cheesefoot Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649126" start="1028" end="1031" title="A31 road" label="A31"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="1059" end="1069" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="1124" end="1134" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q547492" start="1138" end="1149" title="Stockbridge, Hampshire" label="Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636844" start="1201" end="1206" title="List of roads zones in Great Britain" label="B3049"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785279" start="1306" end="1308" title="M3 motorway (Great Britain)" label="M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649158" start="1334" end="1337" title="A34 road" label="A34"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="1365" end="1375" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649140" start="1404" end="1407" title="A33 road" label="A33"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636844" start="1505" end="1510" title="List of B roads in Great Britain" label="B3420"/>
<link wikidata="Q429589" start="1532" end="1535" title="A30 road" label="A30"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="1543" end="1549" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075132" start="1553" end="1566" title="Barton Stacey" label="Barton Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677000" start="1635" end="1645" title="River Test" label="River Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640591" start="1649" end="1657" title="Wherwell" label="Wherwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q492805" start="1662" end="1669" title="Andover, Hampshire" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="1724" end="1729" title="rural" label="rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1769" end="1775" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q920646" start="1923" end="1937" title="Haywards Heath" label="Haywards Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="1989" end="2005" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526099" start="2044" end="2052" title="Petworth" label="Petworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700135" start="2057" end="2065" title="Midhurst" label="Midhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="2283" end="2290" title="pilgrim" label="pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="2315" end="2324" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="2335" end="2345" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="2350" end="2360" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298322" start="2447" end="2452" title="weald" label="weald"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="2456" end="2462" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095007" start="2642" end="2660" title="Pilgrims&amp;#x27; Way" label="Pilgrims&amp;#x27; Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="2681" end="2686" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="2687" end="2697" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="2705" end="2716" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2783" end="2788" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192758" start="2796" end="2811" title="Pieter Boogaart" label="Pieter Boogaart"/>
<link wikidata="Q387692" start="3183" end="3218" title="Great Britain road numbering scheme" label="Great Britain road numbering scheme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723284" wikidata="Q117329" url="?curid=723284" title="Prince Egon von Fürstenberg">
<text>Egon, Prinz von Fürstenberg (Eduard Egon Peter Paul Giovanni Prinz zu Fürstenberg; 29 June 1946 – 11 June 2004) was a socialite, banker, fashion and interior designer, and a member of the former German princely family of Fürstenberg. 

In 1969, he married fashion designer Diane Halfin, with whom he had two children, Alexandre Egon (born 25 January 1970) and Tatiana Desirée (born 16 February 1971). The couple separated in 1973 and divorced in 1983. The same year, he married Lynn Marshall (born c. 1950), an American from Mississippi who was the co-owner of a flower shop; the couple remained childless. Between his marriages, Egon also had a male partner; he was frank about his bisexuality and the openness of his first marriage.

Fürstenberg wrote two books on fashion and interior design (&quot;The Power Look,&quot; 1978, and &quot;The Power Look at Home: Decorating for Men,&quot; 1980), as well as opening an interior design firm. He died in Rome on 11 June 2004.

== Family ==
Eduard Egon Peter Paul Giovanni Prinz zu Fürstenberg, born 29 June 1946 in Lausanne, Switzerland, was the elder son of Prince Tassilo zu Fürstenberg (1903–1989) and his first wife, Clara Agnelli (1920-2016), elder sister of Fiat&#x27;s chairman Gianni Agnelli. After Clara&#x27;s departure, his father married Texas oil heiress Dr. Cecilie Amelia Hudson (née Blaffer).

Fürstenberg&#x27;s younger brother is Prince Sebastian zu Fürstenberg, and his sister was socialite and actress Princess Ira zu Fürstenberg.

==Biography==
Egon von Fürstenberg was born in Lausanne, Switzerland. He was baptized by the French nuncio Angelo Roncalli (later elected Pope John XXIII) and was brought up in great privilege in Venice, Italy. He earned a degree in economics from the University of Geneva, followed by an 14-month term on a peace mission in Burundi working as a teacher, and then two years as an investment banker in New York.

While studying at a university, he met 1965 fellow student Diane Simone Michelle Halfin, a Belgian-born Jewish woman of Romanian-Greek descent and daughter of a Holocaust survivor. They married on 16 July 1969, at Montfort-l&#x27;Amaury, Yvelines, France. The new Princess Diane von Fürstenberg was pregnant, and Egon&#x27;s father, who objected to his son marrying a Jew, attended the wedding ceremony but boycotted the reception. 

His wife opened her fashion house in New York at Egon&#x27;s urging, creating an eventually iconic wrap dress, a career as designer that pre-dated and arguably eclipsed Egon&#x27;s. Fürstenberg began his career as a buyer for Macy&#x27;s, taking night classes at the Fashion Institute of Technology, and Parson&#x27;s School of Design.

The von Fürstenbergs had two children: Alexandre Egon (born 25 January 1970) and Tatiana Desirée (born 16 February 1971). They divorced in 1983.

Fürstenberg began independent work as a fashion designer in 1977, designing clothes for plus-size women, and later expanding to full fashion and product licensing, with ready-to-wear, fragrance, and made to measure lines based in Rome. Next von Furstenberg designed ready-made clothing for the masses, and an off-the-peg (ready-to-wear) line of fashion.

Fürstenberg wrote two top selling books: &quot;The Power Look&quot; (1978), a guide to fashion and good taste, and &quot;The Power Look at Home: Decorating for Men&quot; (1980), a book on home furnishings. He opened an interior design firm in 1981. In 1991, he exhibited at Alta Moda days in Rome.

Fürstenberg collected art, and his collection included works by Zachary Selig.

Egon von Fürstenberg died at Spallanzani Hospital in Rome on 11 June 2004. The &quot;New York Post&quot; reported Fürstenberg&#x27;s widow stating that he died of liver cancer caused by a hepatitis C infection that he acquired in the 1970s.

==Published works==
Fürstenberg&#x27;s published works included:
* &quot;The Power Look,&quot; 1978, New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston
* &quot;The Power Look at Home: Decorating for Men,&quot; 1980, New York, NY: Morrow

==References==
== External links ==
*Homepage Egon von Fürstenberg
* FMD, 2015, &quot;Designers: Egon von Fürstenberg, &quot;Fashion Model Directory&quot; (&quot;FMD&quot;, online), see , accessed 14 July 2015.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q117329" start="0" end="27" title="Prince Egon von Fürstenberg" label="Egon, Prinz von Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q681590" start="221" end="232" title="House of Fürstenberg (Swabia)" label="Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q272438" start="273" end="285" title="Diane von Fürstenberg" label="Diane Halfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720526" start="318" end="332" title="Prince Alexander von Fürstenberg" label="Alexandre Egon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688127" start="360" end="375" title="Princess Tatiana von Fürstenberg" label="Tatiana Desirée"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="1063" end="1084" title="Lausanne, Switzerland" label="Lausanne, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1107" end="1136" title=":de:Tassilo Fürstenberg" label="Prince Tassilo zu Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501177" start="1169" end="1182" title="Clara Agnelli" label="Clara Agnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="1212" end="1216" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q356351" start="1233" end="1247" title="Gianni Agnelli" label="Gianni Agnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q463164" start="1470" end="1497" title="Princess Ira von Fürstenberg" label="Princess Ira zu Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="1547" end="1555" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="1638" end="1653" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1696" end="1709" title="Venice, Italy" label="Venice, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503473" start="1752" end="1772" title="University of Geneva" label="University of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q272438" start="1971" end="1999" title="Diane von Fürstenberg" label="Diane Simone Michelle Halfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="2016" end="2022" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409870" start="2073" end="2091" title="Holocaust survivor" label="Holocaust survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q251655" start="2126" end="2148" title="Montfort-l&amp;#x27;Amaury" label="Montfort-l&amp;#x27;Amaury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12820" start="2150" end="2158" title="Yvelines" label="Yvelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037587" start="2445" end="2455" title="wrap dress" label="wrap dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="2572" end="2583" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q844999" start="2613" end="2644" title="Fashion Institute of Technology" label="Fashion Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339626" start="2650" end="2680" title="Parson&amp;#x27;s School of Design" label="Parson&amp;#x27;s School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720526" start="2722" end="2736" title="Prince Alexander von Fürstenberg" label="Alexandre Egon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688127" start="2764" end="2779" title="Princess Tatiana von Fürstenberg" label="Tatiana Desirée"/>
<link wikidata="Q993308" start="3028" end="3043" title="made to measure" label="made to measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063991" start="3547" end="3560" title="Zachary Selig" label="Zachary Selig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803781" start="3592" end="3612" title="Spallanzani Hospital" label="Spallanzani Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="3648" end="3661" title="New York Post" label="New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148337" start="3726" end="3738" title="Hepatocellular carcinoma" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="3751" end="3762" title="hepatitis C" label="hepatitis C"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723288" wikidata="Q1215169" url="?curid=723288" title="The Newton Boys">
<text>The Newton Boys is a 1998 American Western crime film directed by Richard Linklater, who co-wrote the screenplay with Claude Stanush and Clark Lee Walker. It is based on Stanush&#x27;s 1994 book of the same name, which tells the true story of the Newton Gang, a family of bank and train robbers from Uvalde, Texas. The film stars Matthew McConaughey, who was actually born in Uvalde, Skeet Ulrich, Ethan Hawke, Vincent D&#x27;Onofrio, and Dwight Yoakam.

It was filmed throughout Texas including the towns of Bertram, Austin, Bartlett, New Braunfels, and San Antonio. The film was a box office disappointment and received a mixed reception from critics, some noting that the film falls short of Linklater&#x27;s other work.

==Plot==
A miscarriage of justice lands Willis Newton languished in prison, he encountered a harsh reality: money held the key to societal status within the unforgiving confines. Determined to climb the social ladder, he joined forces with Slim and Glasscock, two fellow inmates, to pull off a daring bank robbery in broad daylight. Their audacious plan failed, and Slim was captured during their hasty escape on horseback. Willis and Glasscock, however, escaped and found a bank director willing to purchase their stolen war bonds. This lucrative encounter provided them with vital information about countless other banks, paving the way for their lucrative criminal careers.

Willis and Glasscock embarked on a series of nocturnal bank robberies, using cars as their mode of escape. Glasscock proved to be a master of nitroglycerin, effectively utilizing the explosive to blast open safes. Willis, driven by a sense of injustice, convinced his brothers to support their criminal enterprise, arguing that bankers were the true crooks and that robbing them was merely a case of little thieves stealing from big thieves. He further rationalized their actions by emphasizing that all banks were insured, and that the insurance companies would ultimately benefit from their robberies by increasing their sales.

The Newton gang&#x27;s prolific bank robbing spree continued unabated, and some bankers proved to be dishonest in exaggerating their losses. This prompted insurance companies to pressure banks into investing in enhanced safes, impervious to nitroglycerin. Faced with this setback, the Newtons shifted their operations to Toronto, where they targeted a cash transport vehicle in broad daylight.

Despite meticulously planning their Toronto heist, unforeseen events disrupted their execution, resulting in a narrow escape for the gang members. Undeterred, Willis resolved to abandon his criminal ways and become a legitimate businessman. However, his investment in an oil well turned sour and drained his finances, leaving him devastated. In his despair, he questioned his faith, convinced that God had thwarted his attempts to go straight.

Desperate for redemption, Willis was easily drawn into another criminal venture: the robbery of a night-time train. Glasscock, once an expert with nitroglycerin, proved less proficient with a gun. In a moment of panic, he mistook Willis&#x27; brother, Dock Newton, for a guard and fatally shot him. Willis, driven by loyalty, sought medical attention for his wounded brother, inadvertently exposing their identities.

In the end, all the Newton brothers are finally arrested and sentenced for their crimes. The once-notorious gang, driven by a misguided sense of justice and a thirst for financial security, met their bitter end within the confines of a prison.

==Cast==
* Matthew McConaughey as Willis Newton
* Skeet Ulrich as Joe Newton
* Ethan Hawke as Jess Newton
* Vincent D&#x27;Onofrio as Wylie &quot;Dock&quot; Newton
* Dwight Yoakam as Brentwood &quot;Brent Glass&quot; Glasscock
* Chloe Webb as Avis Glasscock
* Gail Cronauer as Ma Newton
* Julianna Margulies as Louise Brown
* Anne Stedman as Madeline
* Lew Temple as The Waiter
* Charles Gunning as &quot;Slim&quot;
* Ken Farmer as Ranger Frank Hamer
* David Jensen as William Fahy
* Bo Hopkins as FBI Agent K.P. Aldrich
* Luke Askew as Chief Shoemaker

==Reception==
The film received mixed reviews from critics, with a 65% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 40 reviews. The site&#x27;s consensus states: &quot;&quot;The Newton Boys&quot; uses a sharp cast and absorbing period detail to help make up for the frustrations of a story puzzlingly short on dramatic tension.&quot; Metacritic gave the film a score of 57 based on 20 reviews, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;. Roger Ebert gave the film two stars, writing &quot;It&#x27;s not an enormous cast, and yet somehow the Newtons are hard to tell apart--not in appearance, but in personality...the film as a whole seems drained of thrust and energy--especially compared to (Richard Linklater&#x27;s) earlier films.&quot;

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Morgenstern, Joe. March 27, 1998. &quot;Prosperous Escapades Recounted In the Tale of &#x27;The Newton Boys&#x27;.&quot; The Wall Street Journal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="35" end="42" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="43" end="53" title="crime film" label="crime film"/>
<link wikidata="Q40035" start="66" end="83" title="Richard Linklater" label="Richard Linklater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203946" start="247" end="258" title="Newton Gang" label="Newton Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q806824" start="272" end="276" title="bank robbery" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832904" start="281" end="286" title="train robbery" label="train"/>
<link wikidata="Q868860" start="300" end="313" title="Uvalde, Texas" label="Uvalde, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188955" start="330" end="349" title="Matthew McConaughey" label="Matthew McConaughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q472320" start="384" end="396" title="Skeet Ulrich" label="Skeet Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q484615" start="398" end="409" title="Ethan Hawke" label="Ethan Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q320052" start="411" end="433" title="Vincent D&amp;#x27;Onofrio" label="Vincent D&amp;#x27;Onofrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="439" end="452" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="480" end="485" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q979662" start="509" end="516" title="Bertram, Texas" label="Bertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="518" end="524" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q982542" start="526" end="534" title="Bartlett, Texas" label="Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q574612" start="536" end="549" title="New Braunfels, Texas" label="New Braunfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="555" end="566" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q617663" start="1247" end="1255" title="war bond" label="war bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="1545" end="1558" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="1940" end="1959" title="insurance companies" label="insurance companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2355" end="2362" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q188955" start="3548" end="3567" title="Matthew McConaughey" label="Matthew McConaughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203946" start="3571" end="3584" title="Newton Gang" label="Willis Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q472320" start="3587" end="3599" title="Skeet Ulrich" label="Skeet Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203946" start="3603" end="3613" title="Newton Gang" label="Joe Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q484615" start="3616" end="3627" title="Ethan Hawke" label="Ethan Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203946" start="3631" end="3642" title="Newton Gang" label="Jess Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q320052" start="3645" end="3667" title="Vincent D&amp;#x27;Onofrio" label="Vincent D&amp;#x27;Onofrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203946" start="3671" end="3700" title="Newton Gang" label="Wylie &amp;quot;Dock&amp;quot; Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="3703" end="3716" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203946" start="3720" end="3763" title="Newton Gang" label="Brentwood &amp;quot;Brent Glass&amp;quot; Glasscock"/>
<link wikidata="Q509117" start="3766" end="3776" title="Chloe Webb" label="Chloe Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517059" start="3797" end="3810" title="Gail Cronauer" label="Gail Cronauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q229714" start="3826" end="3844" title="Julianna Margulies" label="Julianna Margulies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28043116" start="3863" end="3875" title="Anne Stedman" label="Anne Stedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237275" start="3890" end="3900" title="Lew Temple" label="Lew Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487077" start="3976" end="3987" title="Frank Hamer" label="Frank Hamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728617" start="4021" end="4031" title="Bo Hopkins" label="Bo Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568060" start="4060" end="4070" title="Luke Askew" label="Luke Askew"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="4172" end="4187" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="4415" end="4425" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="4524" end="4535" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q40035" start="4779" end="4796" title="Richard Linklater" label="Richard Linklater"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723289" wikidata="Q5473028" url="?curid=723289" title="Fortín de San Gerónimo">
<text>Fortín de San Gerónimo de Boquerón is a small historic fort located at the mouth of the Condado Lagoon in San Juan Islet across from the district of Condado in the barrio of Santurce in San Juan, Puerto Rico.

It was built during the 18th century to replace a smaller battery (called El Boquerón) that stood at the easternmost end of the San Juan islet. The original Boquerón battery was used by the Spanish to defend the city of San Juan from attacks by Sir Francis Drake in 1595 and George Clifford, the third Earl of Cumberland in 1598, who managed to destroy it during his attack. San Gerónimo became part of San Juan&#x27;s first line of defense, along with the Fortín San Antonio and Escambrón Fort, while the last line of defense was the formidable Castillo San Cristóbal, which guarded the city entrance proper and also defended from land attacks.

== History ==

The San Gerónimo and San Antonio forts were pivotal in repelling the invasion by the forces of British Admiral Henry Harvey and Sir Ralph Abercromby in 1797. On April 17, 1797, their combined forces (64 to 68 ships and 7,000 to 13,000 men) landed in Cangrejos, approximately three miles west of San Juan. San Juan&#x27;s military forces, which included, among others, the &quot;Regimiento Fijo de Puerto Rico&quot; (Resident Regiment of Puerto Rico) and the Militias Disciplinadas (Trained Militias) were outnumbered by the invaders by a ratio of almost three to one. Admiral Harvey blockaded the San Juan Harbor while Abercromby established his operations headquarters in San Mateo parish overseeing all of San Juan and the Martín Peña Bridge. Abercromby&#x27;s strategy was to take the Martín Peña bridge in order to block Spanish reinforcements from the south and bombard San Gerónimo and San Antonio from Miramar to gain access to and cross the San Antonio Bridge into the San Juan islet. British forces included the Royal Marines, made famous by their later defeat of Napoleon&#x27;s troops in Egypt. Then-Governor of Puerto Rico Field Marshal Don Ramón de Castro y Gutiérrez, a brilliant strategist, prevented the British from advancing and frustrated their conquest of San Juan.

The San Gerónimo and San Antonio sustained heavy damage from the constant bombardment during the two-week siege on the city. Chronicles describe the defenders shooting their muskets and cannons from behind sandbags because of the devastation their forts sustained. Both San Gerónimo and San Antonio were eventually rebuilt and expanded.

San Gerónimo is located adjacent to the grounds of the Caribe Hilton Hotel. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 11, 1983. Unlike similar forts near Old San Juan, it is not part of San Juan National Historic Site. San Gerónimo is owned by the Institute of Puerto Rican Culture but is managed by the Hilton. Thanks to the work of volunteers, the fort is again open to the public and contains an exhibit of the history of San Juan. The &quot;Polvorín de San Gerónimo&quot;, or gunpowder house, that was built in 1769 and supplied the fort with gunpowder, is now part of the Luis Muñoz Rivera Park nearby.

As recent as the year 2006, attempts were being made by the Instituto de Cultura Puertorriqueña and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to build a breakwater to stop any further deterioration from irreparably damaging the centuries-old fort. Senate Vice President Orlando Parga has led efforts to modify some of the construction projects that would encroach on the fort or would hamper the Corps of Engineers&#x27; preservation and reconstruction efforts.

In July 2007, the Fort was the scene of protests against the construction of a tourist project called Paseo Caribe that would block access to the fortification. Protesters argued that the public should have free access to it. The protest lasted about a week during which the protesters halted the construction projects by climbing onto the cranes.

The Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 directed the U.S. Secretary of the Interior to conduct a study to determine the suitability of including San Gerónimo as part of San Juan National Historic Site.

After two decades closed to the public, in 2018 the &quot;Asociación Amigos del Fortín de San Jerónimo&quot; was created, a non-profit association that is responsible for the preservation and future reopening for the charity of the Puerto Rican people and tourists.

In 2023, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill that would make the Fort an affiliated area of the National Park Service.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Fuerte de San José

==References==
==External links==
*Instituto de Cultura Puertorriqueña (Spanish)
*Puerta de Tierra, San Juan - Fortín San Jerónimo (sic) (Spanish)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5473028" start="0" end="34" title="Fortín de San Gerónimo" label="Fortín de San Gerónimo de Boquerón"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="55" end="59" title="fort" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159133" start="88" end="102" title="El Condado, Puerto Rico" label="Condado Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084279" start="106" end="120" title="San Juan Islet" label="San Juan Islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159133" start="149" end="156" title="Condado (Santurce)" label="Condado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631071" start="164" end="170" title="Barrios of San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="barrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q511729" start="174" end="182" title="Santurce, San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="Santurce"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="186" end="194" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="196" end="207" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872281" start="444" end="451" title="Battle of San Juan (1595)" label="attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="455" end="472" title="Francis Drake" label="Sir Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q335537" start="485" end="530" title="George Clifford, 3rd Earl of Cumberland" label="George Clifford, the third Earl of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962969" start="667" end="685" title="Fortín San Antonio" label="Fortín San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748608" start="756" end="778" title="Castillo San Cristóbal (San Juan)" label="Castillo San Cristóbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q656046" start="941" end="949" title="Battle of San Juan (1797)" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q278399" start="1000" end="1020" title="Ralph Abercromby" label="Sir Ralph Abercromby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="2007" end="2020" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039457" start="2552" end="2571" title="Caribe Hilton Hotel" label="Caribe Hilton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2594" end="2630" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136674" start="2678" end="2690" title="Old San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="Old San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q281149" start="2710" end="2741" title="San Juan National Historic Site" label="San Juan National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040803" start="2772" end="2805" title="Institute of Puerto Rican Culture" label="Institute of Puerto Rican Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700918" start="3101" end="3123" title="Luis Muñoz Rivera Park" label="Luis Muñoz Rivera Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="3237" end="3265" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103152" start="3394" end="3407" title="Orlando Parga" label="Orlando Parga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090367" start="3940" end="3982" title="Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009" label="Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="3996" end="4026" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="U.S. Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="4521" end="4542" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q65076561" start="4573" end="4591" title="Fuerte de San José" label="Fuerte de San José"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723294" wikidata="Q923032" url="?curid=723294" title="John Gardner Wilkinson">
<text>Sir John Gardner Wilkinson (5 October 1797 – 29 October 1875) was an English traveller, writer and pioneer egyptologist of the 19th century. He is often referred to as &quot;the Father of British egyptology&quot;.

==Childhood and education==
Wilkinson was born in Little Missenden, Buckinghamshire. His father was a Westmoreland clergyman, the Reverend John Wilkinson, an amateur enthusiast for antiquities. Wilkinson inherited a modest income from his early-deceased parents. Sent by his guardian to Harrow School in 1813, he later went up to Exeter College, Oxford in 1816. Wilkinson ultimately took no degree and, suffering from ill-health, decided to travel to Italy. There in 1819 he met the antiquarian Sir William Gell and resolved to study Egyptology.

==First sojourn in Egypt==
Wilkinson first arrived in Egypt in October 1821 as a young man of 24 years, remaining in the country for a further 12 years continuously. During his stay, Wilkinson visited virtually every known ancient Egyptian site, skillfully recording inscriptions and paintings as a talented copyist and compiling copious notes.

==Return to England and honours==

Finally returning to England for his health&#x27;s sake in 1833, succeeding in being elected to the Royal Society in 1834, Wilkinson went on to publish his researches in a large number of publications. Although preceded by &quot;The Topography of Thebes and General View of Egypt&quot; in 1835, Wilkinson&#x27;s most significant work was &quot;Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians&quot;. First published in three volumes in 1837 and subsequently illustrated by Joseph Bonomi, this title stood as the best general treatment of ancient Egyptian culture and history for the next half century. Acclaim for this publication brought Wilkinson a knighthood in 1839 and ensured him the title of the first distinguished British Egyptologist.

==Further travels and research==
The now Sir John Gardner Wilkinson returned to Egypt in 1842, contributing an article entitled &quot;Survey of the Valley of the Natron Lakes&quot; to the &quot;Journal of the Geographical Society&quot; in 1843. The same year witnessed his publication of a revised and enlarged edition of his &quot;Topography&quot;, entitled &quot;Moslem Egypt and Thebes&quot;.

Wilkinson travelled in Dalmatia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina during 1844, an account of his observations being published in 1848 (&quot;Dalmatia and Montenegro&quot;, 2 volumes).

A third visit to Egypt in 1848 to 1849 was followed by a final visit to Thebes in 1855. Thereafter, Wilkinson remained in England where he investigated Cornish antiquities and studied zoology.

==Marriage, death and legacy==

In 1856, at the age of 59, he married Caroline Catherine Lucas (b. 1822), the daughter of Henry Lucas of Glamorganshire. Lady Wilkinson worked on editing her husband&#x27;s manuscripts as well as writing several books of her own, the most successful of which was &quot;Weeds and Wildflowers&quot; (1858).

Wilkinson died at Llandovery in 1875. He had bequeathed his collections with an elaborate catalogue in 1864 to his cousin, Lady Georgiana Stanhope Lovell, who had married Sir John Harper Crewe at Calke Abbey (now owned by the National Trust). He left his widow in poor financial straits from which she was rescued by a pension that Benjamin Disraeli persuaded the Queen to grant her.

Wilkinson&#x27;s papers are now held in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and form an invaluable resource to some of the earliest recorded states (dating to 1821 to 1856, before the advent of widespread tourism and collection) of many Egyptian monuments. His library and two plan folders are held in the National Trust collection at Calke Abbey. Many historic sites were subsequently damaged or lost altogether, making Wilkinson&#x27;s work all the more important.

==Publications==

*&quot;Materia Hieroglyphica&quot; (1828)
*&quot;The Topography of Thebes and General View of Egypt&quot;, London, 1835
*&quot;Dalmatia and Montenegro&quot;, London, 1848
*&quot;Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, including their private life, government, laws, arts, manufactures, religion, agriculture, and early history, derived from a comparison of the paintings, sculptures, and monuments still existing, with the accounts of ancient authors&quot;, (6 volumes, 1837–41). New edition, revised &amp; corrected, 1878
*&quot;Modern Egypt and Thebes: being a description of Egypt; including the information required for travellers in that country.&quot; (1843) Full text available on google books.

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==

*Wilkinson&#x27;s watercolor of a &quot;Woman in the Tomb at Thebes&quot;
*Gardner Wilkinson: Modern Egypt and Thebes in Archive.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q923032" start="0" end="26" title="John Gardner Wilkinson" label="Sir John Gardner Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q145903" start="107" end="119" title="Egyptology" label="egyptologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868593" start="265" end="281" title="Little Missenden" label="Little Missenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="283" end="298" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="317" end="329" title="Westmorland" label="Westmoreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="502" end="515" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q81173" start="545" end="559" title="Exeter College, Oxford" label="Exeter College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="561" end="567" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="698" end="709" title="antiquarian" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q506472" start="710" end="726" title="William Gell" label="Sir William Gell"/>
<link wikidata="Q145903" start="749" end="759" title="Egyptology" label="Egyptology"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="816" end="821" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1243" end="1256" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q456273" start="1612" end="1625" title="Joseph Bonomi the Younger" label="Joseph Bonomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="2305" end="2313" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="2315" end="2325" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="2327" end="2349" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="2541" end="2547" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="2621" end="2628" title="Cornwall" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="2653" end="2660" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21612711" start="2733" end="2757" title="Caroline Catharine Wilkinson" label="Caroline Catherine Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="2800" end="2814" title="Glamorganshire" label="Glamorganshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q651733" start="3019" end="3029" title="Llandovery" label="Llandovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021459" start="3197" end="3208" title="Calke Abbey" label="Calke Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="3333" end="3350" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="3430" end="3446" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="3448" end="3454" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3873" end="3894" title="Materia Hieroglyphica" label="Materia Hieroglyphica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3915" end="3965" title="The Topography of Thebes and General View of Egypt" label="The Topography of Thebes and General View of Egypt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723297" wikidata="Q190900" url="?curid=723297" title="Centered square number">
<text>In elementary number theory, a centered square number is a centered figurate number that gives the number of dots in a square with a dot in the center and all other dots surrounding the center dot in successive square layers. That is, each centered square number equals the number of dots within a given city block distance of the center dot on a regular square lattice. While centered square numbers, like figurate numbers in general, have few if any direct practical applications, they are sometimes studied in recreational mathematics for their elegant geometric and arithmetic properties.

The figures for the first four centered square numbers are shown below:

Each centered square number is the sum of successive squares. Example: as shown in the following figure of Floyd&#x27;s triangle, 25 is a centered square number, and is the sum of the square 16 (yellow rhombus formed by shearing a square) and of the next smaller square, 9 (sum of two blue triangles):

== Relationships with other figurate numbers ==

Let &quot;C&quot;&quot;k&quot;,&quot;n&quot; generally represent the &quot;n&quot;th centered &quot;k&quot;-gonal number. The &quot;n&quot;th centered square number is given by the formula:

:formula_1

That is, the &quot;n&quot;th centered square number is the sum of the &quot;n&quot;th and the (&quot;n&quot; – 1)th square numbers. The following pattern demonstrates this formula:

The formula can also be expressed as:

:formula_2

That is, the &quot;n&quot;th centered square number is half of the &quot;n&quot;th odd square number plus 1, as illustrated below:

Like all centered polygonal numbers, centered square numbers can also be expressed in terms of triangular numbers:

:formula_3

where

:formula_4

is the &quot;n&quot;th triangular number. This can be easily seen by removing the center dot and dividing the rest of the figure into four triangles, as below:

The difference between two consecutive octahedral numbers is a centered square number (Conway and Guy, p.50).

Another way the centered square numbers can be expressed is:

:formula_5

where 

:formula_6

Yet another way the centered square numbers can be expressed is in terms of the centered triangular numbers:

:formula_7

where 

:formula_8

== List of centered square numbers ==

The first centered square numbers (&quot;C&quot;4,&quot;n&quot; &lt; 4500) are:

:1, 5, 13, 25, 41, 61, 85, 113, 145, 181, 221, 265, 313, 365, 421, 481, 545, 613, 685, 761, 841, 925, 1013, 1105, 1201, 1301, 1405, 1513, 1625, 1741, 1861, 1985, 2113, 2245, 2381, 2521, 2665, 2813, 2965, 3121, 3281, 3445, 3613, 3785, 3961, 4141, 4325, … .

== Properties ==

All centered square numbers are odd, and in base 10 one can notice the one&#x27;s digit follows the pattern 1-5-3-5-1.

All centered square numbers and their divisors have a remainder of 1 when divided by 4. Hence all centered square numbers and their divisors end with digit 1 or 5 in base 6, 8, and 12.

Every centered square number except 1 is the hypotenuse of a Pythagorean triple (3-4-5, 5-12-13, 7-24-25, ...). This is exactly the sequence of Pythagorean triples where the two longest sides differ by 1. (Example: 52 + 122 = 132.)

This is not to be confused with the relationship (&quot;n&quot; – 1)2 + &quot;n&quot;2 = &quot;C&quot;4,&quot;n&quot;. (Example: 22 + 32 = 13.)

== Generating function ==

The generating function that gives the centered square numbers is:
:formula_9

== References ==
*.
*.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="3" end="27" title="elementary number theory" label="elementary number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q190900" start="31" end="53" title="Centered square number" label="centered square number"/>
<link wikidata="Q190898" start="59" end="67" title="Centered polygonal number" label="centered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130510" start="68" end="83" title="figurate number" label="figurate number"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="119" end="125" title="Square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q573509" start="304" end="323" title="Taxicab geometry" label="city block distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582067" start="355" end="369" title="square lattice" label="square lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130510" start="407" end="422" title="figurate number" label="figurate number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410503" start="513" end="537" title="recreational mathematics" label="recreational mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366492" start="774" end="795" title="Floyd&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Floyd&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190898" start="1104" end="1139" title="Centered polygonal number" label="centered &amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-gonal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q50705" start="1338" end="1351" title="square number" label="square number"/>
<link wikidata="Q190898" start="1596" end="1621" title="centered polygonal number" label="centered polygonal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q245102" start="1682" end="1699" title="triangular number" label="triangular number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627321" start="1934" end="1951" title="octahedral number" label="octahedral number"/>
<link wikidata="Q190890" start="2180" end="2206" title="centered triangular number" label="centered triangular number"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="2363" end="2364" title="1 (number)" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q203" start="2366" end="2367" title="5 (number)" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q37141" start="2369" end="2371" title="13 (number)" label="13"/>
<link wikidata="Q79986" start="2373" end="2375" title="25 (number)" label="25"/>
<link wikidata="Q712623" start="2377" end="2379" title="41 (number)" label="41"/>
<link wikidata="Q774689" start="2381" end="2383" title="61 (number)" label="61"/>
<link wikidata="Q427730" start="2385" end="2387" title="85 (number)" label="85"/>
<link wikidata="Q715432" start="2389" end="2392" title="113 (number)" label="113"/>
<link wikidata="Q721079" start="2394" end="2397" title="145 (number)" label="145"/>
<link wikidata="Q735416" start="2399" end="2402" title="181 (number)" label="181"/>
<link wikidata="Q852290" start="2404" end="2407" title="221 (number)" label="221"/>
<link wikidata="Q912591" start="2414" end="2417" title="313 (number)" label="313"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199563" start="2419" end="2422" title="365 (number)" label="365"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034350" start="2928" end="2929" title="Senary" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q76463" start="2931" end="2932" title="Octal" label="8"/>
<link wikidata="Q212177" start="2938" end="2940" title="Duodecimal" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q104962" start="2988" end="2998" title="hypotenuse" label="hypotenuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q208225" start="3004" end="3022" title="Pythagorean triple" label="Pythagorean triple"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="723298" wikidata="Q1050504" url="?curid=723298" title="De Havilland Hornet Moth">
<text>The de Havilland DH.87 Hornet Moth is a single-engined cabin biplane designed by the de Havilland Aircraft Company in 1934 as a potential replacement for its highly successful de Havilland Tiger Moth trainer. Although its side-by-side two-seat cabin made it closer in configuration to the modern aircraft that military trainee pilots would later fly, there was no interest from the RAF and the aircraft was put into production for private buyers.

==Design and development==

The prototype first flew at Hatfield on 9 May 1934 and, with two other pre-production aircraft, embarked on an extensive test program that resulted in the first production aircraft (designated DH.87A) completed in August 1935 having wings of greater outboard taper. These were found to cause problems, especially when landing in three-point attitude: there was a tendency for the tips to stall, causing embarrassment to the pilot and often damage to the aeroplane. From early 1936, de Havilland offered owners of the DH.87A replacement wings of the new squarer shape at a reduced price in exchange for the original wings. Designated DH.87B, new aircraft from about manufacture Number 68 were built with the new square wings. This wing reduced the overall span by . The alterations slightly increased overall weight at some penalty to performance.

A total of 164 aircraft were produced, of which 84 were placed on the British Register. Many were impressed for military service during World War II, mostly being used by the RAF as liaison aircraft.

Small numbers survived the war and with time became highly prized by vintage aircraft enthusiasts. A small number are still flying, over eighty years after production ceased.

==Variants==

* DH.87 Hornet Moth : prototypes
* DH.87A Hornet Moth : production model
* DH.87B Hornet Moth : production model with wing modification

==Operators==

===Civil charter operators and pilots 1935–2009===
;
;
;
;
;
; - TC-101

===Military operators===
*&quot;L&#x27;Armée de l&#x27;Air&quot;
*Portuguese Air Force
*South African Air Force
*Royal Air Force (1940–1945)
**No. 24 Squadron RAF
**No. 49 Squadron RAF
**No. 116 Squadron RAF
**No. 510 Squadron RAF
**No. 526 Squadron RAF
**No. 527 Squadron RAF
**No. 528 Squadron RAF
**No. 529 Squadron RAF
*Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm
**One aircraft impressed and four from Canada

==Specifications (DH.87B)==

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* Jackson, A.J. &quot;De Havilland Aircraft since 1909&quot;. London: Putnam, Third edition, 1987. .
* Follett, K. &quot;Hornet flight&quot;, (translated in Italian &quot;Il volo del calabrone&quot;, Mondadori Editore S.p.A., Milano, 2003 ) It&#x27;s a fictitious novel, first printed in 2002, in which a hornet moth plays a key role in the story.

==External links==

*The de Havilland Moth Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1050504" start="4" end="34" title="De Havilland Hornet Moth" label="de Havilland DH.87 Hornet Moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="61" end="68" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="85" end="97" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q654062" start="176" end="199" title="de Havilland Tiger Moth" label="de Havilland Tiger Moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="382" end="385" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q19788" start="504" end="512" title="Hatfield, Hertfordshire" label="Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1460" end="1472" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1499" end="1502" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="1972" end="1998" title="L&amp;#x27;Armée de l&amp;#x27;Air" label="L&amp;#x27;Armée de l&amp;#x27;Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q591136" start="2006" end="2026" title="Portuguese Air Force" label="Portuguese Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519024" start="2028" end="2051" title="South African Air Force" label="South African Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2053" end="2068" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064243" start="2083" end="2102" title="No. 24 Squadron RAF" label="No. 24 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043549" start="2105" end="2124" title="No. 49 Squadron RAF" label="No. 49 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042877" start="2127" end="2147" title="No. 116 Squadron RAF" label="No. 116 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043571" start="2150" end="2170" title="No. 510 Squadron RAF" label="No. 510 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043590" start="2173" end="2193" title="No. 526 Squadron RAF" label="No. 526 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043592" start="2196" end="2216" title="No. 527 Squadron RAF" label="No. 527 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043593" start="2219" end="2239" title="No. 528 Squadron RAF" label="No. 528 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043594" start="2242" end="2262" title="No. 529 Squadron RAF" label="No. 529 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2264" end="2274" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="2275" end="2288" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
</links>
</doc>
