<doc id="706186" wikidata="Q1536343" url="?curid=706186" title="Reproductive rights">
<text>Reproductive rights are legal rights and freedoms relating to reproduction and reproductive health that vary amongst countries around the world. The World Health Organization defines reproductive rights as follows:

Reproductive rights rest on the recognition of the basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and means to do so, and the right to attain the highest standard of sexual and reproductive health. They also include the right of all to make decisions concerning reproduction free of discrimination, coercion and violence.

Reproductive rights may include some or all of the following: right to abortion; birth control; freedom from coerced sterilization and contraception; the right to access good-quality reproductive healthcare; and the right to education and access in order to make free and informed reproductive choices. Reproductive rights may also include the right to receive education about sexually transmitted infections and other aspects of sexuality, right to menstrual health and protection from practices such as female genital mutilation (FGM).

Reproductive rights began to develop as a subset of human rights at the United Nation&#x27;s 1968 International Conference on Human Rights. The resulting non-binding Proclamation of Tehran was the first international document to recognize one of these rights when it stated that: &quot;Parents have a basic human right to determine freely and responsibly the number and the spacing of their children.&quot; Women&#x27;s sexual, gynecological, and mental health issues were not a priority of the United Nations until its Decade of Women (1975–1985) brought them to the forefront. States, though, have been slow in incorporating these rights in internationally legally binding instruments. Thus, while some of these rights have already been recognized in hard law, that is, in legally binding international human rights instruments, others have been mentioned only in non binding recommendations and, therefore, have at best the status of soft law in international law, while a further group is yet to be accepted by the international community and therefore remains at the level of advocacy.

Issues related to reproductive rights are some of the most vigorously contested rights&#x27; issues worldwide, regardless of the population&#x27;s socioeconomic level, religion or culture.

The issue of reproductive rights is frequently presented as being of vital importance in discussions and articles by population concern organizations such as Population Matters.

Reproductive rights are a subset of sexual and reproductive health and rights.

==History==
===Proclamation of Tehran===
In 1945, the United Nations Charter included the obligation &quot;to promote... universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without discrimination as to race, sex, language, or religion&quot;. However, the Charter did not define these rights. Three years later, the UN adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), the first international legal document to delineate human rights; the UDHR does not mention reproductive rights. Reproductive rights began to appear as a subset of human rights in the 1968 Proclamation of Tehran, which states: &quot;Parents have a basic human right to determine freely and responsibly the number and the spacing of their children&quot;.

This right was affirmed by the UN General Assembly in the 1969 which states &quot;The family as a basic unit of society and the natural environment for the growth and well-being of all its members, particularly children and youth, should be assisted and protected so that it may fully assume its responsibilities within the community. Parents have the exclusive right to determine freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children.&quot; The 1975 UN International Women&#x27;s Year Conference echoed the Proclamation of Tehran.

===Cairo Programme of Action===
The twenty-year &quot;Cairo Programme of Action&quot; was adopted in 1994 at the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) in Cairo. The non-binding Programme of Action asserted that governments have a responsibility to meet individuals&#x27; reproductive needs, rather than demographic targets. It recommended that family planning services be provided in the context of other reproductive health services, including services for healthy and safe childbirth, care for sexually transmitted infections, and post-abortion care. The ICPD also addressed issues such as violence against women, sex trafficking, and adolescent health. The Cairo Program is the first international policy document to define reproductive health, stating:
Reproductive health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, in all matters relating to the reproductive system and its functions and processes. Reproductive health therefore implies that people are able to have a satisfying and safe sex life and that they have the capability to reproduce and the freedom to decide if, when and how often to do so. Implicit in this last condition are the right of men and women to be informed [about] and to have access to safe, effective, affordable and acceptable methods of family planning of their choice, as well as other methods for regulation of fertility which are not against the law, and the right of access to appropriate health-care services that will enable women to go safely through pregnancy and childbirth and provide couples with the best chance of having a healthy infant [para. 72].

Unlike previous population conferences, a wide range of interests from grassroots to government level were represented in Cairo. 179 nations attended the ICPD and overall eleven thousand representatives from governments, NGOs, international agencies and citizen activists participated. The ICPD did not address the far-reaching implications of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In 1999, recommendations at the ICPD+5 were expanded to include commitment to AIDS education, research, and prevention of mother-to-child transmission, as well as to the development of vaccines and microbicides.

The Cairo Programme of Action was adopted by 184 UN member states. Nevertheless, many Latin American and Islamic states made formal reservations to the programme, in particular, to its concept of reproductive rights and sexual freedom, to its treatment of abortion, and to its potential incompatibility with Islamic law.

Implementation of the Cairo Programme of Action varies considerably from country to country. In many countries, post-ICPD tensions emerged as the human rights-based approach was implemented. Since the ICPD, many countries have broadened their reproductive health programs and attempted to integrate maternal and child health services with family planning. More attention is paid to adolescent health and the consequences of unsafe abortion. Lara Knudsen observes that the ICPD succeeded in getting feminist language into governments&#x27; and population agencies&#x27; literature, but in many countries, the underlying concepts are not widely put into practice. In two preparatory meetings for the ICPD+10 in Asia and Latin America, the United States, under the George W. Bush administration, was the only nation opposing the ICPD&#x27;s Programme of Action.

===Beijing Platform===
The 1995 Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, in its non-binding Declaration and Platform for Action, supported the Cairo Programme&#x27;s definition of reproductive health, but established a broader context of reproductive rights:
The human rights of women include their right to have control over and decide freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free of coercion, discrimination and violence. Equal relationships between women and men in matters of sexual relations and reproduction, including full respect for the integrity of the person, require mutual respect, consent and shared responsibility for sexual behavior and its consequences [para. 96]. The Beijing Platform demarcated twelve interrelated critical areas of the human rights of women that require advocacy. The Platform framed women&#x27;s reproductive rights as &quot;indivisible, universal and inalienable human rights.&quot; The platform for the 1995 Fourth World Conference on Women included a section that denounced gender-based violence and included forced sterilization as a human rights violation. However, the international community at large has not confirmed that women have a right to reproductive healthcare and in ensuing years since the 1995 conference, countries have proposed language to weaken reproductive and sexual rights. This conference also referenced for the first time indigenous rights and women&#x27;s rights at the same time, combining them into one category needing specific representation. Reproductive rights are highly politicized, making it difficult to enact legislation.

===Yogyakarta Principles===
The Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity, proposed by a group of experts in November 2006 but not yet incorporated by States in international law, declares in its Preamble that &quot;the international community has recognized the rights of persons to decide freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free from coercion, discrimination, and violence.&quot; In relation to reproductive health, Principle 9 on &quot;The Right to Treatment with Humanity while in Detention&quot; requires that &quot;States shall... [p]rovide adequate access to medical care and counseling appropriate to the needs of those in custody, recognizing any particular needs of persons on the basis of their sexual orientation and gender identity, including with regard to reproductive health, access to HIV/AIDS information and therapy and access to hormonal or other therapy as well as to gender-reassignment treatments where desired.&quot; Nonetheless, African, Caribbean and Islamic Countries, as well as the Russian Federation, have objected to the use of these principles as Human Rights standards.

===State interventions===
State interventions that contradict at least some reproductive rights have happened both under right-wing and left-wing governments. Examples include attempts to forcefully increase the birth rate – one of the most notorious natalist policies of the 20th century was that which occurred in communist Romania in the period of 1967–1990 during communist leader Nicolae Ceaușescu, who adopted a very aggressive natalist policy which included outlawing abortion and contraception, routine pregnancy tests for women, taxes on childlessness, and legal discrimination against childless people – as well as attempts to decrease the fertility rate – China&#x27;s one child policy (1978–2015). State mandated forced marriage was also practiced by authoritarian governments as a way to meet population targets: the Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia systematically forced people into marriages, in order to increase the population and continue the revolution. Some governments have implemented racist policies of forced sterilizations of &#x27;undesirable&#x27; ethnicities. Such policies were carried out against ethnic minorities in Europe and North America in the 20th century, and more recently in Latin America against the Indigenous population in the 1990s; in Peru, President Alberto Fujimori (in office from 1990 to 2000) has been accused of genocide and crimes against humanity as a result of a sterilization program put in place by his administration targeting indigenous people (mainly the Quechuas and the Aymaras).

==Prohibition of forced sterilization and forced abortion==
The Istanbul convention, the first legally binding instrument in Europe in the field of violence against women and domestic violence, prohibits forced sterilization and forced abortion:

==Human rights==
Human rights have been used as a framework to analyze and gauge abuses, especially for coercive or oppressive governmental policies. The framing of reproductive (human) rights and population control programs are split along race and class lines, with white, western women predominately focused on abortion access (especially during the second wave feminism of the 1970–1980s), silencing women of colour in the Global South or marginalized women in the Global North (black and indigenous women, prisoners, welfare recipients) who were subjected to forced sterilization or contraceptive usage campaigns. The hemisphere divide has also been framed as Global North feminists advocating for women&#x27;s bodily autonomy and political rights, while Global South women advocate for basic needs through poverty reduction and equality in the economy.

This divide between first world versus third world women established as feminists focused on women&#x27;s issues (from the first world largely promoting sexual liberation) versus women focused on political issues (from the third world often opposing dictatorships and policies). In Latin America, this is complicated as feminists tend to align with first world ideals of feminism (sexual/reproductive rights, violence against women, domestic violence) and reject religious institutions such as the Catholic Church and Evangelicals, which attempt to control women&#x27;s reproduction. On the other side, human rights advocates are often aligned with religious institutions that are specifically combating political violence, instead of focusing on issues of individual bodily autonomy.

The debate regarding whether women should have complete autonomous control over their bodies has been espoused by the United Nations and individual countries, but many of those same countries fail to implement these human rights for their female citizens. This shortfall may be partly due to the delay of including women-specific issues in the human rights framework. However, multiple human rights documents and declarations specifically proclaim reproductive rights of women, including the ability to make their own reproductive healthcare decisions regarding family planning, including: the UN Declaration of Human Rights (1948), The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (1979), the U.N.&#x27;s Millennium Development Goals, and the new Sustainable Development Goals, which are focused on integrating universal reproductive healthcare access into national family planning programs. Unfortunately, the 2007 Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, did not address indigenous women&#x27;s reproductive or maternal healthcare rights or access.

Since most existing legally binding international human rights instruments do not explicitly mention sexual and reproductive rights, a broad coalition of NGOs, civil servants, and experts working in international organizations have been promoting a reinterpretation of those instruments to link the realization of the already internationally recognized human rights with the realization of reproductive rights. An example of this linkage is provided by the 1994 Cairo Programme of Action: 
Reproductive rights embrace certain human rights that are already recognized in national laws, international human rights documents and other relevant United Nations consensus documents. These rights rest on the recognition of the basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and means to do so, and the right to attain the highest standard of sexual and reproductive health. It also includes the right of all to make decisions concerning reproduction free of discrimination, coercion and violence as expressed in human rights documents. In the exercise of this right, they should take into account the needs of their living and future children and their responsibilities towards the community.
Similarly, Amnesty International has argued that the realisation of reproductive rights is linked with the realisation of a series of recognised human rights, including the right to health, the right to freedom from discrimination, the right to privacy, and the right not to be subjected to torture or ill-treatment.

The World Health Organization states that:
 Sexual and reproductive health and rights encompass efforts to eliminate preventable maternal and neonatal mortality and morbidity, to ensure quality sexual and reproductive health services, including contraceptive services, and to address sexually transmitted infections (STI) and cervical cancer, violence against women and girls, and sexual and reproductive health needs of adolescents. Universal access to sexual and reproductive health is essential not only to achieve sustainable development but also to ensure that this new framework speaks to the needs and aspirations of people around the world and leads to realisation of their health and human rights.

However, not all states have accepted the inclusion of reproductive rights in the body of internationally recognized human rights. At the Cairo Conference, several states made formal reservations either to the concept of reproductive rights or to its specific content. Ecuador, for instance, stated that: 
With regard to the Programme of Action of the Cairo International Conference on Population and Development and in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and laws of Ecuador and the norms of international law, the delegation of Ecuador reaffirms, inter alia, the following principles embodied in its Constitution: the inviolability of life, the protection of children from the moment of conception, freedom of conscience and religion, the protection of the family as the fundamental unit of society, responsible paternity, the right of parents to bring up their children and the formulation of population and development plans by the Government in accordance with the principles of respect for sovereignty. Accordingly, the delegation of Ecuador enters a reservation with respect to all terms such as &quot;regulation of fertility&quot;, &quot;interruption of pregnancy&quot;, &quot;reproductive health&quot;, &quot;reproductive rights&quot; and &quot;unwanted children&quot;, which in one way or another, within the context of the Programme of Action, could involve abortion.
Similar reservations were made by Argentina, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras, Malta, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru and the Holy See. Islamic Countries, such as Brunei, Djibouti, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Syria, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen made broad reservations against any element of the programme that could be interpreted as contrary to the Sharia. Guatemala even questioned whether the conference could legally proclaim new human rights.

==Women&#x27;s rights==
The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the World Health Organization (WHO) advocate for reproductive rights with a primary emphasis on women&#x27;s rights. In this respect the UN and WHO focus on a range of issues from access to family planning services, sex education, menopause, and the reduction of obstetric fistula, to the relationship between reproductive health and economic status.

The reproductive rights of women are advanced in the context of the right to freedom from discrimination and the social and economic status of women. The group Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN) explained the link in the following statement:
Control over reproduction is a basic need and a basic right for all women. Linked as it is to women&#x27;s health and social status, as well as the powerful social structures of religion, state control and administrative inertia, and private profit, it is from the perspective of poor women that this right can best be understood and affirmed. Women know that childbearing is a social, not a purely personal, phenomenon; nor do we deny that world population trends are likely to exert considerable pressure on resources and institutions by the end of this century. But our bodies have become a pawn in the struggles among states, religions, male heads of households, and private corporations. Programs that do not take the interests of women into account are unlikely to succeed...

Women&#x27;s reproductive rights have long retained key issue status in the debate on overpopulation.
&quot;The only ray of hope I can see – and it&#x27;s not much – is that wherever women are put in control of their lives, both politically and socially; where medical facilities allow them to deal with birth control and where their husbands allow them to make those decisions, birth rate falls. Women don&#x27;t want to have 12 kids of whom nine will die.&quot; &quot;David Attenborough

According to OHCHR: &quot;Women&#x27;s sexual and reproductive health is related to multiple human rights, including the right to life, the right to be free from torture, the right to health, the right to privacy, the right to education, and the prohibition of discrimination&quot;.

Attempts have been made to analyse the socioeconomic conditions that affect the realisation of a woman&#x27;s reproductive rights. The term reproductive justice has been used to describe these broader social and economic issues. Proponents of reproductive justice argue that while the right to legalized abortion and contraception applies to everyone, these choices are only meaningful to those with resources and that there is a growing gap between access and affordability.

This more nuanced framework of reproductive justice that recognizes that even with the necessary access to reproductive health, there are other influences beyond choice that determine a women&#x27;s ability to control her bodily autonomy is discussed in &quot;Battles Over Abortion and Reproductive Rights&quot; (2017) by Suzanne Staggenborg and Marie B. Skoczylas. They define this concept as detailed below.

Reproductive Justice: interrelationships among issues, linking reproductive health and rights to other social issues (broader human rights framework)
* &quot;White-dominated sectors of the pro-choice movement that focused solely on abortion and downplayed the reality that reproduction is encouraged for some women and discouraged for others&quot; (221)

==Men&#x27;s rights==
Men&#x27;s reproductive rights have been claimed by various organizations, both for issues of reproductive health, and other rights related to sexual reproduction. Three international issues in men&#x27;s reproductive health are sexually transmitted infections, cancer, and exposure to toxins.

Recently men&#x27;s reproductive right with regards to paternity have become subject of debate in the U.S. The term &quot;male abortion&quot; was coined by Melanie McCulley, a South Carolina attorney, in a 1998 article. The theory begins with the premise that when a woman becomes pregnant she has the option of abortion, adoption, or parenthood. A man, however, has none of those options, but will still be affected by the woman&#x27;s decision. It argues, in the context of legally recognized gender equality, that in the earliest stages of pregnancy the putative (alleged) father should have the right to relinquish all future parental rights and financial responsibility, leaving the informed mother with the same three options. This concept has been supported by a former president of the feminist organization National Organization for Women, attorney Karen DeCrow. The feminist argument for male reproductive choice contends that the uneven ability to choose experienced by men and women in regards to parenthood is evidence of a state-enforced coercion favoring traditional sex roles.

In 2006, the National Center for Men brought a case in the US, &quot;Dubay v. Wells&quot; (dubbed by some &quot;&quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; for men&quot;), that argued that in the event of an unplanned pregnancy, when an unmarried woman informs a man that she is pregnant by him, he should have an opportunity to give up all paternity rights and responsibilities. Supporters argue that this would allow the woman time to make an informed decision and give men the same reproductive rights as women. In its dismissal of the case, the U.S. Court of Appeals (Sixth Circuit) stated that &quot;the Fourteenth Amendment does not deny to [the] State the power to treat different classes of persons in different ways.&quot;

The opportunity to give men the right for a paper abortion is heavily discussed. Sperm theft is another related issue.

==Intersex and reproductive rights==

Intersex, in humans and other animals, is a variation in sex characteristics including chromosomes, gonads, or genitals that do not allow an individual to be distinctly identified as male or female. Such variation may involve genital ambiguity, and combinations of chromosomal genotype and sexual phenotype other than XY-male and XX-female. Intersex persons are often subjected to involuntary &quot;sex normalizing&quot; surgical and hormonal treatments in infancy and childhood, often also including sterilization.

UN agencies have begun to take note. On 1 February 2013, Juan E Mendés, the UN Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, issued a statement condemning non-consensual surgical intervention on intersex people. His report stated, &quot;Children who are born with atypical sex characteristics are often subject to irreversible sex assignment, involuntary sterilization, involuntary genital normalizing surgery, performed without their informed consent, or that of their parents, &quot;in an attempt to fix their sex&quot;, leaving them with permanent, irreversible infertility and causing severe mental suffering&quot;. In May 2014, the World Health Organization issued a joint statement on &quot;Eliminating forced, coercive and otherwise involuntary sterilization, An interagency statement&quot; with the OHCHR, UN Women, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF. The report references the involuntary surgical &quot;sex-normalising or other procedures&quot; on &quot;intersex persons&quot;. It questions the medical necessity of such treatments, patients&#x27; ability to consent, and a weak evidence base. The report recommends a range of guiding principles to prevent compulsory sterilization in medical treatment, including ensuring patient autonomy in decision-making, ensuring non-discrimination, accountability and access to remedies.

==Youth rights and access==
===Minors===

In many jurisdictions minors require parental consent or parental notification in order to access various reproductive services, such as contraception, abortion, gynecological consultations, testing for STIs etc. The requirement that minors have parental consent/notification for testing for HIV/AIDS is especially controversial as it can cause delayed diagnosis and treatment. Balancing minors&#x27; rights versus parental rights is considered an ethical problem in medicine and law, and there have been many court cases on this issue in the US. An important concept recognized since 1989 by the Convention on the Rights of the Child is that of the evolving capacities of a minor, namely that minors should, in accordance with their maturity and level of understanding, be involved in decisions that affect them.

Youth are often denied equal access to reproductive health services because health workers view adolescent sexual activity as unacceptable, or see sex education as the responsibility of parents. Providers of reproductive health have little accountability to youth clients, a primary factor in denying youth access to reproductive health care. In many countries, regardless of legislation, minors are denied even the most basic reproductive care, if they are not accompanied by parents: in India, for instance, in 2017, a 17-year-old girl who was rejected by her family due to her pregnancy, was also rejected by hospitals and gave birth in the street. In recent years the lack of reproductive rights for adolescents has been a concern of international organizations, such as UNFPA.

Mandatory involvement of parents in cases where the minor has sufficient maturity to understand their situation is considered by health organization as a violation of minor&#x27;s rights and detrimental to their health. The World Health Organization has criticized parental consent/notification laws:

Discrimination in health care settings takes many forms and is often manifested when an individual or group is denied access to health care services that are otherwise available to others. It can also occur through denial of services that are only needed by certain groups, such as women. Examples include specific individuals or groups being subjected to physical and verbal abuse or violence; involuntary treatment; breaches of confidentiality and/or denial of autonomous decision-making, such as the requirement of consent to treatment by parents, spouses or guardians; and lack of free and informed consent. ... Laws and policies must respect the principles of autonomy in health care decision-making; guarantee free and informed consent, privacy and confidentiality; prohibit mandatory HIV testing; prohibit screening procedures that are not of benefit to the individual or the public; and ban involuntary treatment and mandatory third-party authorization and notification requirements.
According to UNICEF: &quot;When dealing with sexual and reproductive health, the obligation to inform parents and obtain their consent becomes a significant barrier with consequences for adolescents&#x27; lives and for public health in general.&quot; One specific issue which is seen as a form of hypocrisy of legislators is that of having a higher age of medical consent for the purpose of reproductive and sexual health than the age of sexual consent – in such cases the law allows youth to engage in sexual activity, but does not allow them to consent to medical procedures that may arise from being sexually active; UNICEF states that &quot;On sexual and reproductive health matters, the minimum age of medical consent should never be higher than the age of sexual consent.&quot;

===Africa===


Many unintended pregnancies stem from traditional contraceptive methods or no contraceptive measures.

Youth sexual education in Uganda is relatively low. Comprehensive sex education is not generally taught in schools; even if it was, the majority of young people do not stay in school after the age of fifteen, so information would be limited regardless.

Africa experiences high rates of unintended pregnancy, along with high rates of HIV/AIDS. Young women aged 15–24 are eight times more likely to have HIV/AIDS than young men. Sub-Saharan Africa is the world region most affected by HIV/AIDS, with approximately 25 million people living with HIV in 2015. Sub-Saharan Africa accounts for two-thirds of the global total of new HIV infections.

Attempted abortions and unsafe abortions are a risk for youth in Africa. On average, there are 2.4 million unsafe abortions in East Africa, 1.8 million in Western Africa, over 900,000 in Middle Africa, and over 100,000 in Southern Africa each year. The Guttmacher Institute estimates that, over the time range of 2015 to 2019, 77% of abortions in Sub-Saharan Africa are unsafe, with a fatality rate of 185 deaths per 100,000 abortions, making it the unsafest region for abortions.

In Uganda, abortion is illegal except to save the mother&#x27;s life. However, 78% of teenagers report knowing someone who has had an abortion and the police do not always prosecute everyone who has an abortion. An estimated 22% of all maternal deaths in the area stem from illegal, unsafe abortions.

As of 2022, the only countries in Africa in which abortion is broadly legal are Benin, Cape Verde, Mozambique, South Africa, and Tunisia. Zambia allows abortion for health or socioeconomic reasons, though there are limitations to access. Discussion about legalizing abortion is ongoing in Liberia and Sierra Leone.

The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples&#x27; Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, also known as the Maputo Protocol, states in Article 14(2)c that governments must &quot;protect the reproductive rights of women by authorising medical abortion in cases of sexual assault, rape, incest, and where the continued pregnancy endangers the mental and physical health of the mother or the life of the mother or the foetus.&quot; It is the only human rights charter that details conditions for abortion. Since the protocol was written in 2003, 39 countries have ratified it. It has played a significant part in the easing of abortion laws in several African countries.

===European Union===
Over 85% of European women (all ages) have used some form of birth control in their lives. Europeans as an aggregate report using the pill and condoms as the most commonly used contraceptives.

Sweden has the highest percentage of lifetime contraceptive use, with 96% of its inhabitants claiming to have used birth control at some point in their life. Sweden also has a high self-reported rate of postcoital pill use. A 2007 anonymous survey of Swedish 18-year-olds showed that three out of four youth were sexually active, with 5% reporting having had an abortion and 4% reporting the contraction of an STI.

In the European Union, reproductive rights are protected through the European Convention on Human Rights and its jurisprudence, as well as the Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (the Istanbul Convention).
However, these rights are denied or restricted by the laws, policies and practices of member states.
In fact, some countries criminalize medical staff, have stricter regulations than the international norm or exclude legal abortion and contraception from public health insurance.
A study conducted by Policy Departments, at the request of the European Parliament Committee on Women&#x27;s Rights and Gender Equality, recommends the EU to strengthen the legal framework on equal access to sexual and reproductive health goods and services.

===Latin America===

Latin America has come to international attention due to its harsh anti-abortion laws. Latin America is home to some of the few countries of the world with a complete ban on abortion, without an exception for saving maternal life. In some of these countries, particularity in Central America, the enforcement of such laws is very aggressive: El Salvador and Nicaragua have drawn international attention for strong enforcement of their complete bans on abortion. In 2017, Chile relaxed its total ban, allowing abortion to be performed when the woman&#x27;s life is in danger, when a fetus is unviable, or in cases of rape.

In Ecuador, education and class play a large role in the definition of which young women become pregnant and which do not – 50% of young women who are illiterate get pregnant, compared to 11% of girls with secondary education. The same is true for poorer individuals – 28% become impregnated while only 11% of young women in wealthier households do. Furthermore, access to reproductive rights, including contraceptives, are limited, due to age and the perception of female morality. Health care providers often discuss contraception theoretically, not as a device to be used on a regular basis. Decisions concerning sexual activity often involve secrecy and taboos, as well as a lack of access to accurate information. Even more telling, young women have much easier access to maternal healthcare than they do to contraceptive help, which helps explain high pregnancy rates in the region.

Rates of adolescent pregnancy in Latin America number over a million each year.

===United States===

Among sexually experienced teenagers, 78% of teenage females and 85% of teenage males used contraception the first time they had sex; 86% and 93% of these same females and males, respectively, reported using contraception the last time they had sex. The male condom is the most commonly used method during first sex, although 54% of young women in the United States rely upon the pill.

Young people in the U.S. are no more sexually active than individuals in other developed countries, but they are significantly less knowledgeable about contraception and safe sex practices. As of 2006, only twenty states required sex education in schools – of these, only ten required information about contraception. On the whole, less than 10% of American students receive sex education that includes topical coverage of abortion, homosexuality, relationships, pregnancy, and STI prevention. Abstinence-only education was used throughout much of the United States in the 1990s and early 2000s. Based upon the moral principle that sex outside of marriage is unacceptable, the programs often misled students about their rights to have sex, the consequences, and prevention of pregnancy and STIs.

Abortion in the United States was a constitutional right since the United States Supreme Court decision &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; which decriminalised abortion nationwide in 1973, and established a minimal period during which abortion is legal (with more or fewer restrictions throughout the pregnancy) until this decision was overturned in June 2022 by the decision &quot;Dobbs v. Jackson Women&#x27;s Health Organization&quot;. Abortion rights are now decided at the state level with only California, Michigan, Ohio, and Vermont conferring explicit rights to abortions. The state constitutions of Alabama, Louisiana, Tennessee, and West Virginia explicitly contain no right to an abortion.

==Lack of knowledge about rights==
One of the many reasons why reproductive rights are poor in many places, is not only that they are restricted but that the vast majority of the population may not know what the law is. Not only are ordinary people uninformed, but so are medical doctors. A study in Brazil on medical doctors found considerable ignorance and misunderstanding of the law on abortion (which is severely restricted, but not completely illegal). In Ghana, abortion, while restricted, is permitted on several grounds, but only 3% of pregnant women and 6% of those seeking an abortion were aware of the legal status of abortion. In Nepal, abortion was legalized in 2002, but a study in 2009 found that only half of women knew that abortion was legalized. Many people also do not understand the laws on sexual violence: in Hungary, where marital rape was made illegal in 1997, in a study in 2006, 62% of people did not know that marital rape was a crime. The United Nations Development Programme states that, in order to advance gender justice, &quot;Women must know their rights and be able to access legal systems&quot;, and the 1993 UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women states at Art. 4 (d) [...] &quot;States should also inform women of their rights in seeking redress through such mechanisms&quot;. In the UK, Beverley Lawrence Beech understood the importance of women knowing their rights so that they can make decisions about the place and manner of the birth of their children.

==Gender equality and violence against women==

Addressing issues of gender-based violence is crucial for attaining reproductive rights. The United Nations Population Fund refers to &quot;Equality and equity for men and women, to enable individuals to make free and informed choices in all spheres of life, free from discrimination based on gender&quot; and &quot;Sexual and reproductive security, including freedom from sexual violence and coercion, and the right to privacy,&quot; as part of achieving reproductive rights, and states that the right to liberty and security of the person which is fundamental to reproductive rights obliges states to:
* Take measures to prevent, punish and eradicate all forms of gender-based violence
* Eliminate female genital mutilation/cutting

The WHO states:
:Gender and Reproductive Rights (GRR) aims to promote and protect human rights and gender equality as they relate to sexual and reproductive health by developing strategies and mechanisms for promoting gender equity and equality and human rights in the Departments global and national activities, as well as within the functioning and priority-setting of the Department itself.

Amnesty International writes that:
:Violence against women violates women&#x27;s rights to life, physical and mental integrity, to the highest attainable standard of health, to freedom from torture and it violates their sexual and reproductive rights.

One key issue for achieving reproductive rights is criminalization of sexual violence. If a woman is not protected from forced sexual intercourse, she is not protected from forced pregnancy, namely pregnancy from rape. In order for a woman to be able to have reproductive rights, she must have the right to choose with whom and when to reproduce; and first of all, decide whether, when, and under what circumstances to be sexually active. In many countries, these rights of women are not respected, because women do not have a choice in regard to their partner, with forced marriage and child marriage being common in parts of the world; and neither do they have any rights in regard to sexual activity, as many countries do not allow women to refuse to engage in sexual intercourse when they do not want to (because marital rape is not criminalized in those countries) or to engage in consensual sexual intercourse if they want to (because sex outside marriage is illegal in those countries). In addition to legal barriers, there are also social barriers, because in many countries a complete sexual subordination of a woman to her husband is expected (for instance, in one survey 74% of women in Mali said that a husband is justified to beat his wife if she refuses to have sex with him), while sexual/romantic relations disapproved by family members, or generally sex outside marriage, can result in serious violence, such as honor killings.

==HIV/AIDS==


According to the CDC, &quot;HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. It weakens a person&#x27;s immune system by destroying important cells that fight disease and infection. No effective cure exists for HIV. But with proper medical care, HIV can be controlled.&quot; HIV amelioration is an important aspect of reproductive rights because the virus can be transmitted from mother to child during pregnancy or birth, or via breast milk.

The WHO states that: &quot;All women, including those with HIV, have the right &quot;to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children and to have access to the information, education and means to enable them to exercise these rights&quot;&quot;. The reproductive rights of people living with HIV, and their health, are very important. The link between HIV and reproductive rights exists in regard to four main issues:
* prevention of unwanted pregnancy
* help to plan wanted pregnancy
* healthcare during and after pregnancy
* access to abortion services

==Child and forced marriage==

The WHO states that the reproductive rights and health of girls in child marriages are negatively affected.
The UNPF calls child marriage a &quot;human rights violation&quot; and states that in developing countries, one in every three girls is married before reaching age 18, and one in nine is married under age 15. A forced marriage is a marriage in which one or more of the parties is married without his or her consent or against his or her will. The Istanbul convention, the first legally binding instrument in Europe in the field of violence against women and domestic violence, requires countries which ratify it to prohibit forced marriage (Article 37) and to ensure that forced marriages can be easily voided without further victimization (Article 32).

==Sexual violence in armed conflict==

Sexual violence in armed conflict is sexual violence committed by combatants during armed conflict, war, or military occupation often as spoils of war; but sometimes, particularly in ethnic conflict, the phenomenon has broader sociological motives. It often includes gang rape. Rape is often used as a tactic of war and a threat to international security. Sexual violence in armed conflict is a violation of reproductive rights, and often leads to forced pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections. Such sexual violations affect mostly women and girls, but rape of men can also occur, such as in Democratic Republic of the Congo.

==Maternal mortality==
Maternal death is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as &quot;the death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management but not from accidental or incidental causes.&quot; It is estimated that in 2015, about 303,000 women died during and following pregnancy and childbirth, and 99% of such deaths occur in developing countries.

==Issues==
===Birth control===

Birth control, also known as contraception and fertility control, is a method or device used to prevent pregnancy. Birth control has been used since ancient times, but effective and safe methods of birth control only became available in the 20th century. Planning, making available, and using birth control is called family planning. Some cultures limit or discourage access to birth control because they consider it to be morally, religiously, or politically undesirable.

All birth control methods meet opposition, especially religious opposition, in some parts of the world. Opposition does not only target modern methods, but also &#x27;traditional&#x27; ones; for example, the Quiverfull movement, a conservative Christian ideology, encourages the maximization of procreation, and opposes all forms of birth control, including natural family planning.

===Abortion===

According to a study by WHO and the Guttmacher Institute worldwide, 25 million unsafe abortions (45% of all abortions) occurred every year between 2010 and 2014. 97% of unsafe abortions occur in developing countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. By contrast, most abortions that take place in Western and Northern Europe and North America are safe.

The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women considers the criminalization of abortion a &quot;violations of women&#x27;s sexual and reproductive health and rights&quot; and a form of &quot;gender-based violence&quot;; paragraph 18 of its &quot;General recommendation No. 35 on gender-based violence against women, updating general recommendation No. 19&quot; states that: &quot;Violations of women&#x27;s sexual and reproductive health and rights, such as forced sterilizations, forced abortion, forced pregnancy, criminalisation of abortion, denial or delay of safe abortion and post-abortion care, forced continuation of pregnancy, abuse and mistreatment of women and girls seeking sexual and reproductive health information, goods and services, are forms of gender based violence that, depending on the circumstances, may amount to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.&quot; The same &quot;General Recommendation&quot; also urges countries at paragraph 31 to [...] &quot;In particular, repeal:
a) Provisions that allow, tolerate or condone forms of gender-based violence against women, including [...] legislation that criminalises abortion.&quot;

An article from the World Health Organization calls safe, legal abortion a &quot;fundamental right of women, irrespective of where they live&quot; and unsafe abortion a &quot;silent pandemic&quot;. The article states &quot;ending the silent pandemic of unsafe abortion is an urgent public-health and human-rights imperative.&quot; It also states &quot;access to safe abortion improves women&#x27;s health, and vice versa, as documented in Romania during the regime of President Nicolae Ceaușescu&quot; and &quot;legalisation of abortion on request is a necessary but insufficient step toward improving women&#x27;s health&quot; citing that in some countries, such as India where abortion has been legal for decades, access to competent care remains restricted because of other barriers. WHO&#x27;s Global Strategy on Reproductive Health, adopted by the World Health Assembly in May 2004, noted: &quot;As a preventable cause of maternal mortality and morbidity, unsafe abortion must be dealt with as part of the MDG on improving maternal health and other international development goals and targets.&quot; The WHO&#x27;s Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction (HRP), whose research concerns people&#x27;s sexual and reproductive health and lives, has an overall strategy to combat unsafe abortion that comprises four inter-related activities:
* to collate, synthesize and generate scientifically sound evidence on unsafe abortion prevalence and practices;
* to develop improved technologies and implement interventions to make abortion safer;
* to translate evidence into norms, tools and guidelines;
* and to assist in the development of programmes and policies that reduce unsafe abortion and improve access to safe abortion and high quality post-abortion care

The UN has estimated in 2017 that repealing anti-abortion laws would save the lives of nearly 50,000 women a year. 209,519 abortions take place in England and Wales alone. Unsafe abortions take place primarily in countries where abortion is illegal, but also occur in countries where it is legal. Despite its legal status, an abortion is &quot;de facto&quot; hardly optional for women due to most doctors being conscientious objectors. Other reasons include the lack of knowledge that abortions are legal, lower socioeconomic backgrounds and spatial disparities. Concerns have been raised about these practical considerations; the UN in its 2017 resolution on &quot;Intensification of efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls: domestic violence&quot; urged states to guarantee access to &quot;safe abortion where such services are permitted by national law&quot;. In 2008, Human Rights Watch stated that &quot;In fact, even where abortion is permitted by law, women often have severely limited access to safe abortion services because of lack of proper regulation, health services, or political will&quot; and estimated that &quot;Approximately 13 percent of maternal deaths worldwide are attributable to unsafe abortion—between 68,000 and 78,000 deaths annually.&quot;

The Maputo Protocol, which was adopted by the African Union in the form of a protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples&#x27; Rights, states at Article 14 (Health and Reproductive Rights) that: &quot;(2). States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to: [...] c) protect the reproductive rights of women by authorising medical abortion in cases of sexual assault, rape, incest, and where the continued pregnancy endangers the mental and physical health of the mother or the life of the mother or the foetus.&quot; The Maputo Protocol is the first international treaty to recognize abortion, under certain conditions, as a woman&#x27;s human right.

The &quot;General comment No. 36 (2018) on article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, on the right to life&quot;, adopted by the Human Rights Committee in 2018, defines, for the first time ever, a human right to abortion – in certain circumstances (however these UN general comments are considered soft law, and, as such, not legally binding).

Although States parties may adopt measures designed to regulate voluntary terminations of pregnancy, such measures must not result in violation of the right to life of a pregnant woman or girl, or her other rights under the Covenant. Thus, restrictions on the ability of women or girls to seek abortion must not, inter alia, jeopardize their lives, subject them to physical or mental pain or suffering which violates article 7, discriminate against them or arbitrarily interfere with their privacy. &quot;States parties must provide safe, legal and effective access to abortion where the life and health of the pregnant woman or girl is at risk, and where carrying a pregnancy to term would cause the pregnant woman or girl substantial pain or suffering, most notably where the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest or is not viable.&quot; In addition, States parties may not regulate pregnancy or abortion in all other cases in a manner that runs contrary to their duty to ensure that women and girls do not have to undertake unsafe abortions, and they should revise their abortion laws accordingly. For example, they should not take measures such as criminalizing pregnancies by unmarried women or apply criminal sanctions against women and girls undergoing abortion or against medical service providers assisting them in doing so, since taking such measures compel women and girls to resort to unsafe abortion. States parties should not introduce new barriers and should remove existing barriers that deny effective access by women and girls to safe and legal abortion, including barriers caused as a result of the exercise of conscientious objection by individual medical providers.

When negotiating the Cairo Programme of Action at the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD), the issue was so contentious that delegates eventually decided to omit any recommendation to legalize abortion, instead advising governments to provide proper post-abortion care and to invest in programs that will decrease the number of unwanted pregnancies.

On 18 April 2008 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, a group comprising members from 47 European countries, adopted a resolution calling for the decriminalization of abortion within reasonable gestational limits and guaranteed access to safe abortion procedures. The nonbinding resolution was passed on 16 April by a vote of 102 to 69.

During and after the ICPD, some interested parties attempted to interpret the term &quot;reproductive health&quot; in the sense that it implies abortion as a means of family planning or, indeed, a right to abortion. These interpretations, however, do not reflect the consensus reached at the Conference.
For the European Union, where legislation on abortion is certainly less restrictive than elsewhere, the Council Presidency has clearly stated that the Council&#x27;s commitment to promote &quot;reproductive health&quot; did not include the promotion of abortion. Likewise, the European Commission, in response to a question from a Member of the European Parliament, clarified:

The term reproductive health was defined by the United Nations (UN) in 1994 at the Cairo International Conference on Population and Development. All Member States of the Union endorsed the Programme of Action adopted at Cairo. The Union has never adopted an alternative definition of &#x27;reproductive health&#x27; to that given in the Programme of Action, which makes no reference to abortion.

With regard to the U.S., only a few days prior to the Cairo Conference, the head of the U.S. delegation, Vice President Al Gore, had stated for the record:

Let us get a false issue off the table: the US does not seek to establish a new international right to abortion, and we do not believe that abortion should be encouraged as a method of family planning.

Some years later, the position of the U.S. administration in this debate was reconfirmed by U.S. Ambassador to the UN, Ellen Sauerbrey, when she stated at a meeting of the UN Commission on the Status of Women that: &quot;nongovernmental organizations are attempting to assert that Beijing in some way creates or contributes to the creation of an internationally recognized fundamental right to abortion&quot;. She added: &quot;There is no fundamental right to abortion. And yet it keeps coming up largely driven by NGOs trying to hijack the term and trying to make it into a definition&quot;.

Collaborative research from the Institute of Development Studies states that &quot;access to safe abortion is a matter of human rights, democracy and public health, and the denial of such access is a major cause of death and impairment, with significant costs to [international] development&quot;. The research highlights the inequities of access to safe abortion both globally and nationally and emphasises the importance of global and national movements for reform to address this. The shift by campaigners of reproductive rights from an issue-based agenda (the right to abortion), to safe, legal abortion not only as a human right, but bound up with democratic and citizenship rights, has been an important way of reframing the abortion debate and reproductive justice agenda.

Meanwhile, the European Court of Human Rights complicated the question even more through a landmark judgment (case of &quot;A. B. and C. v. Ireland&quot;), in which it is stated that the denial of abortion for health and/or well-being reasons is an interference with an individual&#x27;s right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, an interference which in some cases can be justified.

===Population control===

A desire to achieve certain population targets has resulted throughout history in severely abusive practices, in cases where governments ignored human rights and enacted aggressive demographic policies. In the 20th century, several authoritarian governments have sought either to increase or to decrease the births rates, often through forceful intervention. One of the most notorious natalist policies is that which occurred in communist Romania in the period of 1967–1990 during communist leader Nicolae Ceaușescu, who adopted a very aggressive natalist policy which included outlawing abortion and contraception, routine pregnancy tests for women, taxes on childlessness, and legal discrimination against childless people. Ceaușescu&#x27;s policy resulted in over 9,000 women who died due to illegal abortions, large numbers of children put into Romanian orphanages by parents who could not cope with raising them, street children in the 1990s (when many orphanages were closed and the children ended on the streets), and overcrowding in homes and schools. The irony of Ceaușescu&#x27;s aggressive natalist policy was a generation that may not have been born would eventually lead the Romanian Revolution which would overthrow and have him executed.

In stark opposition with Ceaușescu&#x27;s natalist policy was China&#x27;s one-child policy, in effect from 1978 to 2015, which included abuses such as forced abortions. This policy has also been deemed responsible for the common practice of sex-selective abortion which led to an imbalanced sex ratio in the country.

From the 1970s to 1980s, tension grew between women&#x27;s health activists who advance women&#x27;s reproductive rights as part of a human rights-based approach on the one hand, and population control advocates on the other. At the 1984 UN World Population Conference in Mexico City population control policies came under attack from women&#x27;s health advocates who argued that the policies&#x27; narrow focus led to coercion and decreased quality of care, and that these policies ignored the varied social and cultural contexts in which family planning was provided in developing countries. In the 1980s the HIV/AIDS epidemic forced a broader discussion of sex into the public discourse in many countries, leading to more emphasis on reproductive health issues beyond reducing fertility. The growing opposition to the narrow population control focus led to a significant departure in the early 1990s from past population control policies. In the United States, abortion opponents have begun to foment conspiracy theories about reproductive rights advocates, accusing them of advancing a racist agenda of eugenics, and of trying to reduce the African American birth rate in the U.S.

===Female genital mutilation===

Female genital mutilation (FGM) is defined as &quot;all procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia, or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons.&quot; The procedure has no health benefits, and can cause severe bleeding and problems urinating, cysts, infections, and complications in childbirth and increased risk of newborn deaths. It is performed for traditional, cultural or religious reasons in many parts of the world, especially in Africa, and in some parts of Asia, such as Indonesia, Malaysia, Iraqi Kurdistan, and Yemen. The Istanbul Convention prohibits FGM (Article 38). It is estimated that 200 million women worldwide had undergone FGM, including at least 500,000 immigrant women in Europe. Infibulation, also referred to as Type 3 FGM, is the most extreme form of FGM, and is practiced mainly in northeastern Africa, particularly in Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia, and Sudan.

===Bride kidnapping or buying and reproductive slavery===


Bride kidnapping or marriage by abduction, is the practice whereby a woman or girl is abducted for the purpose of a forced marriage. Bride kidnapping has been practiced historically in many parts of the world, and it continues to occur today in some places, especially in Central Asia and the Caucasus, in countries such as Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Armenia, as well as in Ethiopia. Bride kidnapping is often preceded or followed by rape (which may result in pregnancy), in order to force the marriage – a practice also supported by &quot;marry-your-rapist law&quot; (laws regarding sexual violence, abduction or similar acts, whereby the perpetrator avoids prosecution or punishment if he marries the victim). Abducting of women may happen on an individual scale or on a mass scale. Raptio is a Latin term referring to the large-scale abduction of women, usually for marriage or sexual slavery, particularly during wartime.

Bride price, also called bridewealth, is money, property, or other form of wealth paid by a groom or his family to the parents of the woman he marries. The practice of bride price sometimes leads to parents selling young daughters into marriage and to trafficking. Bride price is common across Africa. Such forced marriages often lead to sexual violence, and forced pregnancy. In northern Ghana, for example, the payment of bride price signifies a woman&#x27;s requirement to bear children, and women using birth control are at risks of threats and coercion.

The 1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery defines &quot;institutions and practices similar to slavery&quot; to include:

c) Any institution or practice whereby:
* (i) A woman, without the right to refuse, is promised or given in marriage on payment of a consideration in money or in kind to her parents, guardian, family or any other person or group; or
* (ii) The husband of a woman, his family, or his clan, has the right to transfer her to another person for value received or otherwise; or
* (iii) A woman on the death of her husband is liable to be inherited by another person;

===Sperm donation===

Laws in many countries and states require sperm donors to be either anonymous or known to the recipient, or the laws restrict the number of children each donor may father. Although many donors choose to remain anonymous, new technologies such as the Internet and DNA technology have opened up new avenues for those wishing to know more about the biological father, siblings and half-siblings.

===Compulsory sterilization===


====Ethnic minority women====

Ethnic minority women have often been victims of forced sterilization programs, such as Amerindian women in parts of Latin America of Roma women.

In Peru, President Alberto Fujimori (in office from 1990 to 2000) has been accused of genocide and crimes against humanity as a result of the &quot;Programa Nacional de Población&quot;, a sterilization program put in place by his administration. During his presidency, Fujimori put in place a program of forced sterilizations against indigenous people (mainly the Quechuas and the Aymaras), in the name of a &quot;public health plan&quot;, presented on 28 July 1995.

During the 20th century, forced sterilization of Roma women in European countries, especially in former Communist countries, was practiced, and there are allegations that these practices continue unofficially in some countries, such as Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania. In &quot;V. C. vs. Slovakia&quot;, the European Court for Human Rights ruled in favor of a Roma woman who was the victim of forced sterilization in a state hospital in Slovakia in 2000.

====United States====

Forced sterilization in the United States was practiced starting with the 19th century. The United States during the Progressive era, ca. 1890 to 1920, was the first country to concertedly undertake compulsory sterilization programs for the purpose of eugenics. Thomas C. Leonard, professor at Princeton University, describes American eugenics and sterilization as ultimately rooted in economic arguments and further as a central element of Progressivism alongside wage controls, restricted immigration, and the introduction of pension programs. The heads of the programs were avid proponents of eugenics and frequently argued for their programs, which achieved some success nationwide, mainly in the first half of the 20th century.

====Canada====

Compulsory sterilization has been practiced historically in parts of Canada. Two Canadian provinces (Alberta and British Columbia) performed compulsory sterilization programs in the 20th century with eugenic aims. Canadian compulsory sterilization operated via the same overall mechanisms of institutionalization, judgment, and surgery as the American system. However, one notable difference is in the treatment of non-insane criminals. Canadian legislation never allowed for punitive sterilization of inmates.

The &quot;Sexual Sterilization Act&quot; of Alberta was enacted in 1928 and repealed in 1972. In 1995, Leilani Muir sued the Province of Alberta for forcing her to be sterilized against her will and without her permission in 1959. Since Muir&#x27;s case, the Alberta government has apologized for the forced sterilization of over 2,800 people. Nearly 850 Albertans who were sterilized under the &quot;Sexual Sterilization Act&quot; were awarded million in damages.

===Roman Catholic Church===
The Catholic Church is opposed to artificial contraception, abortion, and sexual intercourse outside marriage. This belief dates back to the first centuries of Christianity. While Roman Catholicism is not the only religion with such views, its religious doctrine is very powerful in influencing countries where most of the population is Catholic, and the few countries of the world with complete bans on abortion are mostly Catholic-majority countries, and in Europe strict restrictions on abortion exist in the Catholic majority countries of Malta (complete ban), Andorra, San Marino, Liechtenstein and to a lesser extent Poland and Monaco.

In France, a country with a Roman Catholic tradition, abortionist Marie-Louise Giraud was guillotined on 30 July 1943 under the authoritarian Vichy regime.

Some of the countries of Central America, notably El Salvador, have also come to international attention due to very forceful enforcement of the anti-abortion laws. El Salvador has received repeated criticism from the UN. The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) named the law &quot;one of the most draconian abortion laws in the world&quot;, and urged liberalization, and Zeid bin Ra&#x27;ad, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, stated that he was &quot;appalled that as a result of El Salvador&#x27;s absolute prohibition on abortion, women are being punished for apparent miscarriages and other obstetric emergencies, accused and convicted of having induced termination of pregnancy&quot;.

===Anti-abortion violence===
Criticism surrounds certain forms of anti-abortion activism. Anti-abortion violence is a serious issue in some parts of the world, especially in North America. It is recognized as single-issue terrorism. Numerous organizations have also recognized anti-abortion extremism as a form of Christian terrorism.

Incidents include vandalism, arson, and bombings of abortion clinics, such as those committed by Eric Rudolph (199698), and murders or attempted murders of physicians and clinic staff, as committed by James Kopp (1998), Paul Jennings Hill (1994), Scott Roeder (2009), Michael F. Griffin (1993), and Peter James Knight (2001).
Since 1978, in the US, anti-abortion violence includes at least 11 murders of medical staff, 26 attempted murders, 42 bombings, and 187 arsons.

==Criticisms==
Some opponents of legalized abortion view the term &quot;reproductive rights&quot; as a euphemism to sway emotions in favor of abortion.

==See also==

* Abortion
* African-American Women for Reproductive Freedom
* Antinatalism
* Asexual reproduction
* Birth control
* Birth control movement in the United States
* Center for Reproductive Rights
* Decreţei
* Eugenics
* Feminism
* Human overpopulation
* Human sexuality
* Ipas (organization)
* Men&#x27;s movement
* Morning-after pill
* NARAL Pro-Choice America
* National Organization for Women
* One-child policy
* Paper Abortion
* Parental leave
* Planned Parenthood
* Pledge two or fewer (campaign for smaller families)
* Reproductive coercion
* Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition
* &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;
* Sara Dubow
* Sex and the law
* Sperm theft
* Tax on childlessness
* Timeline of reproductive rights legislation
* Women&#x27;s movement
* The Yogyakarta Principles
==References==
==External links==
;Organizations
* The League of Women Voters on Reproductive Choice
* UNFPA Population Issues: Reproductive Rights
* American Civil Liberties Union
* Women&#x27;s Global Network for Reproductive Rights Network that links grassroots organizations that are active within this topic

;Further reading
* Gebhard, Julia, Trimiño, Diana. Reproductive Rights, International Regulation, Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law
* The Environmental Politics of Population and Overpopulation A University of California, Berkeley summary about the role of reproductive rights in the current political and ecological context
* Introductory note by Djamchid Momtaz, procedural history note and audiovisual material on the &quot;Proclamation of Teheran&quot; in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law
* Kitch, Sally L. Reproductive Rights and Ecofeminism. https://doi.org/10.3390/h10020066.
* Murray, Melissa and Kristin Luker. &quot;Cases on Reproductive Rights and Justice.&quot; United States: Foundation Press, 2015. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1536343" start="0" end="19" title="Reproductive rights" label="Reproductive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="24" end="35" title="legal right" label="legal right"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427336" start="62" end="74" title="human reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="79" end="98" title="reproductive health" label="reproductive health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="149" end="174" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="707" end="724" title="right to abortion" label="right to abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="726" end="739" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="754" end="775" title="compulsory sterilization" label="coerced sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="828" end="847" title="reproductive health" label="reproductive health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="870" end="890" title="family planning" label="education and access"/>
<link wikidata="Q192280" start="1006" end="1015" title="sex education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="1022" end="1053" title="Sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="1095" end="1111" title="menstrual health" label="menstrual health"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="1150" end="1175" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="1236" end="1248" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048853" start="1338" end="1349" title="Non-binding resolution" label="non-binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="1827" end="1870" title="treaty" label="internationally legally binding instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q965792" start="1937" end="1945" title="soft law" label="hard law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414472" start="1975" end="2013" title="international human rights instruments" label="international human rights instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q965792" start="2121" end="2129" title="soft law" label="soft law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="2133" end="2150" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509280" start="2265" end="2273" title="advocacy" label="advocacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="2423" end="2436" title="socioeconomic" label="socioeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="2444" end="2452" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="2456" end="2463" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349285" start="2583" end="2615" title="List of population concern organizations" label="population concern organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155736" start="2624" end="2642" title="Population Matters" label="Population Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666891" start="2681" end="2722" title="sexual and reproductive health and rights" label="sexual and reproductive health and rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="2779" end="2801" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3076" end="3078" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="3091" end="3128" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="3189" end="3201" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="3523" end="3542" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3948" end="3998" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Year#International" label="1975 UN International Women&amp;#x27;s Year Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q576920" start="4148" end="4202" title="International Conference on Population and Development" label="International Conference on Population and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="4213" end="4218" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048853" start="4224" end="4235" title="Non-binding resolution" label="non-binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="4403" end="4418" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q106201617" start="4592" end="4610" title="post-abortion care" label="post-abortion care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="4651" end="4673" title="violence against women" label="violence against women"/>
<link wikidata="Q21129531" start="4675" end="4690" title="sex trafficking" label="sex trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="4786" end="4805" title="reproductive health" label="reproductive health"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="5948" end="5952" title="non-governmental organization" label="NGOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="6075" end="6092" title="Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937518" start="6432" end="6451" title="Reservation (law)" label="formal reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="6615" end="6626" title="Sharia" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="6775" end="6787" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="7127" end="7135" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753957" start="7521" end="7553" title="Fourth World Conference on Women" label="Fourth World Conference on Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048853" start="7573" end="7584" title="non-binding resolution" label="non-binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950994" start="7585" end="7596" title="Beijing Declaration" label="Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753957" start="7601" end="7620" title="Beijing Platform for Action" label="Platform for Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q51431" start="9191" end="9212" title="Yogyakarta Principles" label="Yogyakarta Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774161" start="9466" end="9489" title="international community" label="international community"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="10117" end="10125" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628266" start="10164" end="10172" title="hormone therapy" label="hormonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130218" start="10204" end="10234" title="gender-affirming care" label="gender-reassignment treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="10326" end="10344" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q686712" start="10670" end="10678" title="natalist" label="natalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="10735" end="10752" title="communist Romania" label="communist Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="10804" end="10821" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984400" start="10957" end="10979" title="Tax on childlessness" label="taxes on childlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="11086" end="11091" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="11099" end="11115" title="one child policy" label="one child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="11144" end="11159" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="11249" end="11260" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="11271" end="11279" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="11443" end="11464" title="forced sterilizations" label="forced sterilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="11697" end="11701" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q133040" start="11713" end="11729" title="Alberto Fujimori" label="Alberto Fujimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="11780" end="11788" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="11793" end="11816" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q134936" start="11931" end="11939" title="Quechua people" label="Quechuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109402" start="11948" end="11955" title="Aymara people" label="Aymaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="12023" end="12042" title="Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence" label="Istanbul convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="12163" end="12183" title="forced sterilization" label="forced sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q231577" start="12188" end="12203" title="forced abortion" label="forced abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="14630" end="14659" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414472" start="14979" end="15017" title="international human rights instruments" label="international human rights instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305631" start="15078" end="15093" title="Epistemic community (international relations)" label="broad coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="15142" end="15169" title="international organizations" label="international organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="16247" end="16268" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="16381" end="16393" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919435" start="16409" end="16424" title="right to health" label="right to health"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="16452" end="16466" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="16472" end="16488" title="right to privacy" label="right to privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="16558" end="16583" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937518" start="17438" end="17457" title="Reservation (law)" label="formal reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="17531" end="17538" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="18690" end="18699" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="18701" end="18719" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="18721" end="18732" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="18734" end="18742" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="18744" end="18749" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="18751" end="18760" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="18762" end="18770" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="18772" end="18776" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="18785" end="18793" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="18822" end="18828" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="18830" end="18838" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="18840" end="18844" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="18846" end="18852" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="18854" end="18860" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="18862" end="18867" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="18869" end="18874" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="18876" end="18896" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="18902" end="18907" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="19014" end="19020" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="19141" end="19171" title="United Nations Population Fund" label="United Nations Population Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="19188" end="19213" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="19280" end="19299" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="19374" end="19389" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q177708" start="19415" end="19424" title="menopause" label="menopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q679020" start="19447" end="19464" title="obstetric fistula" label="obstetric fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="19626" end="19640" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891309" start="19696" end="19745" title="Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era" label="Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113866" start="20669" end="20683" title="overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="21053" end="21071" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="21086" end="21091" title="OHCHR" label="OHCHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314313" start="21497" end="21517" title="reproductive justice" label="reproductive justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119225" start="21651" end="21669" title="abortion law" label="legalized abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="22851" end="22881" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="22884" end="22890" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="22908" end="22914" title="toxins" label="toxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165614" start="23039" end="23052" title="male abortion" label="male abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="23093" end="23107" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="23412" end="23427" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967556" start="23733" end="23764" title="National Organization for Women" label="National Organization for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369599" start="23775" end="23787" title="Karen DeCrow" label="Karen DeCrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="23793" end="23801" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="23969" end="23977" title="coercion" label="coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="23999" end="24008" title="sex roles" label="sex roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310665" start="24080" end="24094" title="Dubay v. Wells" label="Dubay v. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="24129" end="24140" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165614" start="24768" end="24782" title="paper abortion" label="paper abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q124168060" start="24805" end="24816" title="Sperm theft" label="Sperm theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="24895" end="24900" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="24912" end="24918" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="24939" end="24942" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="24969" end="24979" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="24982" end="24987" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="24993" end="25000" title="genital" label="genital"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="25159" end="25167" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="25179" end="25188" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="26083" end="26108" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="26253" end="26258" title="OHCHR" label="OHCHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q641576" start="26260" end="26268" title="UN Women" label="UN Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q588982" start="26270" end="26276" title="UNAIDS" label="UNAIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="26278" end="26282" title="UNDP" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="26284" end="26289" title="UNFPA" label="UNFPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="26294" end="26300" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="26609" end="26633" title="compulsory sterilization" label="compulsory sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="27115" end="27123" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="27271" end="27278" title="ethical" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q466087" start="27420" end="27457" title="Convention on the Rights of the Child" label="Convention on the Rights of the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418749" start="27473" end="27503" title="evolving capacities" label="evolving capacities of a minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190007" start="27638" end="27643" title="Youth" label="Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974939" start="27714" end="27728" title="health workers" label="health workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="28413" end="28418" title="UNFPA" label="UNFPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="28645" end="28670" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q327538" start="30146" end="30167" title="age of sexual consent" label="age of sexual consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817591" start="30520" end="30542" title="unintended pregnancies" label="unintended pregnancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="30593" end="30606" title="contraceptive" label="contraceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324092" start="30670" end="30697" title="Comprehensive sex education" label="Comprehensive sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="30872" end="30878" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="30952" end="30960" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="31046" end="31064" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="31271" end="31280" title="abortions" label="abortions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342132" start="31285" end="31301" title="unsafe abortions" label="unsafe abortions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121433" start="31514" end="31534" title="Guttmacher Institute" label="Guttmacher Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="31746" end="31752" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339474" start="31979" end="31994" title="maternal deaths" label="maternal deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568847" start="32125" end="32130" title="Abortion in Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314244" start="32132" end="32142" title="Abortion in Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32144" end="32154" title="Abortion-rights movements#Africa" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q859701" start="32156" end="32168" title="Abortion in South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32174" end="32181" title="Abortion-rights movements#Africa" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128106144" start="32183" end="32189" title="Abortion in Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127868179" start="32334" end="32341" title="Abortion in Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127782116" start="32346" end="32358" title="Abortion in Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924288" start="32483" end="32498" title="Maputo Protocol" label="Maputo Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="33126" end="33139" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344800" start="33195" end="33203" title="Oral contraceptive pill" label="the pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="33208" end="33215" title="condoms" label="condoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q741027" start="33462" end="33481" title="Emergency contraception" label="postcoital pill use"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="33621" end="33629" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="33669" end="33672" title="Sexually transmitted disease" label="STI"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="33682" end="33696" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="33744" end="33779" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="33818" end="33901" title="Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence" label="Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q780189" start="34272" end="34344" title="European Parliament Committee on Women&amp;#x27;s Rights and Gender Equality" label="European Parliament Committee on Women&amp;#x27;s Rights and Gender Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="34490" end="34503" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339474" start="34706" end="34719" title="maternal mortality" label="maternal life"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="34766" end="34781" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112556" start="34832" end="34843" title="Abortion in El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653935" start="34848" end="34857" title="Abortion in Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614627" start="34961" end="34966" title="Abortion in Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="35116" end="35123" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q535691" start="36012" end="36032" title="adolescent pregnancy" label="adolescent pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="36364" end="36370" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="36485" end="36489" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill" label="pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q192280" start="36722" end="36735" title="sex education" label="sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="36915" end="36923" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="36925" end="36938" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q736922" start="36940" end="36953" title="Intimate relationships" label="relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="36955" end="36964" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370501" start="36986" end="37011" title="Abstinence-only education" label="Abstinence-only education"/>
<link wikidata="Q283681" start="37289" end="37318" title="Abortion in the United States" label="Abortion in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068570" start="37325" end="37345" title="constitutional right" label="constitutional right"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="37356" end="37383" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="37399" end="37410" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q107058269" start="37660" end="37709" title="Dobbs v. Jackson Women&amp;#x27;s Health Organization" label="Dobbs v. Jackson Women&amp;#x27;s Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876905" start="37778" end="37788" title="Abortion in California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876926" start="37790" end="37798" title="Abortion in Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876948" start="37800" end="37804" title="Abortion in Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876958" start="37810" end="37817" title="Abortion in Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876900" start="37886" end="37893" title="Abortion in Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876920" start="37895" end="37904" title="Abortion in Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876955" start="37906" end="37915" title="Abortion in Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876961" start="37921" end="37934" title="Abortion in West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q558075" start="38793" end="38808" title="sexual violence" label="sexual violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198705" start="38828" end="38840" title="marital rape" label="marital rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q29642353" start="39328" end="39351" title="Beverley Lawrence Beech" label="Beverley Lawrence Beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="39641" end="39671" title="United Nations Population Fund" label="United Nations Population Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q558075" start="41001" end="41016" title="sexual violence" label="sexual violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467540" start="41104" end="41120" title="forced pregnancy" label="forced pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239891" start="41129" end="41148" title="pregnancy from rape" label="pregnancy from rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="41498" end="41513" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546421" start="41518" end="41532" title="child marriage" label="child marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198705" start="41748" end="41760" title="marital rape" label="marital rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691275" start="42360" end="42374" title="honor killings" label="honor killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="43559" end="43563" title="United Nations Population Fund" label="UNPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="43766" end="43781" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="43902" end="43921" title="Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence" label="Istanbul convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="44079" end="44094" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q558075" start="44286" end="44301" title="sexual violence" label="sexual violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414937" start="44315" end="44324" title="combatant" label="combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="44333" end="44347" title="armed conflict" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="44357" end="44376" title="military occupation" label="military occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="44386" end="44399" title="War looting" label="spoils of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="44432" end="44447" title="ethnic conflict" label="ethnic conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192354" start="44516" end="44525" title="gang rape" label="gang rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467540" start="44697" end="44713" title="forced pregnancy" label="forced pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="44718" end="44749" title="sexually transmitted infections" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11343419" start="44809" end="44820" title="rape of men" label="rape of men"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="44848" end="44880" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="44939" end="44964" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="45052" end="45061" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="45435" end="45448" title="Birth control" label="Birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="45539" end="45548" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="45752" end="45767" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="45963" end="45972" title="religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q842080" start="46117" end="46127" title="Quiverfull" label="Quiverfull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717322" start="46267" end="46290" title="natural family planning" label="natural family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342132" start="46388" end="46403" title="unsafe abortion" label="unsafe abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q277072" start="46668" end="46728" title="Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women" label="Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="47446" end="47467" title="violence against women" label="gender based violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="47931" end="47948" title="fundamental right" label="fundamental right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342132" start="48001" end="48016" title="unsafe abortion" label="unsafe abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="48032" end="48040" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="48132" end="48145" title="public health" label="public-health"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="48150" end="48162" title="human-rights" label="human-rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031191" start="48235" end="48254" title="women&amp;#x27;s health" label="women&amp;#x27;s health"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="48289" end="48296" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="48328" end="48345" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="49974" end="49982" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="50041" end="50063" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="50541" end="50559" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924288" start="50943" end="50958" title="Maputo Protocol" label="Maputo Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="50985" end="50998" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q385961" start="51032" end="51081" title="African Charter on Human and Peoples&amp;#x27; Rights" label="African Charter on Human and Peoples&amp;#x27; Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="51664" end="51716" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q770764" start="51761" end="51783" title="Human Rights Committee" label="Human Rights Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q965792" start="51930" end="51938" title="soft law" label="soft law"/>
<link wikidata="Q576920" start="53728" end="53782" title="International Conference on Population and Development" label="International Conference on Population and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q939743" start="54072" end="54119" title="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe" label="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365000" start="55963" end="55978" title="Ellen Sauerbrey" label="Ellen Sauerbrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040210" start="56470" end="56502" title="Institute of Development Studies" label="Institute of Development Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="57234" end="57264" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646839" start="57343" end="57366" title="A. B. and C. v. Ireland" label="A. B. and C. v. Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="57575" end="57610" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q686712" start="58078" end="58086" title="natalist" label="natalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="58122" end="58139" title="communist Romania" label="communist Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="58191" end="58208" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984400" start="58344" end="58366" title="Tax on childlessness" label="taxes on childlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119225" start="58488" end="58504" title="illegal abortion" label="illegal abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362650" start="58542" end="58561" title="Romanian orphanages" label="Romanian orphanages"/>
<link wikidata="Q501846" start="58611" end="58626" title="street children" label="street children"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113614" start="58718" end="58730" title="overcrowding" label="overcrowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="58881" end="58900" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58936" end="58944" title="Trial of Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu#Execution" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="59022" end="59038" title="one child policy" label="one-child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q231577" start="59099" end="59114" title="forced abortion" label="forced abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q471757" start="59189" end="59211" title="sex-selective abortion" label="sex-selective abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068155" start="59239" end="59248" title="sex ratio" label="sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="60271" end="60290" title="Conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="60357" end="60363" title="Racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="60374" end="60382" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="60412" end="60428" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="60486" end="60511" title="Female genital mutilation" label="Female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="61083" end="61102" title="Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence" label="Istanbul Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662388" start="61253" end="61265" title="Infibulation" label="Infibulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057805" start="61359" end="61378" title="northeastern Africa" label="northeastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="61396" end="61404" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="61406" end="61413" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="61415" end="61423" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="61425" end="61432" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="61438" end="61443" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971354" start="61506" end="61522" title="Bride kidnapping" label="Bride kidnapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="61622" end="61637" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="61778" end="61790" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="61799" end="61807" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35258599" start="62084" end="62105" title="marry-your-rapist law" label="marry-your-rapist law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131682" start="62329" end="62335" title="Raptio" label="Raptio"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="62471" end="62482" title="Bride price" label="Bride price"/>
<link wikidata="Q558075" start="62809" end="62824" title="sexual violence" label="sexual violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467540" start="62830" end="62846" title="forced pregnancy" label="forced pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502215" start="62851" end="62865" title="northern Ghana" label="northern Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888320" start="63040" end="63160" title="Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery" label="Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q857158" start="63767" end="63779" title="sperm donation" label="sperm donors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="63950" end="63962" title="technologies" label="technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="64271" end="64287" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Amerindian women"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="64317" end="64327" title="Roma people" label="Roma women"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="64333" end="64337" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q133040" start="64349" end="64365" title="Alberto Fujimori" label="Alberto Fujimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="64416" end="64424" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="64429" end="64452" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248439" start="64478" end="64508" title="Programa Nacional de Población" label="Programa Nacional de Población"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557982" start="64664" end="64681" title="Indigenous peoples in Peru" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q134936" start="64694" end="64702" title="Quechua people" label="Quechuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109402" start="64711" end="64718" title="Aymara people" label="Aymaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="64744" end="64757" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="64847" end="64851" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906020" start="65090" end="65108" title="V. C. vs. Slovakia" label="V. C. vs. Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="65120" end="65151" title="European Court for Human Rights" label="European Court for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="65249" end="65257" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="65408" end="65423" title="Progressive era" label="Progressive era"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="65543" end="65551" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24456687" start="65553" end="65570" title="Thomas C. Leonard" label="Thomas C. Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="65819" end="65826" title="pension" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="66142" end="66149" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="66154" end="66170" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070165" start="66333" end="66353" title="institutionalization" label="institutionalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12621536" start="66355" end="66363" title="judgment" label="judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="66369" end="66376" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458690" start="66563" end="66587" title="Sexual Sterilization Act" label="Sexual Sterilization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519928" start="66656" end="66668" title="Leilani Muir" label="Leilani Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="67051" end="67066" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q477172" start="67121" end="67156" title="Premarital sex" label="sexual intercourse outside marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q737326" start="67590" end="67595" title="Abortion in Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668439" start="67612" end="67619" title="Abortion in Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668485" start="67621" end="67631" title="Abortion in San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668468" start="67633" end="67646" title="Abortion in Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668484" start="67670" end="67676" title="Abortion in Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668471" start="67681" end="67687" title="Abortion in Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q292836" start="67756" end="67775" title="Marie-Louise Giraud" label="Marie-Louise Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="67780" end="67791" title="guillotined" label="guillotined"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="67832" end="67844" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="67872" end="67887" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112556" start="67897" end="67908" title="Abortion in El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244308" start="68243" end="68262" title="Prince Zeid bin Ra&amp;#x27;ad" label="Zeid bin Ra&amp;#x27;ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774314" start="68673" end="68695" title="Anti-abortion violence" label="Anti-abortion violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574826" start="68792" end="68814" title="single-issue terrorism" label="single-issue terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284328" start="68897" end="68916" title="Christian terrorism" label="Christian terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668435" start="68971" end="68986" title="abortion clinic" label="abortion clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q513250" start="69016" end="69028" title="Eric Rudolph" label="Eric Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308723" start="69120" end="69130" title="James Charles Kopp" label="James Kopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354071" start="69139" end="69157" title="Paul Jennings Hill" label="Paul Jennings Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808508" start="69166" end="69178" title="Scott Roeder" label="Scott Roeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012988" start="69187" end="69205" title="Michael F. Griffin" label="Michael F. Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174942" start="69218" end="69236" title="Peter James Knight" label="Peter James Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="69312" end="69318" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q81672" start="69341" end="69357" title="attempted murder" label="attempted murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="69363" end="69370" title="bombing" label="bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q327541" start="69381" end="69386" title="arson" label="arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="69410" end="69441" title="Opposition to the legalization of abortion" label="opponents of legalized abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="69493" end="69502" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="69559" end="69567" title="Abortion" label="Abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689637" start="69570" end="69617" title="African-American Women for Reproductive Freedom" label="African-American Women for Reproductive Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q578728" start="69620" end="69632" title="Antinatalism" label="Antinatalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="69635" end="69655" title="Asexual reproduction" label="Asexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="69658" end="69671" title="Birth control" label="Birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917009" start="69674" end="69717" title="Birth control movement in the United States" label="Birth control movement in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059847" start="69720" end="69750" title="Center for Reproductive Rights" label="Center for Reproductive Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183732" start="69753" end="69761" title="Decreţei" label="Decreţei"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="69764" end="69772" title="Eugenics" label="Eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="69775" end="69783" title="Feminism" label="Feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="69786" end="69806" title="Human overpopulation" label="Human overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="69809" end="69824" title="Human sexuality" label="Human sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064935" start="69827" end="69846" title="Ipas (organization)" label="Ipas (organization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681856" start="69849" end="69868" title="Men&amp;#x27;s movement" label="Men&amp;#x27;s movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q741027" start="69871" end="69889" title="Morning-after pill" label="Morning-after pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160931" start="69892" end="69916" title="NARAL Pro-Choice America" label="NARAL Pro-Choice America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967556" start="69919" end="69950" title="National Organization for Women" label="National Organization for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="69953" end="69969" title="One-child policy" label="One-child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165614" start="69972" end="69986" title="Paper Abortion" label="Paper Abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q772989" start="69989" end="70003" title="Parental leave" label="Parental leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="70006" end="70024" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70027" end="70046" title="Population Matters#Pledge two or fewer" label="Pledge two or fewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314307" start="70081" end="70102" title="Reproductive coercion" label="Reproductive coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314304" start="70105" end="70143" title="Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition" label="Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="70152" end="70163" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q125935894" start="70172" end="70182" title="Sara Dubow" label="Sara Dubow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075388" start="70185" end="70200" title="Sex and the law" label="Sex and the law"/>
<link wikidata="Q124168060" start="70203" end="70214" title="Sperm theft" label="Sperm theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984400" start="70217" end="70237" title="Tax on childlessness" label="Tax on childlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806189" start="70240" end="70283" title="Timeline of reproductive rights legislation" label="Timeline of reproductive rights legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580856" start="70286" end="70307" title="Women&amp;#x27;s movement" label="Women&amp;#x27;s movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q51431" start="70310" end="70335" title="The Yogyakarta Principles" label="The Yogyakarta Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032764" start="71016" end="71031" title="Djamchid Momtaz" label="Djamchid Momtaz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706192" wikidata="Q2369355" url="?curid=706192" title="Lodomeria">
<text>Lodomeria is the Latinized name of Volodymyr (Old Slavic: , ; , ; ; ), a Ruthenian principality also referred to as the Principality of Volhynia, which was founded by the Rurik dynasty in 987 in the western parts of Kievan Rus&#x27;. It was centered on the region of Volhynia, straddling the borders of modern-day Poland, Ukraine and Belarus. The Principality of Volodymyr arose in the course of the 12th century along with the Principality of Halych.

&quot;Vladimir&quot; is the Russian form of the name of the city now called Volodymyr, which was the capital of the Principality.

Upon the first partition of Poland in 1772, the name &quot;Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria&quot; (probably in reference to the Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia) was given by the Habsburg monarchy to the Polish territories which they acquired, while most of Volhynia (including the city of Vladimir) remained as part of rump Poland until eventually being annexed in 1795 by the Russian Empire in the Third Partition of Poland - though the Habsburgs did receive the small city of Belz.

Lodomeria - together with Galicia - provided one of the many titles of the Emperor of Austria, &quot;the ruler of the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria&quot;. However, Lodomeria existed only on paper, had no territory and could not be found on any map.

An item in &quot;American Notes and Queries&quot; published in 1889 identified Lodomeria as an ancient district of Poland situated in the eastern portion of the country (at that time part of the Russian Empire, Volhynian Governorate).
About 988, the Ruthenian Grand Prince Vladimir the Great (, born , Grand Prince of Kiev from 980 to 1015) founded the town of Volodymyr,
named after himself. In 1198, one of his descendants, Roman Mstislavich, called his own domain &quot;the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria&quot;.
In 1340, King Casimir of Poland annexed Lodomeria to Poland.

==Origin of the title==
The name &quot;Volhynia&quot; is first mentioned in Ruthenian chronicles as a region inhabited by a tribe called the Volhynians that was conquered by the Grand Prince of Kiev Vladimir the Great. Volhynia changed hands several times throughout the following centuries. About 1199, it was merged with the Principality of Halych to form the Principality (later Kingdom) of Galicia and Volhynia under Prince Roman the Great. After the death of Roman the Great in 1205, Andrew II of Hungary adopted the title of &quot;King of Lodomeria&quot; (as well as of Galicia), in reference to Volhynia. Although the Hungarians were driven out from Halych-Volhynia by 1221, Hungarian kings continued to add &quot;Galicia et Lodomeria&quot; to their official titles.

In 1527, the Habsburgs inherited those titles, together with the Hungarian crown. In 1772, Empress Maria Theresa, Archduchess of Austria and Queen of Hungary, decided to use those historical claims to justify her participation in the first partition of Poland. In fact, the territories acquired by Austria did not correspond exactly to those of former Halych-Volhynia. Volhynia, including the city of Volodymyr, was taken in 1795 by the Russian Empire, not Austria. On the other hand, much of Lesser Poland did become part of Austrian Galicia. Moreover, despite the fact that the claim derived from the historical Hungarian crown, Galicia and Lodomeria was not officially assigned to Hungary, and after the Ausgleich of 1867, it found itself in Cisleithania, or the Austrian-administered part of Austria-Hungary.

The full official name of the new Austrian province was &quot;Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria with the Duchies of Auschwitz and Zator&quot;. After the incorporation of the Free City of Kraków in 1846, it was extended to &quot;Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria, and the Grand Duchy of Kraków with the Duchies of Auschwitz and Zator&quot; (). Therefore, from 1772 to 1918, &quot;Lodomeria&quot; was claimed by the Austrian monarchs, even though Volhynia, the region the name had originally referred to, was part of the Russian Empire.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2369355" start="0" end="9" title="Lodomeria" label="Lodomeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="17" end="31" title="Latinized name" label="Latinized name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369355" start="35" end="44" title="Lodomeria" label="Volodymyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="46" end="56" title="Old Slavic" label="Old Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="73" end="81" title="Ruthenia" label="Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680472" start="120" end="144" title="Principality of Volhynia" label="Principality of Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210398" start="171" end="184" title="Rurik dynasty" label="Rurik dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="216" end="232" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="267" end="275" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="314" end="320" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="322" end="329" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="334" end="341" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403551" start="428" end="450" title="Principality of Halych" label="Principality of Halych"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="529" end="538" title="Volodymyr, Volyn Oblast" label="Volodymyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="593" end="618" title="first partition of Poland" label="first partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="643" end="675" title="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria" label="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q239502" start="712" end="739" title="Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia" label="Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="758" end="775" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="957" end="971" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="979" end="1004" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156565" start="1058" end="1062" title="Belz" label="Belz"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="1140" end="1158" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="1183" end="1215" title="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria" label="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595868" start="1335" end="1361" title="American Notes and Queries" label="American Notes and Queries"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1513" end="1527" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333965" start="1529" end="1550" title="Volhynian Governorate" label="Volhynian Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14974" start="1591" end="1609" title="Vladimir the Great" label="Vladimir the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097003" start="1620" end="1640" title="Grand Prince of Kiev" label="Grand Prince of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q497773" start="1744" end="1761" title="Roman Mstislavich" label="Roman Mstislavich"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="1849" end="1856" title="Casimir III the Great" label="Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="1936" end="1944" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580069" start="2038" end="2048" title="Volhynians" label="Volhynians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403551" start="2224" end="2246" title="Principality of Halych" label="Principality of Halych"/>
<link wikidata="Q239502" start="2259" end="2311" title="Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia" label="Principality (later Kingdom) of Galicia and Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q497773" start="2325" end="2340" title="Roman the Great" label="Roman the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q271104" start="2386" end="2406" title="Andrew II of Hungary" label="Andrew II of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="2499" end="2507" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="2685" end="2693" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="2771" end="2784" title="Maria Theresa of Austria" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="3073" end="3082" title="Volodymyr (city)" label="Volodymyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3109" end="3123" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="3165" end="3178" title="Lesser Poland" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="3379" end="3388" title="Ausgleich" label="Ausgleich"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="3417" end="3429" title="Cisleithania" label="Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q702327" start="3601" end="3610" title="Duchy of Oświęcim" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281557" start="3615" end="3620" title="Zator, Lesser Poland Voivodeship" label="Zator"/>
<link wikidata="Q501303" start="3659" end="3678" title="Free City of Kraków" label="Free City of Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q688918" start="3755" end="3776" title="Grand Duchy of Kraków" label="Grand Duchy of Kraków"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706198" wikidata="Q5096841" url="?curid=706198" title="Chief Medical Officers (United Kingdom)">
<text>In the United Kingdom, a chief medical officer (CMO) is the most senior government advisor on matter relating to health. There are four chief medical officers in the United Kingdom who are appointed to advise their respective governments:
* His Majesty&#x27;s Government (CMO for England and medical advisor to the United Kingdom government)
* Scottish Government
* Welsh Government
* Northern Ireland Executive

Each CMO is assisted by one or more deputy chief medical officers, and complemented by a chief nursing officer.

The chief medical officer is a qualified medical doctor whose medical speciality traditionally was public health medicine, and whose work focused on the health of communities rather than health of individuals. More recently, some appointees have been senior clinicians without training in public health medicine. In the UK, the CMO is one of the chief professional officers who advise the government in their respective health and social care disciplines. The CMO has independent statutory authority, first established in the 19th century, to issue reports without requiring government approval.

== Chief Medical Officers for England ==

The historic post was created in Victorian times to help to prevent cholera and other epidemics. In 1969, the post of Chief Medical Officer for Wales was created, and prior to this both England and Wales were covered by the post of Chief Medical Officer of England and Wales.
* Sir John Simon (1855–1876)
* Edward Cator Seaton (1876–1879)
* Sir George Buchanan (1879–1892)
* Sir Richard Thorne Thorne (1892–1899)
* Sir William Henry Power (1900–1908)
* Sir Arthur Newsholme (1908–1919)
* Sir George Newman (1919–1935)
* Sir Arthur MacNalty (1935–1940)
* Sir Wilson Jameson (1940–1950)
* Sir John Charles (1950–1960)
* Sir George Godber (1960–1973)
* Sir Henry Yellowlees (1973–1984)
* Sir Donald Acheson (1984–1991)
* Sir Kenneth Calman (1991–1998)
* Sir Liam Donaldson (1998–May 2010)
* Dame Sally Davies (June 2010–September 2019)
* Sir Chris Whitty (October 2019–present)

=== Deputies ===
* John Reid (1972 to 1977) 
* Liz Shore (1977 to 1985) 
* Michael Abrams (1985 to 1992) 
* David Walker (2013 to 2015)
* John Watson (2013 to 2017)
* Gina Radford (2015 to 2019)
* Jenny Harries (July 2019 to March 2021)
* Sir Jonathan Van-Tam (October 2017–March 2022)
* Aidan Fowler (March 2020–present)
* Thomas Waite &quot;interim&quot; (May 2021–April 2022)
* Jeanelle de Gruchy (September 2021 – present)
* Thomas Waite (April 2022 – present)

== Chief Medical Officers for Scotland ==

Through various reorganisations, the CMOs for Scotland has been the chief medical officer in the Local Government Board for Scotland, Scottish Board of Health, Department of Health for Scotland, the Scottish Home and Health Department, the Scottish Executive Health Department and now the Scottish Government:
* J. B. McLintock (1894–1898)
* James Burn Russell (1898–1904)
* Sir Leslie Mackenzie (1904–1929)
* J. P. Kinloch (1929–1932)
* J. L. Brownlie (1932–1937)
* J. M. Mackintosh (1937–1941)
* Sir Andrew Davidson (1941–1954)
* Sir Kenneth Cowan (1954–1964)
* Sir John Brotherston (1964–1977)
* Sir John Reid (1977–1985)
* Iain Macdonald (1985–1989)
* Sir Kenneth Calman (1989–1991)
* Robert Kendell (1991–1996)
* Sir David Carter (1996–2000)
* Ernest Macalpine (&quot;Mac&quot;) Armstrong (2000–2005)
* Sir Harry Burns (2005–2014)
* Aileen Keel (2014–2015; acting)
* Catherine Calderwood (2015–2020)
* Sir Gregor Smith (2020–present; acting until 23 December 2020, thereafter permanent)

== Chief Medical Officers for Wales ==

The Welsh post was created in 1969. Prior to this there was one post for both England and Wales, the Chief Medical Officer for England and Wales.
* Richard Bevan (1969–1977)
* Gareth Crompton (1978–1989)
* Dame Deirdre Hine (1990–1997)
* Ruth Hall (1997–2005)
* David Salter (July 2005–April 2006; acting)
* Tony Jewell (April 2006 – 2012)
* Ruth Hussey (2012–2016)
* Chris Jones (March–July 2016; acting)
* Sir Frank Atherton (2016–2025)

== Chief Medical Officers for Northern Ireland ==
* William Richard Dawson (1922–1929) Chief Medical Officer of Ministry of Home Affairs, Northern Ireland
* Frank F. Main (1954–1968)
* Thomas Terence Baird (1973–1978)
* Bob Weir (1978–1986)
* James McKenna (1988–1995)
* Henrietta Campbell (1995–2006)
* Sir Michael McBride (2006–present)

==See also==
* Medical officer of health
* Chief Dental Officers (United Kingdom)
* Chief Nursing Officer (United Kingdom)
* Government Chief Scientific Adviser (United Kingdom)

==References==
==External links==
* Chief Medical Officers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5096841" start="25" end="46" title="Chief Medical Officers (United Kingdom)" label="chief medical officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096841" start="48" end="51" title="Chief Medical Officers (United Kingdom)" label="CMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="241" end="270" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="344" end="363" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="366" end="382" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="385" end="411" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740721" start="502" end="523" title="Chief Nursing Officer (United Kingdom)" label="chief nursing officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="567" end="581" title="medical doctor" label="medical doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="625" end="638" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="1233" end="1240" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809618" start="1443" end="1457" title="John Simon (pathologist)" label="Sir John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063400" start="1472" end="1491" title="Edward Cator Seaton" label="Edward Cator Seaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948462" start="1506" end="1525" title="George Buchanan (physician)" label="Sir George Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863883" start="1540" end="1565" title="Richard Thorne Thorne" label="Sir Richard Thorne Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020044" start="1580" end="1603" title="William Henry Power" label="Sir William Henry Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996145" start="1618" end="1638" title="Arthur Newsholme" label="Sir Arthur Newsholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542862" start="1653" end="1670" title="George Newman (physician)" label="Sir George Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945591" start="1685" end="1704" title="Arthur MacNalty" label="Sir Arthur MacNalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020294" start="1719" end="1737" title="Wilson Jameson" label="Sir Wilson Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938178" start="1752" end="1768" title="John Charles (physician)" label="Sir John Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539764" start="1783" end="1800" title="George Godber" label="Sir George Godber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16017625" start="1815" end="1835" title="Henry Yellowlees" label="Sir Henry Yellowlees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293944" start="1850" end="1868" title="Donald Acheson" label="Sir Donald Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389941" start="1883" end="1901" title="Kenneth Calman" label="Sir Kenneth Calman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949254" start="1916" end="1934" title="Liam Donaldson" label="Sir Liam Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793582" start="1953" end="1970" title="Sally Davies (doctor)" label="Dame Sally Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q56450896" start="2000" end="2016" title="Chris Whitty" label="Sir Chris Whitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q75604985" start="2088" end="2097" title="Liz Shore" label="Liz Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q102123765" start="2208" end="2220" title="Gina Radford" label="Gina Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q64748120" start="2238" end="2251" title="Jenny Harries" label="Jenny Harries"/>
<link wikidata="Q41448199" start="2280" end="2300" title="Jonathan Van-Tam" label="Sir Jonathan Van-Tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q102183745" start="2422" end="2440" title="Jeanelle de Gruchy" label="Jeanelle de Gruchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664091" start="2647" end="2682" title="Local Government Board for Scotland" label="Local Government Board for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294613" start="2790" end="2826" title="Scottish Executive Health Department" label="Scottish Executive Health Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="2839" end="2858" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q109984458" start="3048" end="3067" title="Sir Andrew Davidson" label="Sir Andrew Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389941" start="3206" end="3224" title="Kenneth Calman" label="Sir Kenneth Calman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344122" start="3239" end="3253" title="Robert Kendell" label="Robert Kendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20193403" start="3268" end="3284" title="David Carter (surgeon)" label="Sir David Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393498" start="3299" end="3343" title="Ernest Macalpine Armstrong" label="Ernest Macalpine (&amp;quot;Mac&amp;quot;) Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667620" start="3358" end="3373" title="Harry Burns (doctor)" label="Sir Harry Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138301" start="3388" end="3399" title="Aileen Keel" label="Aileen Keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560186" start="3422" end="3442" title="Catherine Calderwood" label="Catherine Calderwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q56148745" start="3457" end="3473" title="Gregor Smith" label="Sir Gregor Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3759" end="3774" title="Gareth Crompton" label="Gareth Crompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793787" start="3789" end="3806" title="Deirdre Hine" label="Dame Deirdre Hine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3821" end="3830" title="Ruth Hall (doctor)" label="Ruth Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822652" start="3891" end="3902" title="Tony Jewell (doctor)" label="Tony Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18687884" start="3925" end="3936" title="Ruth Hussey (doctor)" label="Ruth Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q86588692" start="3991" end="4009" title="Frank Atherton" label="Sir Frank Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104744789" start="4327" end="4346" title="Michael McBride (doctor)" label="Sir Michael McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806392" start="4378" end="4403" title="Medical officer of health" label="Medical officer of health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096707" start="4406" end="4444" title="Chief Dental Officers (United Kingdom)" label="Chief Dental Officers (United Kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740721" start="4447" end="4485" title="Chief Nursing Officer (United Kingdom)" label="Chief Nursing Officer (United Kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588713" start="4488" end="4540" title="Government Chief Scientific Adviser (United Kingdom)" label="Government Chief Scientific Adviser (United Kingdom)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706200" wikidata="Q7347763" url="?curid=706200" title="Robert Montgomery (poet)">
<text>Robert Montgomery (1807–1855) was an English poet and minister, the natural son of Robert Gomery (1778-1853), an actor and clown, and Elizabeth Medows Boyce, a schoolteacher. 

Born in Bath, Somerset, it is unknown why Robert Jnr. was baptised with the surname Montgomery. He was educated at a private school in the city. Later, he founded an unsuccessful weekly paper in that city. In 1828 he published &quot;The Omni-presence of the Deity&quot;, which hit popular religious sentiment so exactly that it ran through eight editions in as many months. In 1830 he followed it with &quot;The Puffiad&quot; (a satire), and &quot;Satan, or Intellect without God&quot;. An exhaustive review in &quot;Blackwood&#x27;s&quot; by John Wilson, followed in the thirty-first number by a burlesque of Satan, and two articles in the first volume of Fraser, ridiculed Montgomery&#x27;s pretensions and the excesses of his admirers. 

His name was immortalized by Macaulay&#x27;s famous onslaught in the &quot;Edinburgh Review&quot; for April 1830, &quot;an annihilating so Jove-like that the victim automatically commands the spectator&#x27;s rueful sympathy.&quot; This review did not, however, diminish the sale of his poems; &quot;The Omni-presence of the Deity&quot; reached its 28th edition in 1858. 

In 1830, Montgomery entered Lincoln College, Oxford, graduating B.A. in 1833 and M.A. in 1838. Taking holy orders in 1835 he obtained a curacy at Whittington, Shropshire, which he exchanged in 1836 for the charge of the church of St. Jude, Glasgow. In 1843, he removed to the parish of St. Pancras, London, when he was minister of Percy Chapel.

==Family==
On 7 October 1843, at St George&#x27;s Hanover Square, London, Montgomery married Rachel Catherine Andrews MacKenzie (1814-82), the daughter of Alexander Douglas McKenzie (died 1842) of Bursledon, Hampshire. His brother-in-law was Rev Frederic Charles Cook (1804-1889).

He had a daughter:
* Jessie Anne Douglas Montgomery (1851-1918)

==Death==
Robert Montgomery died at Brighton on 3 December 1855.

==List of works==
*&quot;The Omni-presence of the Deity&quot;, (1828)
*&quot;The Puffiad&quot;, (1830)
*&quot;Satan, or Intellect without God&quot;, (1830)
*&quot;Oxford&quot;, (1831)
*&quot;The Messiah&quot;, (1832)
*&quot;Woman, the Angel of Life&quot;, (1833)
*&quot;God and Man: being outlines of religious and moral truth, according to Scripture and the church&quot;, (1850)

==References==
*

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7347763" start="0" end="17" title="Robert Montgomery (poet)" label="Robert Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="185" end="199" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347763" start="261" end="271" title="Robert Montgomery (poet)" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529971" start="694" end="710" title="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264502" start="720" end="731" title="John Wilson (Scottish writer)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191067" start="802" end="810" title="Article (publishing)" label="articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="947" end="955" title="Thomas Babington Macaulay, 1st Baron Macaulay" label="Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616695" start="993" end="1009" title="Edinburgh Review" label="Edinburgh Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q81153" start="1319" end="1334" title="Lincoln College, Oxford" label="Lincoln College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1336" end="1342" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811275" start="1437" end="1460" title="Whittington, Shropshire" label="Whittington, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="1531" end="1538" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065416" start="1577" end="1588" title="St Pancras, London" label="St. Pancras"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1622" end="1634" title="Percy Chapel" label="Percy Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989923" start="1883" end="1904" title="Frederic Charles Cook" label="Frederic Charles Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q106518590" start="1940" end="1970" title="Jessie Montgomery (Exeter)" label="Jessie Anne Douglas Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="2020" end="2028" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706207" wikidata="Q5684584" url="?curid=706207" title="Hawaiian architecture">
<text>Hawaiian architecture is a distinctive architectural style developed and employed primarily in the Hawaiian Islands. Though based on imported Western styles, unique Hawaiian traits make Hawaiian architecture stand alone against other styles. Hawaiian architecture reflects the history of the islands from antiquity through the kingdom era, from its territorial years to statehood and beyond.

The various styles through the history of Hawaii are telling of the attitudes and the spirit of its people. Hawaiian architecture is said to tell the story of how indigenous native Hawaiians and their complex society in ancient times slowly evolved with the infusion of new styles from beyond its borders, from the early European traders, the visiting whalers and fur trappers from Canada, the missions of the New Englanders and French Catholics, the communes of the Latter-day Saints from Utah, the plantation labourer cultures from Asia to the modern international metropolis that Honolulu is today.

==History==

Within the body of Hawaiian architecture are various subsets of styles; each are considered typical of particular historical periods. The earliest form of Hawaiian architecture originates from what is called ancient Hawaii—designs employed in the construction of village shelters from the simple shacks of outcasts and slaves, huts for the fishermen and canoe builders along the beachfronts, the shelters of the working class &quot;makaainana&quot;, the elaborate and sacred &quot;heiau&quot; of &quot;kahuna&quot; and the palatial thatched homes on raised basalt foundation of the &quot;alii&quot;. The way a simple grass shack was constructed in ancient Hawaii was telling of who lived in a particular home. The patterns in which dried plants and lumber were fashioned together could identify caste, skill and trade, profession and wealth. Hawaiian architecture previous to the arrival of British explorer Captain James Cook used symbolism to identify religious value of the inhabitants of certain structures. Feather standards called &quot;kahili&quot; and &quot;koa&quot; adorned with &quot;kapa&quot; cloth and crossed at the entrance of certain homes called &quot;puloulou&quot; indicated places of &quot;alii&quot; (nobility caste). &quot;Kii&quot; enclosed within basalt walls indicated the homes of &quot;kahuna&quot; (priestly caste).

==Hale==
A hale (pronounced HAH-lay) is a structure built using natural Hawaiian materials and designs that were prevalent during the 19th century in Hawaii. Hales are constructed using rock or wood for the lower frame and grass/leaves for roof thatching. Building codes prohibit plumbing and electrical wiring. Fire sprinklers are required if the hale is near another structure.

There are 4 classic hale styles:
* Hale Halawai - open walls
* Hale Ku`ai - lean-to
* Hale Noa - fully enclosed
* Hale Wa`a - A frame

==Mission==
Traditional Hawaiian architecture experienced its first revolution with the arrival of Congregational missionary Hiram Bingham. Presbyterian religious families followed suit and settled in the major port towns of Honolulu and Lāhainā. Upon their arrival, they erected the first frame houses in Hawaii, employing a style derived from the simple Congregational meeting-houses and farmhouse vernacular buildings of New England. 
They were simple homes with high-pitched roofs and overlapping weatherboards called clapboards. The simplicity and unassuming character of these structures were derived from the puritan ideals—that plainness was a virtue of true Christians. As the years passed, the New England style morphed into a distinctive style called Hawaiian mission architecture. New England methods and materials were replaced by methods and materials readily available to Hawaiians.

Hawaiian mission architecture moved away from construction solely using wood and experimented with the use of coral blocks hewn from the reefs of the Hawaiian Islands. Coral seemed plentiful and were comparable to bricks used for construction in New England. When Queen Kaahumanu converted to the Congregational denomination of Christianity, she commissioned the construction of a major church in what is now downtown Honolulu. Kawaiahao Church is one of the longest-lasting relics of Hawaiian mission architecture using coral blocks. Today, Kawaiahao Church stands adjacent to the Mission Houses Museum, surviving examples of Hawaiian mission architecture using wood.

At the same time that Congregational missionaries went about the construction of Kawaiahao Church, French Catholic missionaries of the Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary under the leadership of Bishop Louis Maigret introduced their own version of Hawaiian mission architecture. The difference was that their Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace project was based on simple French church architecture in the basilica form. The regional twist, like the adaptation that Congregational missionaries embraced, was the use of coral blocks from the reefs of Ala Moana and Kakaako. What the Picpus religious order succeeded in doing was creating the first instance of Hawaiian architecture based on continental European styles as opposed to the American puritan styles imported by the Protestants. The Picpus Fathers opened the doors to European architectural styles—classical, baroque, Renaissance, Rococo and neoclassical — that would become uniquely Hawaiian in the hands of local builders.

==Gothic==

The first experiment of Gothic architecture in Hawaii was undertaken by the Hawaii Catholic Church. Discontent with the earliest designs of the Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace in 1910, Bishop Libert H. Boeynaems began an ambitious project to transform the Hawaiian mission cathedral into a unique cathedral in what was to be called Hawaiian Gothic architecture. The first phase of Boeynaemes&#x27; project was the construction of an elaborate porch over the cathedral entrance. By the time it was completed, he had exhausted his financing. Such an elaborate architectural style proved too costly. His successor, Bishop Stephen Alencastre, stripped the cathedral facade of its Gothic style and financed his own renovation project. The addition of Doric columns transformed the cathedral into a simple but elegant classical building.

A more successful rendering of the Hawaiian Gothic style came as Kamehameha IV assumed the throne and established the Anglican Church of Hawaii — the present-day Episcopal Diocese of Hawaii. With the advice and consent of his bishop Lord Thomas Nettleship Staley, Kamehameha IV oversaw the drafting of plans for the Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew. Unfortunately, the king died and his brother Kamehameha V was left to lay the cornerstone. Completed in 1867, the Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew was the first instance of the use of vaulting in Hawaii. Also, while the Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace was the first to employ stained glass, the royal cathedral installed larger panes as allowed by vaulting.

Other notable buildings constructed in the Hawaiian Gothic style are the Royal Mausoleum and the Aloha Tower. Hawaiian Gothic architecture was not as widespread for the reasons Bishop Boeynaems and Bishop Alencastre found in their experiments with the Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace. The elaborate treatments were too expensive and were deemed unsuitable against the backdrop of the Hawaiian environment. People believed that any Gothic building in Hawaii would look out of place.

==Renaissance==

While Kamehameha IV succeeded in developing the Hawaiian Gothic style, Kamehameha V fathered Hawaiian Renaissance architecture. Commissioned in 1850, the last king of the House of Kamehameha originally planned Aliiōlani Hale to be his royal palace inspired by the sleek beauty of historic Italian structures. In the middle of its construction, the building was changed to become the kingdom&#x27;s government center. Renaissance comes from the French word for rebirth. Hawaiian renaissance was therefore a rebirth of traditional Roman architectural principles of aesthetics but also included concepts derived from Hawaiiana. Elegant facades had petite columns and wide verandas and walls that seemed to crinkle. Curves and ornamentation were important.

When Kalākaua became king, he shared in his predecessor&#x27;s delight with Hawaiian renaissance architecture. He also shared in Kamehameha V&#x27;s dream of building a world-class royal palace befitting of a modern monarchy such as that of Hawaii to rival the famed palaces of Europe. Iolani Palace was finished in 1882 and did fulfill Kalākaua&#x27;s expectations. Considered the finest example of Hawaiian renaissance architecture, Iolani Palace became a world-famous royal landmark. This building has been categorized as the only example of American Florentine architecture anywhere in the world.

In addition to his contributions to the development of Hawaiian renaissance architecture, Kalākaua experimented with various other styles. One of his other famous building projects is the completion of Iolani Barracks. Constructed adjacent to Iolani Palace and across the street from Aliiōlani Hale, Iolani Barracks housed the royal guards. It resembles a medieval castle with crenelated parapets and towers.

==Romanesque==
In the last years of the Hawaiian monarchy and early years of the territorial period, Hawaiian Romanesque architecture came into popular use. The style hearkened back to the European designs of the 11th and 12th centuries. Hawaiian Romanesque employed principles and forms used by Romans in later periods of the ancient empire. The difference was that Hawaiian builders used dark basalt boulders giving the appearance of a uniquely Hawaiian style. Such buildings typically used rounded arches, barrel vaults and groin vaults and cruciform piers for support. The various buildings of the Bernice P. Bishop Museum are in the Hawaiian Romanesque style.

==Beaux-Arts and Art Deco==
In the 1920s and 1930s, Beaux-Arts and Art Deco came to be known in Hawaii. Developed in France in the late 19th century, Beaux-Arts is a form of neoclassicism that combines ancient Greek and Roman architectural styles and principles into a modern form. Likewise, Art Deco is considered to be a blanket modernization of all architectural styles. Hawaiian builders created Hawaiian Beaux-Arts and Art Deco architecture by incorporating Hawaiian motifs and tropical treatments to the various parts of their projects. An example of Hawaiian Beaux-Arts is the Waikiki Natatorium War Memorial in Waikīkī. The most famous examples of Hawaiian Art Deco are the Hawaii Theatre and the Schofield Barracks Historic District.

==International==
The Hawaii State Capitol is the centerpiece of Honolulu&#x27;s collection of buildings in the Hawaiian international style of architecture. Developed in the 1920s and popularized in the 1960s, Bauhaus architecture became a widespread trend throughout the world. An American form of Bauhaus architecture called the international style was accepted in Hawaii and became a trend especially for downtown Honolulu office buildings. Bauhaus employed classical principles in their most simplified forms without the use of heavy ornamentation. Characteristic of Bauhaus were dull colors like white, gray, beige and black and embraced open floor plans.

Bauhaus became an inspiration for Hawaii Governor John A. Burns in his plans to construct a new capitol building for his state. The Hawaii State Capitol was true to the traditions of Bauhaus in its use of clean lines, simple geometric shapes, pervasive use of black and the gray of concrete and the openness of the entire structure. But like all other architectural imports to Hawaii, Bauhaus was transformed into a uniquely Hawaiian style with the addition of several treatments.

Hawaiian international architecture used precious indigenous koa wood for doors and furnishings and designs employed symbolism of natural Hawaiian phenomena. The capitol dome, for example, is designed to reflect the volcanic origins of the Hawaiian Islands. Beneath the dome is a mosaic by Tadashi Sato representing the frequently changing colors of the Hawaiian coastal waters. Tied into the ocean theme, the capitol is surrounded by water just as the Hawaiian Islands are surrounded. The main space of the capitol building is open to the environment with entrances facing the sea and the mountain, respectively.
Architects: Belt, Lemmon &amp; Low (Architects Hawaii Ltd.) and John Carl Warnecke

==Plantation==
At the same time that the monarchy and various corporations developed Downtown Honolulu with their renditions of Hawaiian Renaissance styles, residential homes were being built in the outskirts of the city and elsewhere in the state. The style became known as Hawaiian plantation architecture featuring low profile wood frames, vertical plank siding and large porticos. Roofs were the most distinguishable parts of Hawaiian plantation structures as they were wide-hipped or bellcast and had eaves that were deep bracketed. When viewed against the natural Hawaiian environment, Hawaiian plantation structures look as though they blend easily with their surroundings. The style gets its name from the sugarcane and pineapple plantations, which employed the design for labourer homesteads.

By the 1970s and 1980s, the Hawaiian plantation style was headed toward extinction with the importation of popular trends from California and other western states. But a movement began in the late 1990s that revived the Hawaiian plantation style in a contemporary manner. The wide-hipped or bell-cast roofs were adapted for use in large-scale construction projects like the renovation of Ala Moana Center, Victoria Ward Centers and the building of new towers at the Hawaiian Village Hotel. The style gained new popularity and were employed in new commercial and residential developments in West Oahu especially in the new city of Kapolei. Hawaiian plantation architecture became a signature style for Hawaii and is the most recognizable Hawaiian style being exported to other parts of the globe.

==Skyscrapers==

 Only recently did Hawaii develop a skyscraper skyline with such projects as the First Hawaiian Tower at 1132 Bishop Street and the First Hawaiian Center at 999 Bishop Street, both in downtown Honolulu. Even skyscrapers in Hawaii could not be constructed without the addition of metaphors and symbolism tied to Hawaii&#x27;s natural phenomena. For example, the First Hawaiian Center completed in 1996 employed horizontally louvered windows that framed views of the sea while vertically proportioned windows faced the mountains. A great deal of effort was made to incorporate as much natural light into the building interiors.

Perhaps Norman Lacayo was the most influential architect of the late-20th century in downtown Honolulu. He was the architect for the iconic building, Harbor Court, the anchor of the redevelopment of the downtown waterfront. Harbor Court is a multi-use building with restaurants in the lower floors and a split residential/office tower. No other building in Honolulu captures the romantic spirit of Hawaii. The stepping of the residential tower and the articulation of the office wing create a dynamic similar to the steep volcanic mountain range that borders the city. Although many of his residential towers are distributed throughout Honolulu, most are located along the Nuuanu corridor.

==Evolving residential architecture==

Charles William Dickey from as early as 1899 expressed the concern that an architecture suitable for Hawaii&#x27;s environment be developed and it is this sensitivity for which his architecture is best remembered. He strove in his turn-of-the-20th-century residential work to design houses in which &quot;the culture of the people has asserted itself.&quot; He stressed the need for broad lānais, interior courtyards and fountains, and felt that the &quot;California Mission&quot; style of architecture &quot;is certainly most appropriate for Hawaii.&quot;

Continuing in the evolution of modern Hawaiian Architecture, a great number of contemporary architects have interpreted a &quot;modern&quot; version of Hawaiian Architecture Styles and Sensibilities.

==See also==
*Indigenous architecture
*Architecture of Samoa
*Wharenui

==Notes==
==References==

* Geoffrey W. Fairfax, &quot;The Architecture of Honolulu&quot;, Island Heritage, c. 1972. (out of print)
* Robert Jay, &quot;The Architecture of Charles W. Dickey: Hawaii and California&quot;, University of Hawaii Press, 1994. (out of print)
* Jan Rensel and Margaret Rodman, &quot;Home in the Islands: Housing and Social Change in the Pacific&quot;, University of Hawaii Press, 1997.
* Penkiunas, Daina Julia. &quot;American Regional Architecture in Hawaii: Honolulu, 1915–1935&quot;. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Virginia, 1990. (Published by UMI, Ann Arbor, 1993.)
* Rob Sandler, Julie Mehta, and Frank S. Haines. &quot;Architecture in Hawaii: A Chronological Survey,&quot; new edition, Mutual Publishing, 2008.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5684584" start="0" end="21" title="Hawaiian architecture" label="Hawaiian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="39" end="58" title="architectural style" label="architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="99" end="115" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="277" end="284" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q10749897" start="305" end="314" title="ancient Hawaii" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="327" end="338" title="Kingdom of Hawaii" label="kingdom era"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="349" end="366" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="territorial years"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="370" end="379" title="Hawaii" label="statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q142425" start="556" end="566" title="Indigenous peoples of Oceania" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="567" end="583" title="native Hawaiians" label="native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="745" end="752" title="Whaling" label="whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="757" end="769" title="Fur trade" label="fur trappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="775" end="781" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="803" end="814" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="822" end="838" title="France" label="French Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="860" end="877" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="883" end="887" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="893" end="903" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="927" end="931" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="976" end="984" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10749897" start="1217" end="1231" title="Ancient Hawaii" label="ancient Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097744" start="1490" end="1495" title="heiau" label="heiau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229001" start="1511" end="1517" title="kahuna" label="kahuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="1566" end="1572" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726594" start="1597" end="1601" title="Ali&amp;#x27;i" label="alii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="1758" end="1764" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="1804" end="1809" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1900" end="1907" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036514" start="1917" end="1924" title="Captain (Royal Navy)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="1925" end="1935" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777801" start="2075" end="2078" title="Acacia koa" label="koa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212817" start="2104" end="2108" title="kapa" label="kapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="2232" end="2240" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389032" start="2255" end="2258" title="Tiki" label="Kii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797440" start="2812" end="2819" title="lean-to" label="lean-to"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315918" start="2862" end="2869" title="A-frame building" label="A frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="2970" end="2984" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="2985" end="2995" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q497096" start="2996" end="3009" title="Hiram Bingham I" label="Hiram Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3011" end="3023" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="3024" end="3033" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q487704" start="3096" end="3104" title="Honolulu County, Hawaii" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012971" start="3109" end="3116" title="Lahaina, Hawaii" label="Lāhainā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="3227" end="3256" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational meeting-houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3295" end="3306" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q382362" start="3372" end="3385" title="Weatherboarding" label="weatherboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q382362" start="3393" end="3403" title="Clapboard (architecture)" label="clapboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024056" start="3487" end="3501" title="Puritan work ethic" label="puritan ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3538" end="3548" title="Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="3880" end="3892" title="coral" label="coral blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="3907" end="3911" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q232871" start="4034" end="4049" title="Kaahumanu" label="Queen Kaahumanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303462" start="4179" end="4196" title="downtown Honolulu" label="downtown Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379539" start="4198" end="4214" title="Kawaiahao Church" label="Kawaiahao Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q697595" start="4575" end="4626" title="Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary" label="Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687074" start="4658" end="4671" title="Louis Désiré Maigret" label="Louis Maigret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052335" start="4765" end="4795" title="Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace" label="Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="4858" end="4866" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705099" start="5002" end="5011" title="Ala Moana" label="Ala Moana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349111" start="5016" end="5023" title="Kakaako" label="Kakaako"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="5228" end="5239" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="5310" end="5319" title="classical architecture" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="5321" end="5328" title="baroque architecture" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="5330" end="5341" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="5343" end="5349" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="5354" end="5366" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="5474" end="5493" title="Neo-Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681149" start="5526" end="5548" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Honolulu" label="Hawaii Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030775" start="5634" end="5660" title="Libert H. Boeynaems" label="Bishop Libert H. Boeynaems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608567" start="6061" end="6086" title="Stephen Alencastre" label="Bishop Stephen Alencastre"/>
<link wikidata="Q470398" start="6347" end="6360" title="Kamehameha IV" label="Kamehameha IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="6400" end="6408" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116896" start="6409" end="6425" title="Church of Hawaii" label="Church of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383380" start="6444" end="6471" title="Episcopal Diocese of Hawaii" label="Episcopal Diocese of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792709" start="6515" end="6544" title="Thomas Nettleship Staley" label="Lord Thomas Nettleship Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052213" start="6598" end="6630" title="Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew, Honolulu" label="Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q887354" start="6677" end="6689" title="Kamehameha V" label="Kamehameha V"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="6816" end="6824" title="Vault (architecture)" label="vaulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="6907" end="6920" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574219" start="7063" end="7078" title="Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii" label="Royal Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q448450" start="7087" end="7098" title="Aloha Tower" label="Aloha Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q601505" start="7660" end="7679" title="House of Kamehameha" label="House of Kamehameha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336640" start="7699" end="7713" title="Aliiolani Hale" label="Aliiōlani Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="7778" end="7785" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="8018" end="8023" title="Roman architecture" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684626" start="8103" end="8112" title="Hawaiiana" label="Hawaiiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="8248" end="8256" title="Kalākaua" label="Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848439" start="9047" end="9062" title="Iolani Barracks" label="Iolani Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="9201" end="9209" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="9210" end="9216" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23423" start="9222" end="9232" title="Crenellation" label="crenelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286070" start="9233" end="9240" title="parapet" label="parapet"/>
<link wikidata="Q917098" start="9764" end="9776" title="barrel vault" label="barrel vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q14089752" start="9782" end="9793" title="groin vault" label="groin vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q826520" start="9857" end="9881" title="Bernice P. Bishop Museum" label="Bernice P. Bishop Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="9973" end="9983" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="9988" end="9996" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10038" end="10044" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="10095" end="10108" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960023" start="10505" end="10536" title="Waikiki Natatorium War Memorial" label="Waikiki Natatorium War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q254861" start="10540" end="10547" title="Waikiki" label="Waikīkī"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684427" start="10603" end="10617" title="Hawaii Theatre" label="Hawaii Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430708" start="10626" end="10662" title="Schofield Barracks, Hawai&amp;#x27;i" label="Schofield Barracks Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290002" start="10687" end="10707" title="Hawaii State Capitol" label="Hawaii State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="10876" end="10896" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="10997" end="11016" title="international style (architecture)" label="international style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589655" start="11362" end="11377" title="Governor of Hawaii" label="Hawaii Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q880606" start="11378" end="11391" title="John A. Burns" label="John A. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674370" start="12100" end="12112" title="Tadashi Sato" label="Tadashi Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303462" start="12593" end="12610" title="Downtown Honolulu" label="Downtown Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="13222" end="13231" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="13236" end="13245" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="13246" end="13256" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431609" start="13699" end="13715" title="Ala Moana Center" label="Ala Moana Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927134" start="13717" end="13738" title="Victoria Ward Centers" label="Victoria Ward Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135697" start="13777" end="13799" title="Hilton Hawaiian Village" label="Hawaiian Village Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="13901" end="13910" title="Oahu" label="West Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110254" start="13941" end="13948" title="Kapolei, Hawaii" label="Kapolei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591615" start="14206" end="14226" title="Hawaii Pacific University" label="First Hawaiian Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281206" start="14257" end="14278" title="First Hawaiian Center" label="First Hawaiian Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554375" start="14548" end="14554" title="louver" label="louver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298922" start="14994" end="15012" title="Mixed-use development" label="multi-use building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083546" start="15482" end="15504" title="Charles William Dickey" label="Charles William Dickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482869" start="15871" end="15876" title="Lānai (Hawaiian language)" label="lānai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700522" start="15938" end="15956" title="Mission Revival Style architecture" label="California Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874566" start="16255" end="16278" title="Indigenous architecture" label="Indigenous architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787189" start="16280" end="16301" title="Architecture of Samoa" label="Architecture of Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990652" start="16303" end="16311" title="Wharenui" label="Wharenui"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358493" start="16691" end="16717" title="University of Hawaii Press" label="University of Hawaii Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="16846" end="16868" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111400" start="16890" end="16893" title="ProQuest" label="UMI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706208" wikidata="Q7329579" url="?curid=706208" title="Richard Turner (iron-founder)">
<text>Richard Turner (1798–1881) was an Irish iron founder and manufacturer of glasshouses, born in Dublin. He is rated as one of the most important glasshouse designers of his time. His works included the Palm House at Kew Gardens (with Decimus Burton), the glasshouse in the Winter Gardens at Regent&#x27;s Park in London, the Palm House at Belfast Botanic Gardens and the Curvilinear Range at the Irish National Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin, Ireland.

==Life==
Turner was born in Dublin around 1798, the son of a merchant Timothy Turner and Catherine (née Sissons). Both his grandfather and great-grandfather were also ironsmiths, the elder of which worked on the provost&#x27;s house at Trinity College, Dublin. Turner inherited the ironworks from his uncle, also named Richard Turner. Turner became a property speculator, building houses on Pembroke Road, Leeson Street and Rathmines Road in Dublin. All of the houses were known for their geometric fanlights. He married Jane Goodshaw in 1816, and the couple had at least 10 children.

==Iron foundry work==

Turner earliest known curvilinear conservatory from 1833 at Colebrooke, County Fermanagh. In 1834, he set up the Hammersmith ironworks in Ballsbridge. It was from here that he made the lightest iron structures of the time using wrought iron ribs linked with cast iron tubes. One of his key patrons was Ninian Niven, the director of the National Botanic Gardens at Glasnevin. Turner built the east side of the Palm House for the Gardens in 1834, and potentially the miniature version which is attached to Niven&#x27;s house in Monkstown.

Turner designed and constructed the railway sheds at Westland Row and at the Broadstone in Dublin, and Lime Street in Liverpool, but also turned his hand to the design and manufacture of railings, boilers, cisterns and bedsteads. His entry in Thom’s directory for 1849 describes him as ‘manufacturer of wrought-iron gates, railway conservatories, hothouses etc., and hot water engineer’, indicating the broad range of activities which the firm undertook.

Turner entered the initial competition for designs for the London International Exhibition of 1851 and out of 233 entries was jointly awarded the second prize along with an entry by Hector Horeau. The final built design was &quot;The Crystal Palace&quot; by Joseph Paxton.

==Premises==
Turner&#x27;s premises from the 1830s was at Hammersmith Works, Ballsbridge. The site was later owned by the building firm G&amp;T Crampton until 1963, and is now the site of Hume House offices. In Samuel Lewis’s 1837 &quot;Topographical Dictionary of Ireland&quot;, he describes the new Hammersmith Works as part of the entry for ‘Ball’s-Bridge’ as follows: ‘Near the village are the Hammersmith iron-works, established in 1834 by Mr. R. Turner: the front of this extensive establishment is 200 feet long, presenting a handsome façade towards the road; and at the back are numerous dwelling houses for the workmen, which are called the Hammersmith cottages. The road on which these works are situated has been greatly improved; wide footpaths have been formed, and the whole is lighted with gas. Nearly adjoining the works are the botanical gardens belonging to Trinity College’.

==Selected works==
*Marlfield, Clonmel, County Tipperary (1835–40)
*Bellvue at Enniskillen (1835)
*The wings of the palm house at Belfast Botanic Gardens (1839–40)
*Temperate House, Kew Gardens with Decimus Burton
*Palm house, Kew Gardens with Burton
*Waterlily House, Kew Gardens with Burton
*The winter garden at Regent&#x27;s Park, London (1845) dismantled in 1932
*Roofs at Dublin Broadstone railway station (1847)
*Rath House, Ballybrittas, County Laois (1847–50)

==References==
==Sources==
*Dictionary of Irish Architects Richard Turner entry
*Curvilinear Range information
*Lewis, S. (1837) &quot;A Topographical Dictionary of Ireland&quot;, London.
*Thom, A. (1849) &quot;Dublin Street Directory&quot;, Dublin.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7329579" start="0" end="14" title="Richard Turner (iron-founder)" label="Richard Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="34" end="39" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208210" start="40" end="52" title="iron founder" label="iron founder"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="73" end="84" title="Greenhouse" label="glasshouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="94" end="100" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748726" start="214" end="225" title="Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q714418" start="232" end="246" title="Decimus Burton" label="Decimus Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q739341" start="289" end="307" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="311" end="317" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115229" start="337" end="360" title="Belfast Botanic Gardens" label="Belfast Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q841037" start="394" end="424" title="Irish National Botanic Gardens" label="Irish National Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021986" start="426" end="435" title="Glasnevin" label="Glasnevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="683" end="706" title="Trinity College, Dublin" label="Trinity College, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085900" start="1194" end="1205" title="Ballsbridge" label="Ballsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q841037" start="1392" end="1416" title="National Botanic Gardens (Ireland)" label="National Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242361" start="1697" end="1708" title="Lime Street, Liverpool" label="Lime Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085900" start="2401" end="2412" title="Ballsbridge" label="Ballsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q108523699" start="2460" end="2476" title="G&amp;amp;T Crampton" label="G&amp;amp;T Crampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771809" start="3239" end="3257" title="Marlfield, Clonmel" label="Marlfield, Clonmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q990109" start="3298" end="3309" title="Enniskillen" label="Enniskillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115229" start="3349" end="3372" title="Botanic Gardens (Belfast)" label="Belfast Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698324" start="3384" end="3399" title="Temperate House" label="Temperate House"/>
<link wikidata="Q188617" start="3401" end="3412" title="Kew Gardens" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q714418" start="3418" end="3432" title="Decimus Burton" label="Decimus Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q746398" start="3434" end="3444" title="Palm house" label="Palm house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972306" start="3597" end="3630" title="Dublin Broadstone railway station" label="Dublin Broadstone railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q135311" start="3651" end="3663" title="Ballybrittas" label="Ballybrittas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083946" start="3717" end="3747" title="Dictionary of Irish Architects" label="Dictionary of Irish Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412007" start="3801" end="3810" title="Samuel Lewis (publisher)" label="Lewis, S."/>
<link wikidata="Q4720211" start="3878" end="3886" title="Alexander Thom (almanac editor)" label="Thom, A."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706215" wikidata="Q7374789" url="?curid=706215" title="Prittlewell royal Anglo-Saxon burial">
<text>The Prittlewell royal Anglo-Saxon burial or Prittlewell princely burial is a high-status Anglo-Saxon burial mound which was excavated at Prittlewell, north of Southend-on-Sea, in the English county of Essex.

Artefacts found by archaeologists in the burial chamber are of a quality that initially suggested that this tomb in Prittlewell was a tomb of one of the Anglo-Saxon Kings of Essex, and the discovery of golden foil crosses indicate that the burial was of an early Anglo-Saxon Christian. The burial is now dated to about 580, and is thought that it contained the remains of Sæxa, brother of Sæberht of Essex.

In May 2019, some of the excavated artefacts went on permanent display in Southend Central Museum.

==Excavation==
In the autumn of 2003, in preparation for a road-widening scheme, an archaeological survey was carried out on a plot of land to the north-east of Priory Park in Prittlewell. Earlier excavations had indicated Anglo-Saxon burials in the area, however it was not expected that such a significant find could be made. The archaeologists were lucky in the placement of their trench and uncovered a large Anglo-Saxon burial, and removed many important artefacts, mostly in metalwork. The site is located between the A1159 road and the Shenfield–Southend railway line, close to an Aldi supermarket and The Saxon King pub.

Archaeologists from the Museum of London Archaeology Service, under the supervision of Atkins Ltd, excavated the site and discovered an undisturbed 7th-century chamber grave beneath a mound. They described it as &quot;the most spectacular discovery of its kind made during the past 60 years&quot;.

In total, about 110 objects were lifted by conservators in two phases, over a period of ten days. Some of the objects were block-lifted together with the soil in which they were embedded. The final lift was completed on 20 December 2003, with final defining of the chamber walls and back-filling continuing for three days after.

The quality and preservation of the Prittlewell chamber burial has led to comparisons with the Sutton Hoo Ship Burial and associated graves, discovered in 1939, as well as with the discovery of Tutankhamun&#x27;s tomb in 1922.

== Burial chamber and artefacts ==

Excavation demonstrated the burial chamber to be a deep, formerly timber-walled room full of objects of copper, gold, silver and iron, which had gradually collapsed and filled with soil as its wooden containing walls and ceiling decayed. The finds included an Anglo-Saxon hanging bowl, decorated with inlaid escutcheons and a cruciform arrangement of applied strips, a folding stool, three stave-built tubs or buckets with iron bands, a sword and a lyre, the last one of the most complete found in Britain. The tomb itself is square, the largest chambered tomb ever discovered in England.

The body had been laid in a wooden coffin, with two small gold-foil crosses, one over each eye. One opinion was that he had been laid in the coffin by Christians, and that the coffin had been then buried by pagans, reflecting divided attitudes towards Christianity at the time. The early dating of the burial, before St Augustine&#x27;s mission to England, has led to recent postulation that the crosses have limited religious significance, and were rather a sign of connection to the continent. They bear a resemblance to contemporary crosses found in Lombardy; they may have been buried with the &#x27;prince&#x27; to imbue him with &quot;Romanitas&quot;, and suggest the growing strength of continental Latin Christian culture in southern England, but not represent personal conversion of faith. The acidic sandy soil had completely dissolved the body&#x27;s bones, and any other bone in the tomb, but some pieces of human teeth were found, but too far affected by decay for DNA to be found in them.

The inventory of grave goods is comparable to one found in a burial in the Taplow Barrow in 1883, and though the overall collection is less sumptuous than that from the ship-burial in Mound 1 at Sutton Hoo, many individual objects are closely comparable and of similar quality. For example, there is a hollow gold belt buckle, but much plainer than that from Sutton Hoo, but the lyre, drinking vessels, and copper-alloy shoe buckles are very similar. As at Sutton Hoo, the best hope for closely dating the burial is the Merovingian gold coins, however the dating of these is a complicated matter, based on their metallic content rather than the design and information stamped on them. Research continues on this as on other aspects of the find, but the evidence initially suggests a date in the period 600–650, or 600–630. There is an object identified as a &quot;standard&quot;, as at Sutton Hoo, but of a different type, and there is a folding stool of a type often seen in royal portraits in Early Medieval manuscripts (like a &quot;curule seat&quot;) that is a unique find in England, and was probably imported.

The design of the lyre was reconstructed from soil impressions and surviving metal pieces. There was evidence that it had been repaired at least once. A copy of it was made in yew wood and played to accompany a funeral song sung for King Sæberht in Old English and English in St Mary&#x27;s Church in Southend.

==Theories about occupant==
The quality of the locally made objects, and the presence of imported luxury items such as the Coptic bowl and flagon, appear to point to a royal burial. The most obvious candidates were originally thought to be either Sæberht of Essex (died 616) or his grandson Sigeberht II of Essex (murdered 653), who are the two East Saxon Kings known to have converted to Christianity during this period. As the evidence pointed to an early seventh century date, Sæberht was considered more likely.

However, carbon-dating techniques have since indicated a revised date in the late 6th century. In May 2019, it was reported that a team of 40 specialists from the Museum of London Archaeology (MOLA) now believe the tomb could have belonged to Sæxa, Sæberht&#x27;s brother. Carbon dating had indicated that the tomb was built between 575 and 605, at least 11 years before Sæberht&#x27;s death. Further details of the latest research have been published on the MOLA website.

It is, however, also possible that the occupant is of some other wealthy and powerful individual whose identity has gone unrecorded. In the meantime, the occupant has acquired the popular nickname of the &quot;King of Bling&quot;, in reference to the rich grave goods.

For many years the location of Sæberht&#x27;s remains has been uncertain. Medieval legend claims that Sæberht and his wife Queen Ethelgoda founded a monastery in London in 604 that later became the site of Westminster Abbey, and that they had been buried in the church there. A recessed marble tomb in the south ambulatory of the abbey purportedly contains the bones of Sæberht, although modern scholars cast doubt on its veracity.

==Post-excavation events ==

In 2004 a re-dedication of the King&#x27;s tomb was hosted by the Bishop of Chelmsford John Gladwin and a large celebration event took place attended by over 5000 people in the area. The tomb was re-dedicated in a ceremony held at Prittlewell Priory supported by 85 local churches and voluntary organisations entitled &#x27;Discover the King&#x27;. The event patron was local MP Sir Teddy Taylor and the chair of the organising event was Jonathan Ullmer.

After the discovery of the Prittlewell tomb and the completion of archaeological excavations, local protestors campaigned for Southend Borough Council to cancel the A1159 road road widening scheme, as the planned road would go across the burial site. From September 2005 to July 2009 the site was occupied by a road protest camp known locally as Camp Bling. In 2009 Southend Borough Council announced an alternative road improvement scheme at nearby Cuckoo Corner.

The Prittlewell tomb featured in a 2005 special episode of Channel 4&#x27;s archaeological series &quot;Time Team&quot;, entitled &quot;King of Bling&quot;, and devoted to Prittlewell.

The archaeological work was the winner of the Developer Funded Archaeology Award as part of the British Archaeological Awards for 2006. Southend Borough Council undertook to find a home for the archaeological finds in order to keep them in the borough, and announced that a new gallery would be created at Southend Central Museum to display the artefacts. After restoration work and carbon dating had been completed, the new museum gallery opened to the public in May 2019.

==Early Anglo-Saxon Prittlewell==
In addition to the princely burial, there is other archaeological evidence of early Anglo-Saxon occupation of Prittlewell. A 1923 excavation in Priory Crescent revealed a 6th or 7th century Anglo-Saxon cemetery which may have extended into what is now Priory Park. The parish church, a short distance to the south, contains a remnant of a 7th-century church.

==Notes==
==References==
*
*

==Further reading==
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7374789" start="4" end="40" title="Prittlewell royal Anglo-Saxon burial" label="Prittlewell royal Anglo-Saxon burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374789" start="44" end="71" title="Prittlewell royal Anglo-Saxon burial" label="Prittlewell princely burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763672" start="89" end="113" title="Anglo-Saxon burial mounds" label="Anglo-Saxon burial mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997004" start="137" end="148" title="Prittlewell" label="Prittlewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="159" end="174" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="201" end="206" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="362" end="373" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110888" start="374" end="388" title="Kings of Essex" label="Kings of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456843" start="466" end="493" title="Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England" label="early Anglo-Saxon Christian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="581" end="585" title="Sæxa" label="Sæxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q558536" start="598" end="614" title="Sæberht of Essex" label="Sæberht of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569537" start="691" end="714" title="Southend Central Museum" label="Southend Central Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245990" start="878" end="889" title="Priory Park, Southend-on-Sea" label="Priory Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997004" start="893" end="904" title="Prittlewell" label="Prittlewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177535" start="1241" end="1251" title="A1159 road" label="A1159 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494235" start="1260" end="1291" title="Shenfield–Southend line" label="Shenfield–Southend railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="1305" end="1309" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940934" start="1371" end="1407" title="Museum of London Archaeology Service" label="Museum of London Archaeology Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q503256" start="2071" end="2081" title="Sutton Hoo" label="Sutton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q835309" start="2170" end="2193" title="Tutankhamun&amp;#x27;s tomb" label="Tutankhamun&amp;#x27;s tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="2344" end="2350" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2369" end="2373" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648024" start="2512" end="2524" title="hanging bowl" label="hanging bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="2689" end="2693" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q32520" start="3147" end="3166" title="Augustine of Canterbury" label="St Augustine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362697" start="3471" end="3480" title="Romanitas" label="Romanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="3808" end="3811" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684716" start="3909" end="3922" title="Taplow Barrow" label="Taplow Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4018" end="4039" title="Sutton_Hoo#Mound_1" label="Mound 1 at Sutton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="4354" end="4365" title="Merovingian" label="Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064051" start="4870" end="4881" title="curule seat" label="curule seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="5127" end="5130" title="Taxus baccata" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q558536" start="5189" end="5196" title="Sæberht of Essex" label="Sæberht"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="5200" end="5211" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q558536" start="5510" end="5526" title="Sæberht of Essex" label="Sæberht of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q880230" start="5554" end="5575" title="Sigeberht II of Essex" label="Sigeberht II of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456843" start="5639" end="5664" title="Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England" label="converted to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="5789" end="5802" title="carbon-dating" label="carbon-dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940934" start="5943" end="5971" title="Museum of London Archaeology" label="Museum of London Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6023" end="6027" title="Sæxa" label="Sæxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44359" start="6472" end="6477" title="Bling-bling" label="Bling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="6730" end="6747" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q756720" start="6836" end="6846" title="ambulatory" label="ambulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917800" start="7052" end="7072" title="Bishop of Chelmsford" label="Bishop of Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700227" start="7073" end="7085" title="John Gladwin" label="John Gladwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245990" start="7217" end="7235" title="Prittlewell Priory" label="Prittlewell Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12899736" start="7369" end="7381" title="Teddy Taylor" label="Teddy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569516" start="7568" end="7592" title="Southend Borough Council" label="Southend Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177535" start="7607" end="7617" title="A1159 road" label="A1159 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339498" start="7753" end="7765" title="Road protest (UK)" label="road protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027013" start="7788" end="7798" title="Camp Bling" label="Camp Bling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805125" start="7948" end="7963" title="Time Team (specials)" label="special episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="7967" end="7976" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788226" start="8012" end="8021" title="Time Team" label="Time Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998867" start="8190" end="8219" title="British Archaeological Awards" label="British Archaeological Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569537" start="8400" end="8423" title="Southend Central Museum" label="Southend Central Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706216" wikidata="Q1337934" url="?curid=706216" title="Jökulhlaup">
<text>A jökulhlaup ( ) (literally &quot;glacial run&quot;) is a type of glacial outburst flood. It is an Icelandic term that has been adopted in glaciological terminology in many languages. 
It originally referred to the well-known subglacial outburst floods from Vatnajökull, Iceland, which are triggered by geothermal heating and occasionally by a volcanic subglacial eruption, but it is now used to describe any large and abrupt release of water from a subglacial or proglacial lake/reservoir.

Since jökulhlaups emerge from hydrostatically sealed lakes with floating levels far above the threshold, their peak discharge can be much larger than that of a marginal or extra-marginal lake burst. The hydrograph of a jökulhlaup from Vatnajökull typically either climbs over a period of weeks with the largest flow near the end, or it climbs much faster during the course of some hours. These patterns are suggested to reflect channel melting, and sheet flow under the front, respectively. Similar processes on a very large scale occurred during the deglaciation of North America and Europe after the last ice age (e.g., Lake Agassiz and the English Channel), and presumably at earlier times, although the geological record is not well preserved.

==Formation process==

===Subglacial water generation===
Subglacial meltwater may be produced on the glacier surface (supraglacially), below the glacier (basally) or in both locations. Ablation (surface melting) tends to result in surface pooling. Basal melting results from geothermal heat flux out of the earth, which varies with location, as well as from friction heating which results from the ice moving over the surface below it. In 1997 analyses concluded that, based on basal meltwater production rates, the annual production of subglacial water from one typical northwestern Germany catchment was during the last Weichselian glaciation.

=== Supraglacial and subglacial water flow===
Meltwater may flow either above the glacier (supraglacially), below the glacier (subglacially/basally) or as groundwater in an aquifer below the glacier as a result of the hydraulic transmissivity of the subsoil under the glacier. If the rate of production exceeds the rate of loss through the aquifer, then water will collect in surface or subglacial ponds or lakes.

The signatures of supraglacial and basal water flow differ with the passage zone. Supraglacial flow is similar to stream flow in all surface environments—water flows from higher areas to lower areas under the influence of gravity. Basal flow under the glacier exhibits significant differences. In basal flow the water, either produced by melting at the base or drawn downward from the surface by gravity, collects at the base of the glacier in ponds and lakes in a pocket overlain by hundreds of metres of ice. If there is no surface drainage path, water from surface melting will flow downward and collect in crevices in the ice, while water from basal melting collects under the glacier; either source can form a subglacial lake. The hydraulic head of the water collected in a basal lake will increase as water drains through the ice until the pressure grows high enough either to force a path through the ice or to float the ice above it.

===Episodic releases===
If meltwater accumulates, the discharges are episodic under continental ice sheets as well as under Alpine glaciers. The discharge results when water collects, the overlying ice is lifted, and the water moves outward in a pressurized layer or a growing under-ice lake. Areas where the ice is most easily lifted (i.e. areas with thinner overlying ice sheets) are lifted first. Hence the water may move up the terrain underlying the glacier if it moves toward areas of lower overlying ice. As water collects, additional ice is lifted until a release path is created.

If no preexisting channel is present, the water is initially released in a broad-front jökulhlaup which can have a flow front that is tens of kilometres wide, spreading out in a thin front. As the flow continues, it tends to erode the underlying materials and the overlying ice, creating a tunnel valley channel even as the reduced pressure allows most of the glacial ice to settle back to the underlying surface, sealing off the broad front release and channelizing the flow. The direction of the channel is defined primarily by the overlying ice thickness and second by the gradient of the underlying earth, and may be observed to &quot;run uphill&quot; as the pressure of the ice forces the water to areas of lower ice coverage until it emerges at a glacial face. Hence the configuration of the various tunnel valleys formed by a specific glaciation provides a general mapping of the glacier thickness when the tunnel valleys were formed, particularly if the original surface relief under the glacier was limited.

The rapid, high-volume discharge is highly erosive, as evidenced by the debris found in tunnels and at the mouth of tunnels, which tends to be coarse rocks and boulders. This erosive environment is consistent with creation of tunnels over 400 m deep and 2.5 km wide, as have been observed in the Antarctic.

Piotrowski has developed a detailed analytic model of the process, which predicts a cycle as follows:
# Meltwater is produced as a result of geothermal heating from below. Surface ablation water is not considered as it would be minimal at the glacial maximum and evidence indicates that surface water does not penetrate more than 100 meters into a glacier.
# Meltwater initially drains through subglacial aquifers.
# When the hydraulic transmissivity of the substratum is exceeded, subglacial meltwater accumulates in basins.
# Water accumulates sufficiently to open the ice blockage in the tunnel valley which accumulated after the last discharge.
# The tunnel valley discharges the meltwater excess—turbulent flow melts out or erodes the excess ice as well as eroding the valley floor.
# As the water level drops, the pressure decreases until the tunnel valleys again close with ice and water flow ceases.
===Human triggered===
A subglacial lake in Iceland was inadvertently triggered by a borehole drilled through the overlying ice. The authors suggested that hydrofracturing crevasses and flooding of moulins by precipitation events may be natural triggers of jökulhlaups.

==Examples==
Whilst jökulhlaups were originally associated with Vatnajökull, they have been reported in the literature over a broad range of locations including the present day Antarctic, and there is evidence that they also occurred in the Laurentian ice sheet and the Scandinavian ice sheet during the Last Glacial Maximum.

===Iceland===
*Mýrdalsjökull is subject to large jökulhlaups when the subglacial volcano Katla erupts, roughly every 40 to 80 years. The eruption in 1755 is estimated to have had a peak discharge of .

*The Grímsvötn volcano frequently causes large jökulhlaups from Vatnajökull. The 1996 eruption of Gjálp sent melt water southwards into Grímsvötn, that caused a jökulhlaup with a peak flow of and lasted for several days. This is the largest Grímsvötn glacial flood ever recorded.

* The Eyjafjallajökull volcano can cause jökulhlaups. The 2010 eruption caused a jökulhlaup with a peak flow of about .

Work in Iceland has categorised jökulhlaups by origin and size. The categories of origin are:
*From an ice-dammed marginal lakes such as when an outlet glacier closes off an ice-free side valley.
**Grænalón was a former example of such a lake.
*From a supraglacial lake formed by accumulation of melt water in a depression on the surface of the glacier.
**Such jökulhlaups tend to be small in Iceland
*From a subglacial lake.
**Tend to be formed by geothermal activity as found in the eastern and western Skaftá ice cauldrons and Grímsvötn.
*From a volcanic eruption underneath a glacier (subglacial eruption).
** While melt water might flow immediately away from the eruption site, it might also accumulate near the site creating an unstable reservoir as has happened in the jökulhlaup from Eyjafjallajökull in 2010 and Katla eruptions underneath Mýrdalsjökull.
*From melting after a pyroclastic flow onto snow and ice in explosive eruptions in stratovolcanoes.
**This type of flood may be a lahar and has happened at Hekla.
*From a glacier surge into a proglacial lake or at the end of the surge when the subglacial drainage system re-establishes itself. 
**The 1999 surge of Langjökull at its outlet glacier of Eystri-Hagafellsjökull was into a lake which then flooded downstream.
*From a landslide. Substantial potential energy is released in such slides, which can cause melting of ice and creation of flood water either if the slide falls onto a glacier or displaces water in a glacier dammed lake. 
**The 1967 rockslide onto the Steinsholtsjökull outlet glacier of Eyjafjallajökull caused such a flood.

===North America===
In July 1994, an ice-dammed surface lake drained via a subglacial tunnel through , in the British Columbian Coast Mountains, resulting in a jökulhlaup. The flood surge of from 100 to 300 m3/second flowed 11 km through Farrow Creek to terminate in Chilko Lake, causing significant erosion. The ice dam has not reformed. Similar British Columbian jökulhlaups are summarized in the table below.

As the Laurentide Ice Sheet receded from its maximum extent from around 21,000 to 13,000 years ago, two significant meltwater rerouting events occurred in eastern North America. Though there is still much debate among geologists as to where these events occurred, they likely took place when the ice sheet receded from the Adirondack Mountains and the St. Lawrence Lowlands.
* First, Glacial Lake Iroquois drained to the Atlantic in catastrophic Hudson Valley releases, as the receding ice sheet dam failed and re-established itself in three jökulhlaups. Evidence of the scale of the meltwater discharge down the Hudson Valley includes deeply incised sediments in the valley, large sediment deposit lobes on the continental shelf, and glacial erratic boulders greater than 2 metres in diameter on the outer shelf.
* Later, when the St. Lawrence Valley was deglaciated, Glacial Lake Candona drained to the North Atlantic, with subsequent drainage events routed through the Champlain Sea and St. Lawrence Valley. This surge of meltwater to the North Atlantic by jökulhlaup about 13,350 years ago is believed to have triggered the reduction in thermohaline circulation and the short-lived Northern Hemisphere Intra-Allerød cold period.
* Finally, Lake Agassiz was an immense glacial lake located in the center of North America. Fed by glacial runoff at the end of the last glacial period, its area was larger than all of the modern Great Lakes combined, and it held more water than contained by all lakes in the world today. It drained in a series of events between 13,000 BP and 8,400 BP.
* Also, into the Pacific Ocean, large drainage events took place through the Columbia River Gorge, dubbed the Missoula Floods.
* Since 2011, periodic glacial floods have occurred from the Suicide Basin through the Mendenhall Glacier in Juneau, Alaska multiple times each year, with major such floods occurring in the summer of 2023 and 2024.

===India===

On 7 February 2021, part of Nanda Devi Glacier broke away in the 2021 Uttarakhand glacier burst, triggering outburst flood sweeping away a power plant. More than 150 people were feared dead.

===Sweden===
Around 9500 BC the Baltic Ice Lake was tapped on water as the ice front retreated north of mount Billingen.

==See also==
*1996 eruption of Gjálp
*Altai flood
*Diluvium
*Giant current ripples
*Glacial Lake Ojibway
*1818 Giétro Glacier catastrophe
*Glacial lake outburst flood
*Outburst flood

== References ==
==External links==

*Video of a jökulhlaup at Eyjafjallajokull volcano, Iceland 14 April 2010, Blog of Professor Dave Petley, Durham University
*NOAA. Jokulhlaup Brochure. Jökulhlaup in the United States.

==Further reading==
* Helgi Björnsson: Subglacial lakes and jökulhlaups in Iceland. Global and Planetary Change 35 (2002) 255–271</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1337934" start="2" end="12" title="Jökulhlaup" label="jökulhlaup"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="66" end="73" title="glacial" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612702" start="74" end="88" title="outburst flood" label="outburst flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="99" end="108" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52120" start="139" end="152" title="glaciology" label="glaciological"/>
<link wikidata="Q179734" start="258" end="269" title="Vatnajökull" label="Vatnajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="271" end="278" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q610781" start="353" end="372" title="subglacial eruption" label="subglacial eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140477" start="450" end="460" title="subglacial lake" label="subglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320719" start="464" end="489" title="Proglacial lake" label="proglacial lake/reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q177807" start="522" end="533" title="hydrostatic" label="hydrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="608" end="617" title="discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q320062" start="695" end="705" title="hydrograph" label="hydrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707848" start="1043" end="1055" title="deglaciation" label="deglaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="1094" end="1106" title="Last glacial period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q390804" start="1114" end="1126" title="Lake Agassiz" label="Lake Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="1135" end="1150" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q322177" start="1426" end="1434" title="Ablation" label="Ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14664222" start="1863" end="1885" title="Weichselian glaciation" label="Weichselian glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="2061" end="2068" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2106" end="2130" title="Hydraulic conductivity#Transmissivity" label="hydraulic transmissivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="2525" end="2532" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q369743" start="3039" end="3053" title="hydraulic head" label="hydraulic head"/>
<link wikidata="Q611796" start="4126" end="4139" title="tunnel valley" label="tunnel valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488728" start="6225" end="6240" title="hydrofracturing" label="hydrofracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q766608" start="6267" end="6273" title="Moulin (geomorphology)" label="moulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765405" start="6581" end="6601" title="Laurentian ice sheet" label="Laurentian ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14664222" start="6610" end="6632" title="Scandinavian ice sheet" label="Scandinavian ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="6644" end="6664" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q214818" start="6682" end="6695" title="Mýrdalsjökull" label="Mýrdalsjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q201914" start="6756" end="6761" title="Katla volcano" label="Katla"/>
<link wikidata="Q182913" start="6874" end="6883" title="Grímsvötn" label="Grímsvötn"/>
<link wikidata="Q179734" start="6933" end="6944" title="Vatnajökull" label="Vatnajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q98768975" start="6950" end="6972" title="1996 eruption of Gjálp" label="1996 eruption of Gjálp"/>
<link wikidata="Q39651" start="7156" end="7172" title="Eyjafjallajökull" label="Eyjafjallajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q943482" start="7469" end="7477" title="Grænalón" label="Grænalón"/>
<link wikidata="Q182913" start="7801" end="7810" title="Grímsvötn" label="Grímsvötn"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="8156" end="8172" title="pyroclastic flow" label="pyroclastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="8217" end="8230" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q47212" start="8264" end="8269" title="lahar" label="lahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184975" start="8290" end="8295" title="Hekla" label="Hekla"/>
<link wikidata="Q737657" start="8449" end="8459" title="Langjökull" label="Langjökull"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8843" end="8859" title="Eyjafjallajökull#Geography" label="Eyjafjallajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="8992" end="9008" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q920070" start="9010" end="9025" title="Coast Mountains" label="Coast Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9120" end="9132" title="Farrow Creek" label="Farrow Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q316421" start="9149" end="9160" title="Chilko Lake" label="Chilko Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="9458" end="9471" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q357546" start="9618" end="9638" title="Adirondack Mountains" label="Adirondack Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9647" end="9668" title="St. Lawrence Lowlands" label="St. Lawrence Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215744" start="9679" end="9700" title="Glacial Lake Iroquois" label="Glacial Lake Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="9741" end="9754" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q372934" start="10030" end="10045" title="glacial erratic" label="glacial erratic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10127" end="10146" title="St. Lawrence Valley" label="St. Lawrence Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10164" end="10184" title="Glacial Lake Candona" label="Glacial Lake Candona"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="10200" end="10214" title="North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061490" start="10267" end="10280" title="Champlain Sea" label="Champlain Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q463223" start="10436" end="10460" title="thermohaline circulation" label="thermohaline circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741484" start="10481" end="10526" title="Allerød oscillation" label="Northern Hemisphere Intra-Allerød cold period"/>
<link wikidata="Q390804" start="10539" end="10551" title="Lake Agassiz" label="Lake Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="10865" end="10867" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112581" start="10959" end="10979" title="Columbia River Gorge" label="Columbia River Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q371794" start="10992" end="11007" title="Missoula Floods" label="Missoula Floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920336" start="11096" end="11114" title="Mendenhall Glacier" label="Mendenhall Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="11118" end="11132" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q213262" start="11266" end="11276" title="Nanda Devi" label="Nanda Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q105358710" start="11303" end="11333" title="2021 Uttarakhand glacier burst" label="2021 Uttarakhand glacier burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612702" start="11346" end="11360" title="outburst flood" label="outburst flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="11455" end="11457" title="Anno Domini" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318375" start="11462" end="11477" title="Baltic Ice Lake" label="Baltic Ice Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q862885" start="11540" end="11549" title="Billingen" label="Billingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q98768975" start="11566" end="11588" title="1996 eruption of Gjálp" label="1996 eruption of Gjálp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736086" start="11590" end="11601" title="Altai flood" label="Altai flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586696" start="11603" end="11611" title="Diluvium" label="Diluvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137986" start="11613" end="11634" title="Giant current ripples" label="Giant current ripples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355232" start="11636" end="11656" title="Glacial Lake Ojibway" label="Glacial Lake Ojibway"/>
<link wikidata="Q870017" start="11658" end="11689" title="Giétro Glacier" label="1818 Giétro Glacier catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254417" start="11691" end="11718" title="Glacial lake outburst flood" label="Glacial lake outburst flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612702" start="11720" end="11734" title="Outburst flood" label="Outburst flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="11879" end="11896" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706222" wikidata="Q1199790" url="?curid=706222" title="The Passionate Pilgrim">
<text>The Passionate Pilgrim (1599) is an anthology of 20 poems collected and published by William Jaggard that were attributed to &quot;W. Shakespeare&quot; on the title page, only five of which are considered authentically Shakespearean. These are two sonnets, later to be published in the 1609 collection of &quot;Shakespeare&#x27;s Sonnets&quot;, and three poems extracted from the play &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot;. Five were attributed to other poets during his lifetime, and two were published in other collections anonymously. While most critics disqualify the rest as not Shakespearean on stylistic grounds, stylometric analysis by Ward Elliott and Robert Valenza put two blocks of the poems (4, 6, 7 and 9, and 10, 12, 13 and 15) within Shakespeare&#x27;s stylistic boundaries. Jaggard later published an augmented edition with poems he knew to be by Thomas Heywood.

==Textual history==
&quot;The Passionate Pilgrim&quot; was first published in an octavo volume by William Jaggard, probably in 1599 or possibly the year before, since the printer, probably Thomas Judson, had set up shop after September 1598. The date cannot be fixed with certainty, as the work was not entered in the Stationers&#x27; Register and the title page of the first edition title page is not extant. The last six poems are preceded by a second title page, headed &quot;Sonnets to Sundry Notes of Musicke&quot;, although the reason for the division is not clear.

The first edition (ESTC S107201) survives only in two sheets, forming eleven leaves comprising poems 1–5 and 16–18, preserved in a fragmentary composite copy at the Folger Shakespeare Library, intermixed with sheets of the second edition that were probably added to replace defective leaves. 

In addition to the sheets incorporated into the Folger Library copy of the first edition, two complete copies of the second edition dated 1599 survive (ESTC S106363), one in the Wren Library of Trinity College, Cambridge, and the other in the Huntington Library. The title page of this edition states that the book is to be sold by stationer William Leake, who had obtained the rights to Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Venus and Adonis&quot; in 1596 and published five octavo editions of that poem (the third edition through the eighth) between 1599 and 1602.

Jaggard issued an expanded edition of &quot;The Passionate Pilgrim&quot; in 1612 (ESTC S106170), containing additional poems on the theme of Helen of Troy, announced on the title page (&quot;Whereunto is newly added two Love Epistles, the first from Paris to Hellen, and Hellen&#x27;s answere back again to Paris&quot;). These were in fact taken from Thomas Heywood&#x27;s &quot;Troia Britannica,&quot; which Jaggard had published in 1609. Heywood protested the &quot;manifest injury done to me&quot; in his &quot;Apology for Actors&quot; (1612), writing that Shakespeare too was &quot;much offended&quot; with Jaggard for making &quot;so bold with his name&quot;, a complaint that apparently led Jaggard to revise the title page and remove Shakespeare&#x27;s name. Two copies of the third edition survive, one in the Folger Library with the original title page, and the other in the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford with the cancel title page omitting Shakespeare&#x27;s name.

The poems in &quot;The Passionate Pilgrim&quot; were reprinted in John Benson&#x27;s 1640 edition of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Poems,&quot; along with the &quot;Sonnets&quot;, &quot;A Lover&#x27;s Complaint,&quot; &quot;The Phoenix and the Turtle,&quot; and other pieces. Thereafter the anthology was included in collections of Shakespeare&#x27;s poems, in Bernard Lintott&#x27;s 1709 edition and subsequent editions.

==Variants between editions==
==The poems (1599 edition)==
==See also==
* Shakespeare Apocrypha

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===References===
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="36" end="45" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013416" start="85" end="100" title="William Jaggard" label="William Jaggard"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="131" end="145" title="William Shakespeare" label="W. Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q662550" start="311" end="337" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Sonnets" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Sonnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q128610" start="391" end="421" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073027" start="869" end="883" title="Thomas Heywood" label="Thomas Heywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307353" start="967" end="973" title="octavo" label="octavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228643" start="1075" end="1088" title="Thomas Judson (printer)" label="Thomas Judson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133775" start="1204" end="1229" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register" label="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342864" start="1478" end="1482" title="English Short Title Catalogue" label="ESTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q728116" start="1624" end="1650" title="Folger Shakespeare Library" label="Folger Shakespeare Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037746" start="1931" end="1943" title="Wren Library, Cambridge" label="Wren Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="1947" end="1973" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400558" start="1996" end="2014" title="Huntington Library" label="Huntington Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013382" start="2085" end="2094" title="Worshipful Company of Stationers and Newspaper Makers" label="stationer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014398" start="2095" end="2108" title="William Leake" label="William Leake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066765" start="2166" end="2182" title="Venus and Adonis (Shakespeare poem)" label="Venus and Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18602566" start="2216" end="2222" title="book size" label="octavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="2449" end="2462" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073027" start="2659" end="2673" title="Thomas Heywood" label="Thomas Heywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="3192" end="3208" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="3216" end="3236" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221593" start="3365" end="3376" title="John Benson (publisher)" label="John Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q662550" start="3453" end="3472" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Sonnets" label="&amp;quot;Sonnets&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195233" start="3480" end="3504" title="A Lover&amp;#x27;s Complaint" label="A Lover&amp;#x27;s Complaint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196220" start="3518" end="3544" title="The Phoenix and the Turtle" label="The Phoenix and the Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385592" start="3791" end="3812" title="Shakespeare Apocrypha" label="Shakespeare Apocrypha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706234" wikidata="Q1585480" url="?curid=706234" title="EMH">
<text>EMH may refer to:

* Efficient-market hypothesis, a hypothesis in financial economics that states that asset prices reflect all available information
* Emergency Medical Hologram, a fictional computer program personified in the Doctor on &quot;Star Trek&quot;
* EMH Regional Medical Center, a hospital in Elyria, Ohio
* Extramedullary hematopoiesis, hematopoiesis occurring outside of the medulla of the bone
* Elizabeth Medal of Honour, an award given by the Royal Horticultural Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q724931" start="21" end="48" title="Efficient-market hypothesis" label="Efficient-market hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="224" end="234" title="The Doctor (Star Trek: Voyager)" label="the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323499" start="262" end="289" title="EMH Regional Medical Center" label="EMH Regional Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422215" start="320" end="348" title="Extramedullary hematopoiesis" label="Extramedullary hematopoiesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945692" start="411" end="436" title="Elizabeth Medal of Honour" label="Elizabeth Medal of Honour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706237" wikidata="Q551417" url="?curid=706237" title="Guillaume Duchenne de Boulogne">
<text>Guillaume-Benjamin-Amand Duchenne (de Boulogne) (September 17, 1806, in Boulogne-sur-Mer – September 15, 1875, in Paris) was a French neurologist who revived Luigi Galvani&#x27;s research and greatly advanced the science of electrophysiology. The era of modern neurology developed from Duchenne&#x27;s understanding of neural pathways and his diagnostic innovations including deep tissue biopsy, nerve conduction tests (NCS), and clinical photography. This extraordinary range of activities (mostly in the Salpêtrière) was achieved against the background of a troubled personal life and a generally indifferent medical and scientific establishment.

Neurology did not exist in France before Duchenne and although many medical historians regard Jean-Martin Charcot as the father of the discipline, Charcot owed much to Duchenne, often acknowledging him as &quot;mon maître en neurologie&quot; (my master in neurology). 
The American neurologist Joseph Collins (1866–1950) wrote that Duchenne found neurology &quot;a sprawling infant of unknown parentage which he succored to a lusty youth.&quot;
His greatest contributions were made in the myopathies that came to immortalize his name, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Duchenne-Aran spinal muscular atrophy, Duchenne-Erb paralysis, Duchenne&#x27;s disease (Tabes dorsalis), and Duchenne&#x27;s paralysis (progressive bulbar palsy). He was the first clinician to practise muscle biopsy, with an invention he called &quot;l&#x27;emporte-pièce&quot; (Duchenne&#x27;s trocar). 
In 1855, he formalized the diagnostic principles of electrophysiology and introduced electrotherapy in a textbook titled &quot;De l&#x27;electrisation localisée et de son application à la physiologie, à la pathologie et à la thérapeutique.&quot; 
A companion atlas to this work, the &quot;Album de photographies pathologiques&quot;, was the first neurology text illustrated by photographs. Duchenne&#x27;s monograph, the &quot;Mécanisme de la physionomie humaine&quot; – also illustrated prominently by his photographs – was the first study on the physiology of emotion and was highly influential on Darwin&#x27;s work on human evolution and emotional expression.

==Biography==


Guillaume-Benjamin Duchenne descended from a long line of mariners who had settled in the Boulogne-sur-Mer region of France. In opposition to his father&#x27;s wishes that he become a sailor, and driven by a fascination with science, Duchenne enrolled at the University of Douai where he received his Baccalauréat at the age of 19.
He then trained under a number of distinguished Paris physicians including René-Théophile-Hyacinthe Laënnec (1781–1826) and Baron Guillaume Dupuytren (1777–1835) before returning to Boulogne and setting up in practice there. Duchenne married a local woman, and, following the birth of their son, his wife died. This resulted in a lengthy period of personal difficulties for Duchenne with his family and in a prolonged estrangement from his son (who later followed Duchenne into medical practice) and they were only reunited towards the end of his life.

In 1835, Duchenne began experimenting with therapeutic &quot;électropuncture&quot; (a technique recently invented by François Magendie and Jean-Baptiste Sarlandière by which electric shock was administered beneath the skin with sharp electrodes to stimulate the muscles). After a brief second marriage, Duchenne returned to Paris in 1842 in order to continue his medical research. Here, he did not achieve a senior hospital appointment, but supported himself with a small private medical practice, while daily visiting a number of teaching hospitals, including the Salpêtrière psychiatric centre. He developed a non-invasive technique of muscle stimulation that used faradic shock on the surface of the skin, which he called &quot;électrisation localisée&quot; and he published these experiments in his work, &quot;On Localized Electrization and its Application to Pathology and Therapy&quot;, first published in 1855. A pictorial supplement to the second edition, &quot;Album of Pathological Photographs&quot; (&quot;Album de Photographies Pathologiques&quot;) was published in 1862. A few months later, the first edition of his now much-discussed work, &quot;The Mechanism of Human Physiognomy&quot;, was published. Were it not for this small, but remarkable, work, his next publication, the result of nearly 20 years of study, Duchenne&#x27;s &quot;Physiology of Movements&quot;, his most important contribution to medical science, might well have gone unnoticed.

Despite his unorthodox procedures, and his often uneasy relations with the senior medical staff with whom he worked, Duchenne&#x27;s single-mindedness obtained him an international standing as a neurologist and researcher. He is counted as one of the developers of electro-physiology and electro-therapeutics, and he also showed that smiles resulting from true happiness not only utilize the muscles of the mouth but also those of the eyes: such &quot;genuine&quot; smiles are known as Duchenne smiles in his honor. He is also credited with the discovery of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Duchenne died in 1875, after several years of illness. He was never elected to the French Academy of Sciences nor did he belong to a French university.

==&quot;The Mechanism of Human Facial Expression&quot;==


Influenced by the fashionable beliefs of physiognomy of the 19th century, Duchenne wanted to determine how the muscles in the human face produce facial expressions which he believed to be directly linked to the soul of man. He is known, in particular, for the way he triggered muscular contractions with electrical probes, recording the resulting distorted and often grotesque expressions with the recently invented camera. He published his findings in 1862, together with extraordinary photographs of the induced expressions, in the book &quot;Mecanisme de la physionomie Humaine&quot; (&quot;The Mechanism of Human Facial Expression&quot;, also known as &quot;The Mechanism of Human Physiognomy&quot;).

Duchenne believed that the human face was a kind of map, the features of which could be codified into universal taxonomies of mental states; he was convinced that the expressions of the human face were a gateway to the soul of man. Unlike Lavater and other physiognomists of the era, Duchenne was skeptical of the face&#x27;s ability to express moral character; rather he was convinced that it was through a reading of the expressions alone (known as pathognomy) which could reveal an &quot;accurate rendering of the soul&#x27;s emotions&quot;. He believed that he could observe and capture an &quot;idealized naturalism&quot; in a similar (and even improved) way to that observed in Greek art. It is these notions that he sought conclusively and scientifically to chart by his experiments and photography and it led to the publishing of &quot;The Mechanism of Human Physiognomy&quot; in 1862 (also entitled, &quot;The Electro-Physiological Analysis of the Expression of the Passions, Applicable to the Practice of the Plastic Arts&quot;. in French: &quot;Mécanisme de la physionomie humaine, ou Analyse électro-physiologique de l&#x27;expression des passions applicable à la pratique des arts plastiques&quot;), now generally rendered as &quot;The Mechanism of Human Facial Expression&quot;. The work compromises a volume of text divided into three parts:
# General Considerations,
# A Scientific Section, and
# An Aesthetic Section.

These sections were accompanied by an atlas of photographic plates. Believing that he was investigating a God-given language of facial signs, Duchenne writes:
In the face our creator was not concerned with mechanical necessity. 
He was able in his wisdom or – please pardon this manner of speaking – in pursuing a divine fantasy … to put any particular muscles into action, one alone or several muscles together, when He wished the characteristic signs of the emotions, even the most fleeting, to be written briefly on man&#x27;s face. Once this language of facial expression was created, it sufficed for Him to give all human beings the instinctive faculty of always expressing their sentiments by contracting the same muscles. 
This rendered the language universal and immutable.
Duchenne defines the fundamental expressive gestures of the human face and associates each with a specific facial muscle or muscle group. He identifies thirteen primary emotions the expression of which is controlled by one or two muscles. He also isolates the precise contractions that result in each expression and separates them into two categories: partial and combined. To stimulate the facial muscles and capture these &quot;idealized&quot; expressions of his patients, Duchenne applied faradic shock through electrified metal probes pressed upon the surface of the various muscles of the face.

Duchenne was convinced that the truth of his pathognomic experiments could only be effectively rendered by photography, the subject&#x27;s expressions being too fleeting to be drawn or painted. &quot;Only photography,&quot; he writes, &quot;as truthful as a mirror, could attain such desirable perfection.&quot; He worked with a talented, young photographer, Adrien Tournachon, (the brother of Felix Nadar), and also taught himself the art in order to document his experiments. From an art-historical point of view, the &quot;Mechanism of Human Physiognomy&quot; was the first publication on the expression of human emotions to be illustrated with actual photographs. Photography had only recently been invented, and there was a widespread belief that this was a medium that could capture the truth of any situation in a way that other mediums were unable to do.

Duchenne used six living models in the scientific section, all but one of whom were his patients. His primary model, however, was an &quot;old toothless man, with a thin face, whose features, without being absolutely ugly, approached ordinary triviality.&quot; Through his experiments, Duchenne sought to capture the very &quot;conditions that aesthetically constitute beauty.&quot; He reiterated this in the aesthetic section of the book where he spoke of his desire to portray the &quot;conditions of beauty: beauty of form associated with the exactness of the facial expression, pose and gesture.&quot; Duchenne referred to these facial expressions as the &quot;gymnastics of the soul&quot;. He replied to criticisms of his use of the old man by arguing that &quot;every face could become spiritually beautiful through the accurate rendering of his or her emotions&quot;, and furthermore said that because the patient was suffering from an anesthetic condition of the face, he could experiment upon the muscles of his face without causing him pain.

===Aesthetics and the narrative setting===
Whereas the scientific section was intended to exhibit the expressive lines of the face and the &quot;truth of the expression,&quot; the aesthetic section was intended also to demonstrate that the &quot;gesture and the pose together contribute to the expression; the trunk and the limbs must be photographed with as much care as the face so as to form an harmonious whole.&quot; For these plates Duchenne used a partially blind young woman who he claimed &quot;had become accustomed to the unpleasant sensation of this treatment …&quot;. As in many of the plates for the scientific section, this model was also stimulated faradically to provoke a different expression on either side of her face. Duchenne advised that looking at both sides of the face simultaneously would reveal only a &quot;mere grimace&quot; and he urged the reader to examine each side separately and with care.

Duchenne&#x27;s experiments for the aesthetic section of the &quot;Mechanism&quot; included the use of performance and narratives which may well have been influenced by gestures and poses found in the pantomime of the period. He believed that only by electroshock and in the setting of elaborately constructed theatre pieces featuring gestures and accessory symbols could he faithfully depict the complex combinatory expressions resulting from conflicting emotions and ambivalent sentiments. These melodramatic tableaux include a nun in &quot;extremely sorrowful prayer&quot; experiencing &quot;saintly transports of virginal purity&quot;; a mother feeling both pain and joy while leaning over a child&#x27;s crib; a bare-shouldered coquette looking at once offended, haughty and mocking; and three scenes from Lady Macbeth expressing the &quot;aggressive and wicked passions of hatred, of jealousy, of cruel instincts,&quot; modulated to varying degrees of contrary feelings of filial piety. This theatre of pathognomic effect dominates the aesthetic section of the &quot;Mecanisme&quot;.

===Beauty and truth===

To help him locate and identify the facial muscles, Duchenne drew heavily upon the work of Charles Bell, who had included psychiatric patients in his studies. Duchenne may have avoided photographing the &quot;passions&quot; of the insane because of technical problems at the time; however, it is more likely that he did so for aesthetic reasons – that he did not regard the expressions of the insane as socially acceptable. Charles Bell&#x27;s writings also showed an instinctive revulsion for the mentally ill.

The exact imitation of nature was for Duchenne the sine qua non of the finest art of whatever age, and although he praised the ancient Greek sculptors for unquestionably attaining an ideal of beauty, he nevertheless criticized them for their anatomical errors and failure to attend to the emotions. Thus at the end of the scientific section, for instance, Duchenne &quot;corrects&quot; the expressions of three widely revered classic Greek or Roman antiquities: In no manner, argues Duchenne, do any of these countenances conform to nature as revealed by his electrophysiological research. He even questions the Greek artist Praxiteles&#x27;s accuracy in sculpting the Niobe:
Would Niobe have been less beautiful if the dreadful emotion of her spirit had bulged the head of her oblique eyebrow as nature does, and if a few lines of sorrow had furrowed the median section of her forehead? On the contrary, nothing is more moving and appealing than such an expression of pain on a young forehead, which is usually so serene.
==Duchenne&#x27;s influence==


Darwin&#x27;s &quot;The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals&quot; written, in part, as a refutation of Sir Charles Bell&#x27;s theologically doctrinaire physiognomy, was published in 1872. This book elaborated on Darwin&#x27;s theory of evolution by natural selection and concentrated on the genetic aspects of human behaviour. Darwin&#x27;s text carried illustrations drawn from Duchenne&#x27;s photographs, and Darwin and Duchenne corresponded briefly. It is noteworthy, also, that Darwin lent his copy of Duchenne&#x27;s book to the British psychiatrist James Crichton-Browne in 1869, that Crichton-Browne seems to have mislaid the book for a year or so (in the West Riding lunatic asylum in Wakefield, Yorkshire - see the &quot;Darwin Correspondence Project&quot;, Letter 7220) and that - in 1872 - Crichton-Browne invited Sir David Ferrier to his asylum laboratory to undertake experiments involving the electrical stimulation of motor centres in the brain.

Duchenne&#x27;s most famous student was Jean-Martin Charcot, who became director of the insane asylum at the Salpêtrière in 1862. He adopted Duchenne&#x27;s procedure of photographic experiments and also believed that it was possible to attain the truth through direct observation. He even named an examination room at the asylum after his teacher. Like Duchenne, Charcot sought to chart the gestures and expressions of his patients, believing them to be subject to absolute, mechanistic laws. However, unlike Duchenne, who restricted his experiments to the realm of the sane, Charcot was interested almost exclusively in photographing the expressions of traumatized patients - the &quot;hysterics&quot;. He is also known for enabling the public to witness these emotional displays by establishing his renowned weekly &quot;theatre of the passions&quot; for the fashionable society of the day to witness the expressions of the insane. This provided much inspiration for popular culture, including the Grand Guignol theatre which opened in 1897, and to which Alfred Binet made numerous contributions. Sigmund Freud, who attended Charcot&#x27;s clinical demonstrations in 1885, laid out the foundations of his life&#x27;s work, psychoanalysis, with a sympathetic deconstruction of Charcot&#x27;s neurological lectures on hypnosis and hysteria.

In 1981, a modern audience was exposed to Duchenne&#x27;s &quot;The Mechanism of Human Physiognomy&quot; when the book and its photographs were revealed - alongside illustrations of phrenology and evolutionary theory - on screen in the film version of John Fowles&#x27;s novel, &quot;The French Lieutenant&#x27;s Woman&quot;. There, the protagonist, Charles Smithson, a young scientist, who &quot;like most men of his time, was still faintly under the influence of the Lavater&#x27;s Physiognomy,&quot; is intent on interpreting an alienated woman&#x27;s true character from her expressions.

Perhaps we can best understand Duchenne&#x27;s contribution to art and science by Robert Sobieszek&#x27;s concluding words to his comprehensive chapter on Duchenne, in his book &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; where he writes:
Duchenne&#x27;s ultimate legacy may be that he set the stage, as it were, for Charcot&#x27;s visual theater of the passions and defined the essential dramaturgy of all the visual theaters, both scientific and artistic, that have since been conceived in the attempt to picture our psyches. … In the end, Duchenne&#x27;s &quot;Mecanisme de la Physionomie Humaine&quot; and the photographic stills from its experimental theater of electroshock excitations established the modern field on which the struggle to depict and thus discern the ever-elusive meanings of our coded faces continues even now to be waged.
==Eponymous diseases==
* Duchenne muscular dystrophy
* Erb-Duchenne palsy
* Duchenne-Aran disease

==Works==
* &quot;Essai sur la brûlure&quot; (1833)
* &quot;De l&#x27;Électrisation localisée et de son application à la physiologie, à la pathologie et à la thérapeutique&quot; (1855)
* &quot;Paraplegie hypertrophique de l&#x27;enfance de cause cerebrale&quot; (1861)
* &quot;Mécanisme de la physionomie humaine, ou Analyse électro-physiologique de l&#x27;expression des passions applicable à la pratique des arts plastiques&quot; (1862)
* &quot;Physiologie des mouvements démontrée à l&#x27;aide de l&#x27;expérimentation électrique et de l&#x27;observation clinique, et applicable à l&#x27;étude des paralysies et des déformations&quot; (1867)

==References==
==Further reading==

*Freitas-Magalhães, A., &amp; Castro, E. (2009). The Neuropsychophysiological Construction of the Human Smile. In A. Freitas-Magalhães (Ed.), Emotional Expression: The Brain and The Face (pp. 1–18). Porto: University Fernando Pessoa Press. .
* Sobieszek, Robert A., &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, 2003, MIT Press
* Delaporte, François. &quot;Anatomy of the Passions&quot;. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2008.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


==External links==

* FILM/TV/Director: Documentary DUCHENNE DE BOULOGNE OU L&#x27;ANATOMIE DES PASSIONS by Mark Blezinger 1999, 26min
* Artifacial Expression Contemporary artist working on Electro-Facial Choreography.
* Electro-Physiognomy an 1870 book review of Duchenne&#x27;s monograph, &quot;Mécanisme de la Physionomie Humaine..&amp;c&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q551417" start="0" end="47" title="Guillaume Duchenne de Boulogne" label="Guillaume-Benjamin-Amand Duchenne (de Boulogne)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="72" end="88" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="134" end="145" title="neurologist" label="neurologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589" start="158" end="171" title="Luigi Galvani" label="Luigi Galvani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154774" start="224" end="241" title="electrophysiology" label="electrophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="261" end="270" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q380117" start="420" end="423" title="Nerve conduction study" label="NCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q939883" start="506" end="517" title="Salpêtrière" label="Salpêtrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710" start="744" end="763" title="Jean-Martin Charcot" label="Jean-Martin Charcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810191" start="944" end="970" title="Joseph Collins (neurologist)" label="Joseph Collins (1866–1950)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648484" start="1185" end="1212" title="Duchenne muscular dystrophy" label="Duchenne muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279175" start="1214" end="1251" title="Progressive muscular atrophy" label="Duchenne-Aran spinal muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736543" start="1253" end="1275" title="Erb&amp;#x27;s palsy" label="Duchenne-Erb paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583311" start="1302" end="1316" title="Tabes dorsalis" label="Tabes dorsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248833" start="1350" end="1374" title="progressive bulbar palsy" label="progressive bulbar palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="1423" end="1429" title="biopsy" label="biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400223" start="1509" end="1515" title="trocar" label="trocar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752305" start="1604" end="1618" title="electrotherapy" label="electrotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113671" start="1946" end="1981" title="Mécanisme de la physionomie humaine" label="Mécanisme de la physionomie humaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="2290" end="2306" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q770639" start="2459" end="2478" title="University of Douai" label="University of Douai"/>
<link wikidata="Q798022" start="2501" end="2513" title="Baccalauréat" label="Baccalauréat"/>
<link wikidata="Q219621" start="2607" end="2639" title="René Laennec" label="René-Théophile-Hyacinthe Laënnec"/>
<link wikidata="Q679098" start="2662" end="2681" title="Guillaume Dupuytren" label="Guillaume Dupuytren"/>
<link wikidata="Q263387" start="3203" end="3220" title="François Magendie" label="François Magendie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168994" start="3225" end="3250" title="Jean-Baptiste Sarlandière" label="Jean-Baptiste Sarlandière"/>
<link wikidata="Q939883" start="3651" end="3662" title="Salpêtrière" label="Salpêtrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q131255" start="3753" end="3758" title="farad" label="farad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="4504" end="4519" title="medical science" label="medical science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752305" start="4842" end="4862" title="electro-therapeutics" label="electro-therapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5040" end="5054" title="Smile#Duchenne smile" label="Duchenne smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648484" start="5112" end="5139" title="Duchenne muscular dystrophy" label="Duchenne muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="5224" end="5250" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q841933" start="5394" end="5405" title="physiognomy" label="physiognomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="5464" end="5470" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q327968" start="5498" end="5515" title="facial expression" label="facial expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="5564" end="5568" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="6171" end="6181" title="Taxonomy (general)" label="taxonomies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968640" start="6185" end="6198" title="mental states" label="mental states"/>
<link wikidata="Q123918" start="6298" end="6305" title="Lavater" label="Lavater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910723" start="6510" end="6520" title="pathognomy" label="pathognomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="7611" end="7619" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="8446" end="8453" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9237" end="9254" title="Adrien Tournachon" label="Adrien Tournachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40116" start="9272" end="9283" title="Felix Nadar" label="Felix Nadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="10685" end="10695" title="anesthetic" label="anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="11923" end="11932" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q546808" start="12233" end="12241" title="Tableau vivant" label="tableaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="12252" end="12255" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454065" start="12533" end="12545" title="Lady Macbeth" label="Lady Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545811" start="12612" end="12620" title="jealousy" label="jealousy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451727" start="12928" end="12940" title="Charles Bell" label="Charles Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q316560" start="13401" end="13413" title="sine qua non" label="sine qua non"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="13477" end="13490" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="13592" end="13602" title="anatomy" label="anatomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q105290" start="13975" end="13992" title="Praxiteles" label="Praxiteles&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q213621" start="14019" end="14024" title="Niobe" label="Niobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="14405" end="14418" title="Charles Darwin" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192325" start="14425" end="14474" title="The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals" label="The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q451727" start="14522" end="14534" title="Charles Bell" label="Charles Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q841933" start="14568" end="14579" title="physiognomy" label="physiognomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q613264" start="14972" end="14993" title="James Crichton-Browne" label="James Crichton-Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q216638" start="15110" end="15119" title="Wakefield" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174416" start="15246" end="15259" title="David Ferrier" label="David Ferrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710" start="15419" end="15438" title="Jean-Martin Charcot" label="Jean-Martin Charcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516931" start="15474" end="15480" title="History of psychiatric institutions" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q939883" start="15488" end="15499" title="Salpêtrière" label="Salpêtrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q751317" start="16380" end="16393" title="Grand Guignol" label="Grand Guignol"/>
<link wikidata="Q207478" start="16437" end="16449" title="Alfred Binet" label="Alfred Binet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="16479" end="16492" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="16605" end="16619" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q144119" start="16711" end="16719" title="hysteria" label="hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338241" start="16904" end="16914" title="Edinburgh Phrenological Society" label="phrenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="16919" end="16938" title="evolutionary theory" label="evolutionary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q214660" start="16974" end="16992" title="John Fowles" label="John Fowles&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268075" start="17006" end="17040" title="The French Lieutenant&amp;#x27;s Woman" label="The French Lieutenant&amp;#x27;s Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648484" start="18173" end="18200" title="Duchenne muscular dystrophy" label="Duchenne muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736543" start="18203" end="18221" title="Erb-Duchenne palsy" label="Erb-Duchenne palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279175" start="18224" end="18245" title="Duchenne-Aran disease" label="Duchenne-Aran disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706242" wikidata="Q4822153" url="?curid=706242" title="Camilla Ottesen">
<text>Camilla Ottesen (born 11 November 1972 in Frederiksberg, Denmark) is a Danish television presenter, notable for having hosted the first Junior Eurovision Song Contest in 2003 with Remee. She won the 2003 Danish TV Manufacturers&#x27; Assocociation&#x27;s award for best presenter in children&#x27;s and youth programming.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4822153" start="0" end="15" title="Camilla Ottesen" label="Camilla Ottesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30096" start="42" end="55" title="Frederiksberg" label="Frederiksberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="57" end="64" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="78" end="88" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q103665" start="136" end="166" title="Junior Eurovision Song Contest" label="Junior Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q210851" start="170" end="174" title="Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q481341" start="180" end="185" title="Remee" label="Remee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706244" wikidata="Q2518149" url="?curid=706244" title="Conical surface">
<text>In geometry, a conical surface is an unbounded three-dimensional surface formed from the union of infinite lines that pass through a fixed point and a space curve.

==Definitions==
A (&quot;general&quot;) conical surface is the unbounded surface formed by the union of all the straight lines that pass through a fixed point — the &quot;apex&quot; or &quot;vertex&quot; — and any point of some fixed space curve — the &quot;directrix&quot; — that does not contain the apex. Each of those lines is called a &quot;generatrix&quot; of the surface. The directrix is often taken as a plane curve, in a plane not containing the apex, but this is not a requirement.

In general, a conical surface consists of two congruent unbounded halves joined by the apex. Each half is called a nappe, and is the union of all the rays that start at the apex and pass through a point of some fixed space curve. Sometimes the term &quot;conical surface&quot; is used to mean just one nappe.

==Special cases==
If the directrix is a circle formula_1, and the apex is located on the circle&#x27;s &quot;axis&quot; (the line that contains the center of formula_1 and is perpendicular to its plane), one obtains the &quot;right circular conical surface&quot; or double cone. More generally, when the directrix formula_1 is an ellipse, or any conic section, and the apex is an arbitrary point not on the plane of formula_1, one obtains an elliptic cone (also called a &quot;conical quadric&quot; or &quot;quadratic cone&quot;), which is a special case of a quadric surface.

==Equations==
A conical surface formula_5 can be described parametrically as
:formula_6,
where formula_7 is the apex and formula_8 is the directrix.

==Related surface==
Conical surfaces are ruled surfaces, surfaces that have a straight line through each of their points. Patches of conical surfaces that avoid the apex are special cases of developable surfaces, surfaces that can be unfolded to a flat plane without stretching. When the directrix has the property that the angle it subtends from the apex is exactly formula_9, then each nappe of the conical surface, including the apex, is a developable surface.

A cylindrical surface can be viewed as a limiting case of a conical surface whose apex is moved off to infinity in a particular direction. Indeed, in projective geometry a cylindrical surface is just a special case of a conical surface.

==See also==
*Conic section
*Quadric

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3" end="11" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518149" start="15" end="30" title="Conical surface" label="conical surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="37" end="46" title="Unbounded set" label="unbounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505239" start="65" end="72" title="surface (mathematics)" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="107" end="112" title="line (mathematics)" label="lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="151" end="162" title="space curve" label="space curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="399" end="410" title="space curve" label="space curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060874" start="578" end="589" title="plane curve" label="plane curve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="809" end="812" title="Line (mathematics)#Ray" label="ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q42344" start="1235" end="1246" title="Double cone (geometry)" label="double cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="1299" end="1306" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="1315" end="1328" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q852117" start="1411" end="1424" title="elliptic cone" label="elliptic cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q852117" start="1529" end="1544" title="quadric" label="quadric surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290922" start="1606" end="1620" title="Parametrization (geometry)" label="parametrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q840376" start="1738" end="1751" title="ruled surface" label="ruled surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q336298" start="1888" end="1907" title="developable surface" label="developable surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="2164" end="2183" title="cylindrical surface" label="cylindrical surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q17123612" start="2203" end="2216" title="limiting case (mathematics)" label="limiting case"/>
<link wikidata="Q177409" start="2312" end="2331" title="projective geometry" label="projective geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="2414" end="2427" title="Conic section" label="Conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q852117" start="2429" end="2436" title="Quadric" label="Quadric"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706247" wikidata="Q806380" url="?curid=706247" title="Electronic band structure">
<text>In solid-state physics, the electronic band structure (or simply band structure) of a solid describes the range of energy levels that electrons may have within it, as well as the ranges of energy that they may not have (called &quot;band gaps&quot; or &quot;forbidden bands&quot;).

Band theory derives these bands and band gaps by examining the allowed quantum mechanical wave functions for an electron in a large, periodic lattice of atoms or molecules. Band theory has been successfully used to explain many physical properties of solids, such as electrical resistivity and optical absorption, and forms the foundation of the understanding of all solid-state devices (transistors, solar cells, etc.).
== Why bands and band gaps occur ==

The formation of electronic bands and band gaps can be illustrated with two complementary models for electrons in solids. The first one is the nearly free electron model, in which the electrons are assumed to move almost freely within the material. In this model, the electronic states resemble free electron plane waves, and are only slightly perturbed by the crystal lattice. This model explains the origin of the electronic dispersion relation, but the explanation for band gaps is subtle in this model.

The second model starts from the opposite limit, in which the electrons are tightly bound to individual atoms. The electrons of a single, isolated atom occupy atomic orbitals with discrete energy levels. If two atoms come close enough so that their atomic orbitals overlap, the electrons can tunnel between the atoms. This tunneling splits (hybridizes) the atomic orbitals into molecular orbitals with different energies.

Similarly, if a large number of identical atoms come together to form a solid, such as a crystal lattice, the atoms&#x27; atomic orbitals overlap with the nearby orbitals. Each discrete energy level splits into levels, each with a different energy. Since the number of atoms in a macroscopic piece of solid is a very large number (), the number of orbitals that hybridize with each other is very large. For this reason, the adjacent levels are very closely spaced in energy (of the order of ), and can be considered to form a continuum, an energy band.

This formation of bands is mostly a feature of the outermost electrons (valence electrons) in the atom, which are the ones involved in chemical bonding and electrical conductivity. The inner electron orbitals do not overlap to a significant degree, so their bands are very narrow.

Band gaps are essentially leftover ranges of energy not covered by any band, a result of the finite widths of the energy bands. The bands have different widths, with the widths depending upon the degree of overlap in the atomic orbitals from which they arise. Two adjacent bands may simply not be wide enough to fully cover the range of energy. For example, the bands associated with core orbitals (such as 1s electrons) are extremely narrow due to the small overlap between adjacent atoms. As a result, there tend to be large band gaps between the core bands. Higher bands involve comparatively larger orbitals with more overlap, becoming progressively wider at higher energies so that there are no band gaps at higher energies.

== Basic concepts ==

=== Assumptions and limits of band structure theory ===
Band theory is only an approximation to the quantum state of a solid, which applies to solids consisting of many identical atoms or molecules bonded together. These are the assumptions necessary for band theory to be valid:
* &quot;Infinite-size system&quot;: For the bands to be continuous, the piece of material must consist of a large number of atoms. Since a macroscopic piece of material contains on the order of 1022 atoms, this is not a serious restriction; band theory even applies to microscopic-sized transistors in integrated circuits. With modifications, the concept of band structure can also be extended to systems which are only &quot;large&quot; along some dimensions, such as two-dimensional electron systems.
* &quot;Homogeneous system&quot;: Band structure is an intrinsic property of a material, which assumes that the material is homogeneous. Practically, this means that the chemical makeup of the material must be uniform throughout the piece.
* &quot;Non-interactivity&quot;: The band structure describes &quot;single electron states&quot;. The existence of these states assumes that the electrons travel in a static potential without dynamically interacting with lattice vibrations, other electrons, photons, etc.

The above assumptions are broken in a number of important practical situations, and the use of band structure requires one to keep a close check on the limitations of band theory:
* Inhomogeneities and interfaces: Near surfaces, junctions, and other inhomogeneities, the bulk band structure is disrupted. Not only are there local small-scale disruptions (e.g., surface states or dopant states inside the band gap), but also local charge imbalances. These charge imbalances have electrostatic effects that extend deeply into semiconductors, insulators, and the vacuum (see doping, band bending).
* Along the same lines, most electronic effects (capacitance, electrical conductance, electric-field screening) involve the physics of electrons passing through surfaces and/or near interfaces. The full description of these effects, in a band structure picture, requires at least a rudimentary model of electron-electron interactions (see space charge, band bending).
* Small systems: For systems which are small along every dimension (e.g., a small molecule or a quantum dot), there is no continuous band structure. The crossover between small and large dimensions is the realm of mesoscopic physics.
* Strongly correlated materials (for example, Mott insulators) simply cannot be understood in terms of single-electron states. The electronic band structures of these materials are poorly defined (or at least, not uniquely defined) and may not provide useful information about their physical state.

=== Crystalline symmetry and wavevectors ===

Band structure calculations take advantage of the periodic nature of a crystal lattice, exploiting its symmetry. The single-electron Schrödinger equation is solved for an electron in a lattice-periodic potential, giving Bloch electrons as solutions
formula_1
where is called the wavevector. For each value of , there are multiple solutions to the Schrödinger equation labelled by , the band index, which simply numbers the energy bands.
Each of these energy levels evolves smoothly with changes in , forming a smooth band of states. For each band we can define a function , which is the dispersion relation for electrons in that band.

The wavevector takes on any value inside the Brillouin zone, which is a polyhedron in wavevector (reciprocal lattice) space that is related to the crystal&#x27;s lattice.
Wavevectors outside the Brillouin zone simply correspond to states that are physically identical to those states within the Brillouin zone.
Special high symmetry points/lines in the Brillouin zone are assigned labels like Γ, Δ, Λ, Σ (see Fig 1).

It is difficult to visualize the shape of a band as a function of wavevector, as it would require a plot in four-dimensional space, vs. , , . In scientific literature it is common to see band structure plots which show the values of for values of along straight lines connecting symmetry points, often labelled Δ, Λ, Σ, or [100], [111], and [110], respectively. Another method for visualizing band structure is to plot a constant-energy isosurface in wavevector space, showing all of the states with energy equal to a particular value. The isosurface of states with energy equal to the Fermi level is known as the Fermi surface.

Energy band gaps can be classified using the wavevectors of the states surrounding the band gap:
* Direct band gap: the lowest-energy state above the band gap has the same as the highest-energy state beneath the band gap.
* Indirect band gap: the closest states above and beneath the band gap do not have the same value.

==== Asymmetry: Band structures in non-crystalline solids ====

Although electronic band structures are usually associated with crystalline materials, quasi-crystalline and amorphous solids may also exhibit band gaps. These are somewhat more difficult to study theoretically since they lack the simple symmetry of a crystal, and it is not usually possible to determine a precise dispersion relation. As a result, virtually all of the existing theoretical work on the electronic band structure of solids has focused on crystalline materials.

=== Density of states ===

The density of states function is defined as the number of electronic states per unit volume, per unit energy, for electron energies near .

The density of states function is important for calculations of effects based on band theory.
In Fermi&#x27;s Golden Rule, a calculation for the rate of optical absorption, it provides both the number of excitable electrons and the number of final states for an electron. It appears in calculations of electrical conductivity where it provides the number of mobile states, and in computing electron scattering rates where it provides the number of final states after scattering.

For energies inside a band gap, .

=== Filling of bands ===


At thermodynamic equilibrium, the likelihood of a state of energy being filled with an electron is given by the Fermi–Dirac distribution, a thermodynamic distribution that takes into account the Pauli exclusion principle:
formula_2
where:
* is the product of the Boltzmann constant and temperature, and
* is the total chemical potential of electrons, or &quot;Fermi level&quot; (in semiconductor physics, this quantity is more often denoted ). The Fermi level of a solid is directly related to the voltage on that solid, as measured with a voltmeter. Conventionally, in band structure plots the Fermi level is taken to be the zero of energy (an arbitrary choice).

The density of electrons in the material is simply the integral of the Fermi–Dirac distribution times the density of states:
formula_3

Although there are an infinite number of bands and thus an infinite number of states, there are only a finite number of electrons to place in these bands.
The preferred value for the number of electrons is a consequence of electrostatics: even though the surface of a material can be charged, the internal bulk of a material prefers to be charge neutral.
The condition of charge neutrality means that must match the density of protons in the material. For this to occur, the material electrostatically adjusts itself, shifting its band structure up or down in energy (thereby shifting ), until it is at the correct equilibrium with respect to the Fermi level.

==== Names of bands near the Fermi level (conduction band, valence band) ====

A solid has an infinite number of allowed bands, just as an atom has infinitely many energy levels. However, most of the bands simply have too high energy, and are usually disregarded under ordinary circumstances.
Conversely, there are very low energy bands associated with the core orbitals (such as 1s electrons). These low-energy &quot;core band&quot;s are also usually disregarded since they remain filled with electrons at all times, and are therefore inert.
Likewise, materials have several band gaps throughout their band structure.

The most important bands and band gaps—those relevant for electronics and optoelectronics—are those with energies near the Fermi level.
The bands and band gaps near the Fermi level are given special names, depending on the material:
* In a semiconductor or band insulator, the Fermi level is surrounded by a band gap, referred to as &quot;the&quot; band gap (to distinguish it from the other band gaps in the band structure). The closest band above the band gap is called &quot;the conduction band&quot;, and the closest band beneath the band gap is called &quot;the valence band&quot;. The name &quot;valence band&quot; was coined by analogy to chemistry, since in semiconductors (and insulators) the valence band is built out of the valence orbitals.
* In a metal or semimetal, the Fermi level is inside of one or more allowed bands. In semimetals the bands are usually referred to as &quot;conduction band&quot; or &quot;valence band&quot; depending on whether the charge transport is more electron-like or hole-like, by analogy to semiconductors. In many metals, however, the bands are neither electron-like nor hole-like, and often just called &quot;valence band&quot; as they are made of valence orbitals. The band gaps in a metal&#x27;s band structure are not important for low energy physics, since they are too far from the Fermi level.

== Theory in crystals ==

The ansatz is the special case of electron waves in a periodic crystal lattice using Bloch&#x27;s theorem as treated generally in the dynamical theory of diffraction. Every crystal is a periodic structure which can be characterized by a Bravais lattice, and for each Bravais lattice we can determine the reciprocal lattice, which encapsulates the periodicity in a set of three reciprocal lattice vectors . Now, any periodic potential which shares the same periodicity as the direct lattice can be expanded out as a Fourier series whose only non-vanishing components are those associated with the reciprocal lattice vectors. So the expansion can be written as:
formula_4
where for any set of integers .

From this theory, an attempt can be made to predict the band structure of a particular material, however most ab initio methods for electronic structure calculations fail to predict the observed band gap.

=== Nearly free electron approximation ===

In the nearly free electron approximation, interactions between electrons are completely ignored. This approximation allows use of Bloch&#x27;s Theorem which states that electrons in a periodic potential have wavefunctions and energies which are periodic in wavevector up to a constant phase shift between neighboring reciprocal lattice vectors. The consequences of periodicity are described mathematically by the Bloch&#x27;s theorem, which states that the eigenstate wavefunctions have the form
formula_5
where the Bloch function formula_6 is periodic over the crystal lattice, that is,
formula_7

Here index refers to the th energy band, wavevector is related to the direction of motion of the electron, is the position in the crystal, and is the location of an atomic site.

The NFE model works particularly well in materials like metals where distances between neighbouring atoms are small. In such materials the overlap of atomic orbitals and potentials on neighbouring atoms is relatively large. In that case the wave function of the electron can be approximated by a (modified) plane wave. The band structure of a metal like aluminium even gets close to the empty lattice approximation.

=== Tight binding model ===

The opposite extreme to the nearly free electron approximation assumes the electrons in the crystal behave much like an assembly of constituent atoms. This tight binding model assumes the solution to the time-independent single electron Schrödinger equation formula_8 is well approximated by a linear combination of atomic orbitals formula_9.
formula_10
where the coefficients formula_11 are selected to give the best approximate solution of this form. Index refers to an atomic energy level and refers to an atomic site. A more accurate approach using this idea employs Wannier functions, defined by:
formula_12
in which formula_13 is the periodic part of the Bloch&#x27;s theorem and the integral is over the Brillouin zone. Here index refers to the -th energy band in the crystal. The Wannier functions are localized near atomic sites, like atomic orbitals, but being defined in terms of Bloch functions they are accurately related to solutions based upon the crystal potential. Wannier functions on different atomic sites are orthogonal. The Wannier functions can be used to form the Schrödinger solution for the -th energy band as:
formula_14

The TB model works well in materials with limited overlap between atomic orbitals and potentials on neighbouring atoms. Band structures of materials like Si, GaAs, SiO2 and diamond for instance are well described by TB-Hamiltonians on the basis of atomic sp3 orbitals. In transition metals a mixed TB-NFE model is used to describe the broad NFE conduction band and the narrow embedded TB d-bands. The radial functions of the atomic orbital part of the Wannier functions are most easily calculated by the use of pseudopotential methods. NFE, TB or combined NFE-TB band structure calculations,
sometimes extended with wave function approximations based on pseudopotential methods, are often used as an economic starting point for further calculations.

=== KKR model ===

The KKR method, also called &quot;multiple scattering theory&quot; or Green&#x27;s function method, finds the stationary values of the inverse transition matrix T rather than the Hamiltonian. A variational implementation was suggested by Korringa, Kohn and Rostocker, and is often referred to as the &quot;Korringa–Kohn–Rostoker method&quot;. The most important features of the KKR or Green&#x27;s function formulation are (1) it separates the two aspects of the problem: structure (positions of the atoms) from the scattering (chemical identity of the atoms); and (2) Green&#x27;s functions provide a natural approach to a localized description of electronic properties that can be adapted to alloys and other disordered system. The simplest form of this approximation centers non-overlapping spheres (referred to as &quot;muffin tins&quot;) on the atomic positions. Within these regions, the potential experienced by an electron is approximated to be spherically symmetric about the given nucleus. In the remaining interstitial region, the screened potential is approximated as a constant. Continuity of the potential between the atom-centered spheres and interstitial region is enforced.

=== Density-functional theory ===
In recent physics literature, a large majority of the electronic structures and band plots are calculated using density-functional theory (DFT), which is not a model but rather a theory, i.e., a microscopic first-principles theory of condensed matter physics that tries to cope with the electron-electron many-body problem via the introduction of an exchange-correlation term in the functional of the electronic density. DFT-calculated bands are in many cases found to be in agreement with experimentally measured bands, for example by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). In particular, the band shape is typically well reproduced by DFT. But there are also systematic errors in DFT bands when compared to experiment results. In particular, DFT seems to systematically underestimate by about 30-40% the band gap in insulators and semiconductors.

It is commonly believed that DFT is a theory to predict ground state properties of a system only (e.g. the total energy, the atomic structure, etc.), and that excited state properties cannot be determined by DFT. This is a misconception. In principle, DFT can determine any property (ground state or excited state) of a system given a functional that maps the ground state density to that property. This is the essence of the Hohenberg–Kohn theorem. In practice, however, no known functional exists that maps the ground state density to excitation energies of electrons within a material. Thus, what in the literature is quoted as a DFT band plot is a representation of the DFT Kohn–Sham energies, i.e., the energies of a fictive non-interacting system, the Kohn–Sham system, which has no physical interpretation at all. The Kohn–Sham electronic structure must not be confused with the real, quasiparticle electronic structure of a system, and there is no Koopmans&#x27; theorem holding for Kohn–Sham energies, as there is for Hartree–Fock energies, which can be truly considered as an approximation for quasiparticle energies. Hence, in principle, Kohn–Sham based DFT is not a band theory, i.e., not a theory suitable for calculating bands and band-plots. In principle time-dependent DFT can be used to calculate the true band structure although in practice this is often difficult. A popular approach is the use of hybrid functionals, which incorporate a portion of Hartree–Fock exact exchange; this produces a substantial improvement in predicted bandgaps of semiconductors, but is less reliable for metals and wide-bandgap materials.

=== Green&#x27;s function methods and the &quot;ab initio&quot; GW approximation ===

To calculate the bands including electron-electron interaction many-body effects, one can resort to so-called Green&#x27;s function methods. Indeed, knowledge of the Green&#x27;s function of a system provides both ground (the total energy) and also excited state observables of the system. The poles of the Green&#x27;s function are the quasiparticle energies, the bands of a solid. The Green&#x27;s function can be calculated by solving the Dyson equation once the self-energy of the system is known. For real systems like solids, the self-energy is a very complex quantity and usually approximations are needed to solve the problem. One such approximation is the GW approximation, so called from the mathematical form the self-energy takes as the product Σ = &quot;GW&quot; of the Green&#x27;s function &quot;G&quot; and the dynamically screened interaction &quot;W&quot;. This approach is more pertinent when addressing the calculation of band plots (and also quantities beyond, such as the spectral function) and can also be formulated in a completely &quot;ab initio&quot; way. The GW approximation seems to provide band gaps of insulators and semiconductors in agreement with experiment, and hence to correct the systematic DFT underestimation.

=== Dynamical mean-field theory ===

Although the nearly free electron approximation is able to describe many properties of electron band structures, one consequence of this theory is that it predicts the same number of electrons in each unit cell. If the number of electrons is odd, we would then expect that there is an unpaired electron in each unit cell, and thus that the valence band is not fully occupied, making the material a conductor. However, materials such as CoO that have an odd number of electrons per unit cell are insulators, in direct conflict with this result. This kind of material is known as a Mott insulator, and requires inclusion of detailed electron-electron interactions (treated only as an averaged effect on the crystal potential in band theory) to explain the discrepancy. The Hubbard model is an approximate theory that can include these interactions. It can be treated non-perturbatively within the so-called dynamical mean-field theory, which attempts to bridge the gap between the nearly free electron approximation and the atomic limit. Formally, however, the states are not non-interacting in this case and the concept of a band structure is not adequate to describe these cases.

=== Others ===
Calculating band structures is an important topic in theoretical solid state physics. In addition to the models mentioned above, other models include the following:
* Empty lattice approximation: the &quot;band structure&quot; of a region of free space that has been divided into a lattice.
* k·p perturbation theory is a technique that allows a band structure to be approximately described in terms of just a few parameters. The technique is commonly used for semiconductors, and the parameters in the model are often determined by experiment.
* The Kronig–Penney model, a one-dimensional rectangular well model useful for illustration of band formation. While simple, it predicts many important phenomena, but is not quantitative.
* Hubbard model

The band structure has been generalised to wavevectors that are complex numbers, resulting in what is called a &quot;complex band structure&quot;, which is of interest at surfaces and interfaces.

Each model describes some types of solids very well, and others poorly. The nearly free electron model works well for metals, but poorly for non-metals. The tight binding model is extremely accurate for ionic insulators, such as metal halide salts (e.g. NaCl).

== Band diagrams ==
To understand how band structure changes relative to the Fermi level in real space, a band structure plot is often first simplified in the form of a band diagram. In a band diagram the vertical axis is energy while the horizontal axis represents real space. Horizontal lines represent energy levels, while blocks represent energy bands. When the horizontal lines in these diagram are slanted then the energy of the level or band changes with distance. Diagrammatically, this depicts the presence of an electric field within the crystal system. Band diagrams are useful in relating the general band structure properties of different materials to one another when placed in contact with each other.

== See also ==
* Band-gap engineering – the process of altering a material&#x27;s band structure
* Felix Bloch – pioneer in the theory of band structure
* Alan Herries Wilson – pioneer in the theory of band structure

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Ashcroft, Neil and N. David Mermin, &quot;Solid State Physics&quot;, 
* Harrison, Walter A., &quot;Elementary Electronic Structure&quot;, 
* Harrison, Walter A.; W. A. Benjamin &quot;Pseudopotentials in the theory of metals&quot;, (New York) 1966
* Marder, Michael P., &quot;Condensed Matter Physics&quot;, 
* Martin, Richard, &quot;Electronic Structure: Basic Theory and Practical Methods&quot;, 
* Millman, Jacob; Arvin Gabriel, &quot;Microelectronics&quot;, , Tata McGraw-Hill Edition.
* Nemoshkalenko, V. V., and N. V. Antonov, &quot;Computational Methods in Solid State Physics&quot;, 
* Omar, M. Ali, &quot;Elementary Solid State Physics: Principles and Applications&quot;, 
* Singh, Jasprit, &quot;Electronic and Optoelectronic Properties of Semiconductor Structures&quot; Chapters 2 and 3, 
* Vasileska, Dragica, Tutorial on Bandstructure Methods (2008)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="3" end="22" title="solid-state physics" label="solid-state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q806380" start="28" end="53" title="Electronic band structure" label="electronic band structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q806380" start="65" end="79" title="Electronic band structure" label="band structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="86" end="91" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="115" end="127" title="energy level" label="energy level"/>
<link wikidata="Q806352" start="233" end="241" title="band gap" label="band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q806380" start="283" end="294" title="Electronic band structure" label="Band theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="373" end="386" title="wave function" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="550" end="572" title="electrical resistivity" label="electrical resistivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q905921" start="577" end="595" title="optical absorption" label="optical absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="650" end="669" title="Solid-state (electronics)" label="solid-state devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188332" start="884" end="910" title="nearly free electron model" label="nearly free electron model"/>
<link wikidata="Q940391" start="1036" end="1061" title="Free_electron_model" label="free electron plane waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="1408" end="1422" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="1438" end="1450" title="energy level" label="energy level"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="1541" end="1547" title="Quantum tunnelling" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q274511" start="1590" end="1600" title="Orbital hybridisation" label="hybridizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q725417" start="1627" end="1644" title="molecular orbital" label="molecular orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="1761" end="1776" title="crystal lattice" label="crystal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="2298" end="2314" title="valence electron" label="valence electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="2382" end="2405" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q806352" start="2508" end="2516" title="Band gap" label="Band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="2729" end="2743" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="2915" end="2926" title="1s electron" label="1s electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="3828" end="3838" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="3843" end="3861" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q232381" start="4010" end="4042" title="2DEG" label="two-dimensional electron systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="4505" end="4522" title="lattice vibration" label="lattice vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="4542" end="4548" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387099" start="4918" end="4932" title="surface states" label="surface states"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="4936" end="4942" title="dopant" label="dopant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="5129" end="5135" title="doping (semiconductor)" label="doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854231" start="5137" end="5149" title="band bending" label="band bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q164399" start="5201" end="5212" title="capacitance" label="capacitance"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="5214" end="5236" title="electrical conductance" label="electrical conductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175727" start="5238" end="5262" title="electric-field screening" label="electric-field screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669228" start="5491" end="5503" title="space charge" label="space charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854231" start="5505" end="5517" title="band bending" label="band bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="5602" end="5610" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133068" start="5616" end="5627" title="quantum dot" label="quantum dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622244" start="5734" end="5752" title="mesoscopic physics" label="mesoscopic physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624687" start="5756" end="5784" title="Strongly correlated material" label="Strongly correlated material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378930" start="5800" end="5814" title="Mott insulator" label="Mott insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="6233" end="6253" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454926" start="6320" end="6334" title="Bloch electron" label="Bloch electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q590051" start="6687" end="6706" title="dispersion relation" label="dispersion relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q917246" start="6781" end="6795" title="Brillouin zone" label="Brillouin zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q164129" start="6834" end="6852" title="reciprocal lattice" label="reciprocal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q849699" start="7477" end="7499" title="Miller index" label="[100], [111], and [110"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311829" start="7591" end="7601" title="isosurface" label="isosurface"/>
<link wikidata="Q13633683" start="7740" end="7751" title="Fermi level" label="Fermi level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406417" start="7768" end="7781" title="Fermi surface" label="Fermi surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q959336" start="7883" end="7898" title="Direct band gap" label="Direct band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q959336" start="8008" end="8025" title="Indirect band gap" label="Indirect band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="8234" end="8241" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263214" start="8257" end="8270" title="quasi-crystal" label="quasi-crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="8279" end="8294" title="amorphous solid" label="amorphous solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073295" start="8913" end="8937" title="Fermi&amp;#x27;s golden rule" label="Fermi&amp;#x27;s Golden Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q905921" start="8969" end="8987" title="optical absorption" label="optical absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="9118" end="9141" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51363" start="9361" end="9386" title="thermodynamic equilibrium" label="thermodynamic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q274072" start="9470" end="9494" title="Fermi–Dirac distribution" label="Fermi–Dirac distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131594" start="9553" end="9578" title="Pauli exclusion principle" label="Pauli exclusion principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="9621" end="9639" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="9644" end="9655" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q737004" start="9670" end="9694" title="total chemical potential" label="total chemical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="9740" end="9761" title="semiconductor physics" label="semiconductor physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="11200" end="11211" title="1s electron" label="1s electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="11680" end="11693" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="11697" end="11711" title="Insulator (electricity)" label="band insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="11922" end="11937" title="conduction band" label="conduction band"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="12007" end="12019" title="valence band" label="valence band"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="12175" end="12190" title="valence orbital" label="valence orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033925" start="12209" end="12218" title="semimetal" label="semimetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q568954" start="12817" end="12823" title="ansatz" label="ansatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454926" start="12898" end="12918" title="Bloch&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Bloch&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319046" start="12947" end="12978" title="dynamical theory of diffraction" label="dynamical theory of diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q865788" start="13050" end="13065" title="Bravais lattice" label="Bravais lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q865788" start="13080" end="13095" title="Bravais lattice" label="Bravais lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q164129" start="13117" end="13135" title="reciprocal lattice" label="reciprocal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="13328" end="13342" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454926" start="13897" end="13917" title="Bloch&amp;#x27;s Theorem" label="Bloch&amp;#x27;s Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="13975" end="13987" title="wavefunction" label="wavefunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q164129" start="14084" end="14102" title="reciprocal lattice" label="reciprocal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="14695" end="14709" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="14742" end="14746" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="14786" end="14799" title="wave function" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="14899" end="14908" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374735" start="14932" end="14959" title="empty lattice approximation" label="empty lattice approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902168" start="15147" end="15166" title="tight binding model" label="tight binding model"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="15228" end="15248" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q900666" start="15285" end="15303" title="Linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="15307" end="15322" title="atomic orbitals" label="atomic orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152058" start="15562" end="15579" title="Wannier functions" label="Wannier functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q917246" start="15702" end="15716" title="Brillouin zone" label="Brillouin zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="16206" end="16220" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="16294" end="16296" title="Silicon" label="Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="16298" end="16302" title="GaAs" label="GaAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="16313" end="16320" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="16412" end="16429" title="transition metals" label="transition metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="16485" end="16500" title="conduction band" label="conduction band"/>
<link wikidata="Q769463" start="16651" end="16666" title="pseudopotential" label="pseudopotential"/>
<link wikidata="Q23750971" start="17148" end="17156" title="Jan Korringa" label="Korringa"/>
<link wikidata="Q78510" start="17158" end="17162" title="Walter Kohn" label="Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432650" start="17216" end="17245" title="Korringa–Kohn–Rostoker method" label="Korringa–Kohn–Rostoker method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175727" start="17952" end="17970" title="Screening effect" label="screened potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048589" start="18248" end="18273" title="density-functional theory" label="density-functional theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="18370" end="18394" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q780736" start="18486" end="18506" title="Exchange interaction" label="exchange-correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q905186" start="18537" end="18555" title="electronic density" label="electronic density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000635" start="18672" end="18713" title="angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy" label="angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="19054" end="19066" title="ground state" label="ground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="19105" end="19117" title="total energy" label="total energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="19123" end="19139" title="atomic structure" label="atomic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q215328" start="19157" end="19170" title="excited state" label="excited state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272140" start="19676" end="19694" title="Kohn–Sham equations" label="Kohn–Sham energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="19890" end="19903" title="quasiparticle" label="quasiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422649" start="19954" end="19976" title="Koopmans&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Koopmans&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20102" end="20124" title="quasiparticle energies" label="quasiparticle energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120992" start="20268" end="20286" title="Time-dependent density functional theory" label="time-dependent DFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075290" start="20415" end="20432" title="hybrid functional" label="hybrid functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q617316" start="20786" end="20803" title="Many-body problem" label="many-body effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602170" start="20833" end="20854" title="Green&amp;#x27;s function (many-body theory)" label="Green&amp;#x27;s function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171303" start="21165" end="21179" title="Dyson equation" label="Dyson equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171303" start="21189" end="21200" title="self-energy" label="self-energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073627" start="21388" end="21404" title="GW approximation" label="GW approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q411283" start="22448" end="22451" title="Cobalt(II) oxide" label="CoO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378930" start="22592" end="22606" title="Mott insulator" label="Mott insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571298" start="22783" end="22796" title="Hubbard model" label="Hubbard model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319042" start="22917" end="22944" title="dynamical mean-field theory" label="dynamical mean-field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="23273" end="23292" title="solid state physics" label="solid state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374735" start="23375" end="23402" title="Empty lattice approximation" label="Empty lattice approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q290128" start="23501" end="23524" title="k·p perturbation theory" label="k·p perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="23669" end="23683" title="semiconductors" label="semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23759" end="23778" title="Particle in a one-dimensional lattice (periodic potential)#Kronig–Penney model" label="Kronig–Penney model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571298" start="23943" end="23956" title="Hubbard model" label="Hubbard model"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="24022" end="24036" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822741" start="24384" end="24396" title="metal halide" label="metal halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="24409" end="24413" title="Sodium chloride" label="NaCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854235" start="24586" end="24598" title="band diagram" label="band diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111188" start="25152" end="25172" title="Band-gap engineering" label="Band-gap engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q123022" start="25234" end="25245" title="Felix Bloch" label="Felix Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706857" start="25290" end="25309" title="Alan Herries Wilson" label="Alan Herries Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q119026074" start="26195" end="26213" title="Dragica Vasileska" label="Vasileska, Dragica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706268" wikidata="Q12828749" url="?curid=706268" title="NOTA (disambiguation)">
<text>Nota or NOTA may refer to:

==Music==
*Nóta, a form of 19th century Hungarian popular song 
*&quot;Lai&quot; (poetic form) or nota, a medieval musical form
*Nota (group), a Puerto Rican vocal group

==NOTA==
*None of the above, a ballot choice in some jurisdictions or organizations
**For which is named the None of the Above Direct Democracy Party, a minor political party in Ontario
*Network on Terminal Architecture, a mobile technology system architecture
*NAP of the Americas, a large data center and Internet exchange point in Miami, Florida
*National Organ Transplant Act of 1984, American legislation

==People==
*Antonella Nota, Italian astronomer
*Július Nôta (1971–2009), Slovak footballer
*Marc Nota (born 1965), Dutch former cricketer and coach
*Nota Schiller (born 1937), Orthodox Jewish rabbi and rosh yeshiva

==Other uses==
*Nota, an Australian automobile manufacturer
*&quot;Note&quot; (film), 2015 Malaysian Film often known as &quot;NOTA&quot; in Malay language
*&quot;NOTA&quot; (film), a 2018 Tamil film
*Nota (library), Danish library for people with print disabilities

==See also==
*Notah Begay III (born 1972), American golfer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12828749" start="0" end="4" title="NOTA (disambiguation)" label="Nota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12828749" start="8" end="12" title="NOTA (disambiguation)" label="NOTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162475" start="39" end="43" title="Nóta" label="Nóta"/>
<link wikidata="Q951215" start="93" end="122" title="Lai (poetic form)" label="&amp;quot;Lai&amp;quot; (poetic form)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062356" start="157" end="169" title="Nota (group)" label="Nota (group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345115" start="209" end="226" title="None of the above" label="None of the above"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111035" start="308" end="348" title="None of the Above Direct Democracy Party" label="None of the Above Direct Democracy Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001150" start="386" end="418" title="Network on Terminal Architecture" label="Network on Terminal Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952344" start="461" end="480" title="NAP of the Americas" label="NAP of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974671" start="549" end="586" title="National Organ Transplant Act of 1984" label="National Organ Transplant Act of 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q122739880" start="622" end="636" title="Antonella Nota" label="Antonella Nota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309988" start="658" end="669" title="Július Nôta" label="Július Nôta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091807" start="702" end="711" title="Marc Nota" label="Marc Nota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062357" start="759" end="772" title="Nota Schiller" label="Nota Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144168" start="842" end="846" title="Nota" label="Nota"/>
<link wikidata="Q25489157" start="887" end="910" title="Note (film)" label="&amp;quot;Note&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290706" start="983" end="1006" title="NOTA (film)" label="&amp;quot;NOTA&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12329322" start="1027" end="1041" title="Nota (library)" label="Nota (library)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062478" start="1108" end="1123" title="Notah Begay III" label="Notah Begay III"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706271" wikidata="Q5507285" url="?curid=706271" title="Fuglede's theorem">
<text>In mathematics, Fuglede&#x27;s theorem is a result in operator theory, named after Bent Fuglede.

== The result ==

Theorem (Fuglede) Let &quot;T&quot; and &quot;N&quot; be bounded operators on a complex Hilbert space with &quot;N&quot; being normal. If &quot;TN&quot; = &quot;NT&quot;, then &quot;TN*&quot; = &quot;N*T&quot;, where &quot;N*&quot; denotes the adjoint of &quot;N&quot;.

Normality of &quot;N&quot; is necessary, as is seen by taking &quot;T&quot;=&quot;N&quot;. When &quot;T&quot; is self-adjoint, the claim is trivial regardless of whether &quot;N&quot; is normal:

formula_1

Tentative Proof: If the underlying Hilbert space is finite-dimensional, the spectral theorem says that &quot;N&quot; is of the form
formula_2
where &quot;Pi&quot; are pairwise orthogonal projections. One expects that &quot;TN&quot; = &quot;NT&quot; if and only if &quot;TPi&quot; = &quot;PiT&quot;.
Indeed, it can be proved to be true by elementary arguments (e.g. it can be shown that all &quot;Pi&quot; are representable as polynomials of &quot;N&quot; and for this reason, if &quot;T&quot; commutes with &quot;N&quot;, it has to commute with &quot;Pi&quot;...).
Therefore &quot;T&quot; must also commute with
formula_3

In general, when the Hilbert space is not finite-dimensional, the normal operator &quot;N&quot; gives rise to a projection-valued measure &quot;P&quot; on its spectrum, &quot;σ&quot;(&quot;N&quot;), which assigns a projection &quot;P&quot;Ω to each Borel subset of &quot;σ&quot;(&quot;N&quot;). &quot;N&quot; can be expressed as
formula_4

Differently from the finite dimensional case, it is by no means obvious that &quot;TN = NT&quot; implies &quot;TP&quot;Ω = &quot;P&quot;Ω&quot;T&quot;. Thus, it is not so obvious that &quot;T&quot; also commutes with any simple function of the form
formula_5

Indeed, following the construction of the spectral decomposition for a bounded, normal, not self-adjoint, operator &quot;T&quot;, one sees that to verify that &quot;T&quot; commutes with formula_6, the most straightforward way is to assume that &quot;T&quot; commutes with both &quot;N&quot; and &quot;N*&quot;, giving rise to a vicious circle!

That is the relevance of Fuglede&#x27;s theorem: The latter hypothesis is not really necessary.

== Putnam&#x27;s generalization ==
The following contains Fuglede&#x27;s result as a special case. The proof by Rosenblum pictured below is just that presented by Fuglede for his theorem when assuming &quot;N&quot;=&quot;M&quot;.

Theorem (Calvin Richard Putnam) Let &quot;T&quot;, &quot;M&quot;, &quot;N&quot; be linear operators on a complex Hilbert space, and suppose that &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot; are normal, &quot;T&quot; is bounded and &quot;MT&quot; = &quot;TN&quot;.
Then &quot;M&quot;*&quot;T&quot; = &quot;TN&quot;*.

First proof (Marvin Rosenblum):
By induction, the hypothesis implies that &quot;M&quot;&quot;k&quot;&quot;T&quot; = &quot;TN&quot;&quot;k&quot; for all &quot;k&quot;.
Thus for any λ in formula_7,
formula_8

Consider the function
formula_9
This is equal to
formula_10
where formula_11 because formula_12 is normal, and similarly formula_13. However we have
formula_14
so U is unitary, and hence has norm 1 for all λ; the same is true for &quot;V&quot;(λ), so
formula_15

So &quot;F&quot; is a bounded analytic vector-valued function, and is thus constant, and equal to &quot;F&quot;(0) = &quot;T&quot;. Considering the first-order terms in the expansion for small λ, we must have &quot;M*T&quot; = &quot;TN*&quot;.

The original paper of Fuglede appeared in 1950; it was extended to the form given above by Putnam in 1951. The short proof given above was first published by Rosenblum in 1958; it is very elegant, but is less general than the original proof which also considered the case of unbounded operators. Another simple proof of Putnam&#x27;s theorem is as follows:

Second proof: Consider the matrices

formula_16

The operator &quot;N&#x27; &quot; is normal and, by assumption, &quot;T&#x27; N&#x27; = N&#x27; T&#x27; &quot;. By Fuglede&#x27;s theorem, one has
formula_17

Comparing entries then gives the desired result.

From Putnam&#x27;s generalization, one can deduce the following:

Corollary If two normal operators &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot; are similar, then they are unitarily equivalent.

Proof: Suppose &quot;MS&quot; = &quot;SN&quot; where &quot;S&quot; is a bounded invertible operator. Putnam&#x27;s result implies &quot;M*S&quot; = &quot;SN*&quot;, i.e.
formula_18

Take the adjoint of the above equation and we have
formula_19

So
formula_20

Let &quot;S*=VR&quot;, with &quot;V&quot; a unitary (since &quot;S&quot; is invertible) and &quot;R&quot; the positive square root of &quot;SS*&quot;. As &quot;R&quot; is a limit of polynomials on &quot;SS*&quot;, the above implies that &quot;R&quot; commutes with &quot;M&quot;. It is also invertible. Then
formula_21

Corollary If &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot; are normal operators, and &quot;MN&quot; = &quot;NM&quot;, then &quot;MN&quot; is also normal.

Proof: The argument invokes only Fuglede&#x27;s theorem. One can directly compute
formula_22

By Fuglede, the above becomes
formula_23

But &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot; are normal, so
formula_24

== &quot;C*&quot;-algebras ==
The theorem can be rephrased as a statement about elements of C*-algebras.

Theorem (Fuglede-Putnam-Rosenblum) Let &quot;x, y&quot; be two normal elements of a &quot;C*&quot;-algebra &quot;A&quot; and &quot;z&quot; such that &quot;xz&quot; = &quot;zy&quot;. Then it follows that &quot;x* z = z y*&quot;.

== References ==
* Fuglede, Bent. A Commutativity Theorem for Normal Operators — PNAS
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507285" start="16" end="38" title="Fuglede&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Fuglede&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198874" start="54" end="69" title="operator theory" label="operator theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q818203" start="83" end="95" title="Bent Fuglede" label="Bent Fuglede"/>
<link wikidata="Q854946" start="243" end="249" title="normal operator" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509647" start="360" end="367" title="Hermitian adjoint" label="adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425077" start="670" end="686" title="spectral theorem" label="spectral theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q339722" start="1329" end="1354" title="projection-valued measure" label="projection-valued measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="2574" end="2589" title="linear operator" label="linear operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="2604" end="2617" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q854946" start="2672" end="2678" title="normal operator" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263809" start="5320" end="5330" title="C*-algebra" label="C*-algebra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706278" wikidata="Q661063" url="?curid=706278" title="Squeezed coherent state">
<text>In physics, a squeezed coherent state is a quantum state that is usually described by two non-commuting observables having continuous spectra of eigenvalues. Examples are position formula_1 and momentum formula_2 of a particle, and the (dimension-less) electric field in the amplitude formula_3 (phase 0) and in the mode formula_4 (phase 90°) of a light wave (the wave&#x27;s quadratures). The product of the standard deviations of two such operators obeys the uncertainty principle:

:formula_5 and formula_6 , respectively.

Trivial examples, which are in fact not squeezed, are the ground state formula_7 of the quantum harmonic oscillator and the family of coherent states formula_8. These states saturate the uncertainty above and have a symmetric distribution of the operator uncertainties with formula_9 in &quot;natural oscillator units&quot; and formula_10.

The term squeezed state is actually used for states with a standard deviation below that of the ground state for one of the operators or for a linear combination of the two. The idea behind this is that the circle denoting the uncertainty of a coherent state in the quadrature phase space (see right) has been &quot;squeezed&quot; to an ellipse of the same area. Note that a squeezed state does not need to saturate the uncertainty principle.

Squeezed states of light were first produced in the mid 1980s. At that time, quantum noise squeezing by up to a factor of about 2 (3 dB) in variance was achieved, i.e. formula_11. As of 2017, squeeze factors larger than 10 (10 dB) have been directly observed.

==Mathematical definition==

The most general wave function that satisfies the identity above is the squeezed coherent state (we work in units with formula_12)

:formula_13

where formula_14 are constants (a normalization constant, the center of the wavepacket, its width, and the expectation value of its momentum). The new feature relative to a coherent state is the free value of the width formula_15, which is the reason why the state is called &quot;squeezed&quot;.

The squeezed state above is an eigenstate of a linear operator

:formula_16

and the corresponding eigenvalue equals formula_17. In this sense, it is a generalization of the ground state as well as the coherent state.

== Operator representation ==
The general form of a squeezed coherent state for a quantum harmonic oscillator is given by

:formula_18

where formula_7 is the vacuum state, formula_20 is the displacement operator and formula_21 is the squeeze operator, given by

:formula_22

where formula_23 and formula_24 are annihilation and creation operators, respectively. For a quantum harmonic oscillator of angular frequency formula_25, these operators are given by

:formula_26

For a real formula_27, (note that formula_28, where &quot;r&quot; is squeezing parameter), the uncertainty in formula_1 and formula_2 are given by

:formula_31

Therefore, a squeezed coherent state saturates the Heisenberg uncertainty principle formula_32, with reduced uncertainty in one of its quadrature components and increased uncertainty in the other.

Some expectation values for squeezed coherent states are

:formula_33

:formula_34

:formula_35

The general form of a displaced squeezed state for a quantum harmonic oscillator is given by

:formula_36

Some expectation values for displaced squeezed state are

:formula_37

:formula_38

:formula_39

Since formula_40 and formula_41 do not commute with each other, 

: formula_42

:formula_43

where formula_44, with formula_45 

==Examples==
Depending on the phase angle at which the state&#x27;s width is reduced, one can distinguish amplitude-squeezed, phase-squeezed, and general quadrature-squeezed states. If the squeezing operator is applied directly to the vacuum, rather than to a coherent state, the result is called the squeezed vacuum. The figures below give a nice visual demonstration of the close connection between squeezed states and Heisenberg&#x27;s uncertainty relation: Diminishing the quantum noise at a specific quadrature (phase) of the wave has as a direct consequence an enhancement of the noise of the complementary quadrature, that is, the field at the phase shifted by formula_46.

As can be seen in the illustrations, in contrast to a coherent state, the quantum noise for a squeezed state is no longer independent of the phase of the light wave. A characteristic broadening and narrowing of the noise during one oscillation period can be observed. The probability distribution of a squeezed state is defined as the norm squared of the wave function mentioned in the last paragraph. It corresponds to the square of the electric (and magnetic) field strength of a classical light wave. The moving wave packets display an oscillatory motion combined with the widening and narrowing of their distribution: the &quot;breathing&quot; of the wave packet. For an amplitude-squeezed state, the most narrow distribution of the wave packet is reached at the field maximum, resulting in an amplitude that is defined more precisely than the one of a coherent state. For a phase-squeezed state, the most narrow distribution is reached at field zero, resulting in an average phase value that is better defined than the one of a coherent state.

In phase space, quantum mechanical uncertainties can be depicted by the Wigner quasi-probability distribution. The intensity of the light wave, its coherent excitation, is given by the displacement of the Wigner distribution from the origin. A change in the phase of the squeezed quadrature results in a rotation of the distribution.

==Photon number distributions and phase distributions==
The squeezing angle, that is the phase with minimum quantum noise, has a large influence on the photon number distribution of the light wave and its phase distribution as well.

For amplitude squeezed light the photon number distribution is usually narrower than the one of a coherent state of the same amplitude resulting in sub-Poissonian light, whereas its phase distribution is wider. The opposite is true for the phase-squeezed light, which displays a large intensity (photon number) noise but a narrow phase distribution. Nevertheless, the statistics of amplitude squeezed light was not observed directly with photon number resolving detector due to experimental difficulty.
For the squeezed vacuum state the photon number distribution displays odd-even-oscillations. This can be explained by the mathematical form of the squeezing operator, that resembles the operator for two-photon generation and annihilation processes. Photons in a squeezed vacuum state are more likely to appear in pairs.

==Classification==

===Based on the number of modes===
Squeezed states of light are broadly classified into single-mode squeezed states and two-mode squeezed states, depending on the number of modes of the electromagnetic field involved in the process. Recent studies have looked into multimode squeezed states showing quantum correlations among more than two modes as well.

====Single-mode squeezed states====
Single-mode squeezed states, as the name suggests, consists of a single mode of the electromagnetic field whose one quadrature has fluctuations below the shot noise level and the orthogonal quadrature has excess noise. Specifically, a single-mode squeezed &quot;vacuum&quot; (SMSV) state can be mathematically represented as,
:formula_47
where the squeezing operator S is the same as introduced in the section on operator representations above. In the photon number basis, writing formula_48 this can be expanded as,
:formula_49
which explicitly shows that the pure SMSV consists entirely of even-photon Fock state superpositions.
Single mode squeezed states are typically generated by degenerate parametric oscillation in an optical parametric oscillator, or using four-wave mixing.

====Two-mode squeezed states====
Two-mode squeezing involves two modes of the electromagnetic field which exhibit quantum noise reduction below the shot noise level in a linear combination of the quadratures of the two fields. For example, the field produced by a nondegenerate parametric oscillator above threshold shows squeezing in the amplitude difference quadrature. The first experimental demonstration of two-mode squeezing in optics was by Heidmann &quot;et al.&quot;. More recently, two-mode squeezing was generated on-chip using a four-wave mixing OPO above threshold. Two-mode squeezing is often seen as a precursor to continuous-variable entanglement, and hence a demonstration of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox in its original formulation in terms of continuous position and momentum observables. A two-mode squeezed vacuum (TMSV) state can be mathematically represented as,
:formula_50,

and, writing down formula_48, in the photon number basis as,

:formula_52
If the individual modes of a TMSV are considered separately (i.e., formula_53), then tracing over or absorbing one of the modes leaves the remaining mode in a thermal state

:formula_54

with an effective average number of photons formula_55.

===Based on the presence of a mean field===
Squeezed states of light can be divided into squeezed vacuum and bright squeezed light, depending on the absence or presence of a non-zero mean field (also called a carrier), respectively. An optical parametric oscillator operated below threshold produces squeezed vacuum, whereas the same OPO operated above threshold produces bright squeezed light. Bright squeezed light can be advantageous for certain quantum information processing applications as it obviates the need of sending local oscillator to provide a phase reference, whereas squeezed vacuum is considered more suitable for quantum enhanced sensing applications. The AdLIGO and GEO600 gravitational wave detectors use squeezed vacuum to achieve enhanced sensitivity beyond the standard quantum limit.

==Atomic spin squeezing==

For squeezing of two-level neutral atom ensembles it is useful to consider the atoms as spin-1/2 particles with corresponding angular momentum operators defined as

:formula_56

where formula_57 and formula_58 is the single-spin operator in the formula_59-direction. Here formula_60 will correspond to the population difference in the two level system, i.e. for an equal superposition of the up and down state formula_61. The formula_62−formula_63 plane represents the phase difference between the two states. This is also known as the Bloch sphere picture. We can then define uncertainty relations such as formula_64. For a coherent (unentangled) state, formula_65. Squeezing is here considered the redistribution of uncertainty from one variable (typically formula_60) to another (typically formula_63). If we consider a state pointing in the formula_62 direction, we can define the Wineland criterion for squeezing, or the metrological enhancement of the squeezed state as

:formula_69.

This criterion has two factors, the first factor is the spin noise reduction, i.e. how much the quantum noise in formula_60 is reduced relative to the coherent (unentangled) state. The second factor is how much the coherence (the length of the Bloch vector, formula_71) is reduced due to the squeezing procedure. Together these quantities tell you how much metrological enhancement the squeezing procedure gives. Here, metrological enhancement is the reduction in averaging time or atom number needed to make a measurement of a specific uncertainty. 20 dB of metrological enhancement means the same precision measurement can be made with 100 times fewer atoms or 100 times shorter averaging time.

== Relation with the concept of quantum phase space ==
The concept of Quantum Phase Space (QPS) extends the notion of phase space from classical to quantum physics by taking into account the uncertainty principle. The definition of the QPS is based on the introduction of joint momentum-coordinate quantum states denoted formula_72 which can be considered as some kind of squeezed coherent states. The expression of the wavefunction corresponding to a state formula_72 in coordinate representation is

formula_74

in which :

* formula_75 is the reduced Planck constant
* formula_1 and formula_2 are respectively the eigenvalues (possible values) of the coordinate operator formula_3 and the momentum operator formula_79
* formula_80 , formula_81, formula_82 and formula_83 are respectively the mean values  and statistical variances of the coordinate and momentum corresponding to the quantum state formula_72 itself

formula_85

A state formula_72 saturates the uncertainty relation i.e. one has the following relation

formula_87

It can be shown that a state formula_72 is an eigenstate of the operator formula_89. The corresponding eigenvalue equation is

formula_90

with

formula_91

It was also shown that the multidimensional generalization of the states  formula_72 are the basic quantum states which corresponds to wavefunctions that are covariants under the action of the group formed by multidimensional Linear Canonical Transformations. 

The quantum phase space (QPS) is defined as the set formula_93 of all possible values of formula_94 , or equivalently as the set formula_95 of possible values of the pair formula_96,  for a given value of the momentum statistical variance formula_83. It follows from this definition that the structure of the quantum phase space depends explicitly on the value of the momentum statistical variance. It is this explicit dependence that makes this definition naturally compatible with the uncertainty principle. It can also be remarked here that, at thermodynamic equilibrium, the momentum statistical variance formula_83 can be related to thermodynamics parameters like temperature, pressure and volume shape and size. At the classical limit, when the momentum and coordinate statistical variances are taken to be equal to zero (ignoring the uncertainty principle), the quantum phase space as defined previously is reduced to the classical phase space.

There are more generalized squeezed coherent states, denoted formula_99 with formula_100 a positive integer, that are related to the concept of QPS and which do not saturate the uncertainty relation for formula_101. These states can be deduced from to the states formula_72 using the following relation

formula_103

The coordinate and momentum statistical variances, denoted respectively formula_104 and formula_105, corresponding to a state formula_99 are

formula_107 

We then have the following relation

formula_108

This relation shows that a state formula_99 does not saturate the uncertainty relation for formula_101 as said before. 

==Experimental realizations==
There has been a whole variety of successful demonstrations of squeezed states. The first demonstrations were experiments with light fields using lasers and non-linear optics (see optical parametric oscillator). This is achieved by a simple process of four-wave mixing with a formula_111 crystal; similarly travelling wave phase-sensitive amplifiers generate spatially multimode quadrature-squeezed states of light when the formula_111 crystal is pumped in absence of any signal. Sub-Poissonian current sources driving semiconductor laser diodes have led to amplitude squeezed light.

Squeezed states have also been realized via motional states of an ion in a trap, phonon states in crystal lattices, and spin states in neutral atom ensembles. Much progress has been made on the creation and observation of spin squeezed states in ensembles of neutral atoms and ions, which can be used to enhancement measurements of time, accelerations, fields, and the current state of the art for measurement enhancement is 20 dB. Generation of spin squeezed states have been demonstrated using both coherent evolution of a coherent spin state and projective, coherence-preserving measurements. Even macroscopic oscillators were driven into classical motional states that were very similar to squeezed coherent states. Current state of the art in noise suppression, for laser radiation using squeezed light, amounts to 15 dB (as of 2016), which broke the previous record of 12.7 dB (2010).

==Applications==
Squeezed states of the light field can be used to enhance precision measurements. For example, phase-squeezed light can improve the phase read out of interferometric measurements (see for example gravitational waves). Amplitude-squeezed light can improve the readout of very weak spectroscopic signals.

Spin squeezed states of atoms can be used to improve the precision of atomic clocks. This is an important problem in atomic clocks and other sensors that use small ensembles of cold atoms where the quantum projection noise represents a fundamental limitation to the precision of the sensor.

Various squeezed coherent states, generalized to the case of many degrees of freedom, are used in various calculations in quantum field theory, for example Unruh effect and Hawking radiation, and generally, particle production in curved backgrounds and Bogoliubov transformations.

Recently, the use of squeezed states for quantum information processing in the continuous variables (CV) regime has been increasing rapidly. Continuous variable quantum optics uses squeezing of light as an essential resource to realize CV protocols for quantum communication, unconditional quantum teleportation and one-way quantum computing. This is in contrast to quantum information processing with single photons or photon pairs as qubits. CV quantum information processing relies heavily on the fact that squeezing is intimately related to quantum entanglement, as the quadratures of a squeezed state exhibit sub-shot-noise quantum correlations.

==See also==
*Negative energy
*Nonclassical light
*Optical phase space
*Quantum optics
*Squeeze operator

==References==
==External links==
* Tutorial about quantum optics of the light field</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q661063" start="14" end="37" title="Squeezed coherent state" label="squeezed coherent state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989763" start="90" end="103" title="Commutator" label="non-commuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q845789" start="104" end="115" title="Observable" label="observables"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="145" end="156" title="Eigenvalues and eigenvectors" label="eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098881" start="376" end="387" title="Optical phase space" label="quadratures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597952" start="441" end="449" title="Operator (physics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="461" end="482" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q677864" start="615" end="642" title="quantum harmonic oscillator" label="quantum harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032070" start="661" end="675" title="coherent state" label="coherent state"/>
<link wikidata="Q661063" start="877" end="891" title="Squeezed coherent state" label="squeezed state"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="1134" end="1150" title="quadrature phase" label="quadrature phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="1205" end="1212" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001328" start="1312" end="1336" title="Squeezed states of light" label="Squeezed states of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="1619" end="1632" title="wave function" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412691" start="1823" end="1833" title="wavepacket" label="wavepacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="1879" end="1887" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032070" start="1920" end="1934" title="coherent state" label="coherent state"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="2076" end="2086" title="eigenstate" label="eigenstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="2144" end="2154" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q766202" start="2423" end="2435" title="vacuum state" label="vacuum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282616" start="2455" end="2476" title="displacement operator" label="displacement operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582217" start="2499" end="2515" title="squeeze operator" label="squeeze operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q677864" start="2633" end="2660" title="quantum harmonic oscillator" label="quantum harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="2949" end="2981" title="Heisenberg uncertainty principle" label="Heisenberg uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="3947" end="3957" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="3965" end="3985" title="uncertainty relation" label="uncertainty relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899805" start="4125" end="4138" title="complementarity (physics)" label="complementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032070" start="4261" end="4275" title="coherent state" label="coherent state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269075" start="4281" end="4294" title="quantum noise" label="quantum noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="4361" end="4371" title="light wave" label="light wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119376" start="5329" end="5366" title="Wigner quasi-probability distribution" label="Wigner quasi-probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="5744" end="5750" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="5797" end="5802" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878894" start="5974" end="5988" title="sub-Poissonian" label="sub-Poissonian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6264" end="6296" title="photon number resolving detector" label="photon number resolving detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582217" start="6476" end="6494" title="squeezing operator" label="squeezing operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689728" start="6528" end="6549" title="Spontaneous parametric down conversion" label="two-photon generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="6843" end="6848" title="Normal mode" label="modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="6856" end="6877" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7500" end="7505" title="#Operator representation" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q678317" start="7666" end="7676" title="Fock state" label="Fock state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503574" start="7995" end="8011" title="Shot noise" label="shot noise level"/>
<link wikidata="Q214975" start="8544" end="8575" title="Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox" label="Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591812" start="8987" end="9000" title="thermal state" label="thermal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q834512" start="9308" end="9337" title="optical parametric oscillator" label="optical parametric oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238887" start="9600" end="9616" title="local oscillator" label="local oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9746" end="9752" title="LIGO#Advanced LIGO" label="AdLIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q697906" start="9757" end="9763" title="GEO600" label="GEO600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190143" start="10034" end="10059" title="angular momentum operator" label="angular momentum operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q884593" start="10444" end="10456" title="Bloch sphere" label="Bloch sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="11715" end="11726" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="11745" end="11760" title="Quantum mechanics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="11788" end="11809" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="12151" end="12166" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="12981" end="12986" title="Group action" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553419" start="13014" end="13046" title="Linear canonical transformation" label="Linear Canonical Transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="14823" end="14828" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="14834" end="14851" title="non-linear optics" label="non-linear optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q834512" start="14857" end="14886" title="optical parametric oscillator" label="optical parametric oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878894" start="15157" end="15171" title="Sub-Poissonian" label="Sub-Poissonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="15328" end="15331" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="15343" end="15349" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="15360" end="15375" title="crystal lattice" label="crystal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="15405" end="15409" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="16321" end="16349" title="interferometry" label="interferometric measurements"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="16367" end="16385" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="16451" end="16472" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopic signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q227467" start="16545" end="16557" title="atomic clock" label="atomic clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269075" start="16673" end="16697" title="quantum noise" label="quantum projection noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q274502" start="16833" end="16851" title="degrees of freedom (physics and chemistry)" label="degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="16889" end="16909" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568269" start="16923" end="16935" title="Unruh effect" label="Unruh effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q497396" start="16940" end="16957" title="Hawking radiation" label="Hawking radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813244" start="17020" end="17045" title="Bogoliubov transformation" label="Bogoliubov transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122216" start="17090" end="17120" title="quantum information processing" label="quantum information processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q662636" start="17715" end="17730" title="Negative energy" label="Negative energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049210" start="17732" end="17750" title="Nonclassical light" label="Nonclassical light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098881" start="17752" end="17771" title="Optical phase space" label="Optical phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q735602" start="17773" end="17787" title="Quantum optics" label="Quantum optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582217" start="17789" end="17805" title="Squeeze operator" label="Squeeze operator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706279" wikidata="Q16865398" url="?curid=706279" title="Carrera (surname)">
<text>Carrera, de la Carrera or Karrera is a surname originated in Venice, Italy. Later, also a Basque surname from Alegría de Oria and Amezketa, in Guipúzcoa (Basque Country, Spain). Other references show that it is also a Castilian surname and there is evidence that the name originated in Barcelona in Catalonia, in northeastern Spain. It is also encountered in Occitan, being rendered as Carrère in French. It may refer to:

==Persons==
*Asia Carrera (1973–), American porn star
*Barbara Carrera (1945–), Nicaraguan-American actress
*Carmen Carrera (1985-), American model
*Carrera family, Chilean family prominent in the Chilean War of Independence
**José Miguel Carrera (1785–1821), hero of the Chilean War of Independence
**Luis Carrera (1791–1818), military leader in the Chilean War of Independence
*Evelyn Carrera (1971–), Dominican Republic volleyball player
*Félix Rigau Carrera (1884–1954), First Puerto Rican aviator
*Gonzalo Carrera (contemporary), Spanish rock musician resident in London / United Kingdom 
*Ignacio Carrera Pinto (1848–1882), hero of the Chilean Army
*Javiera Carrera (1771–1862), hero of the Chilean war of Independence
*Juan Ignacio Carrera (1981-), Argentine footballer.
*Juan Luis Carrera (contemporary), American musician and recording engineer
*Leonardo Carrera (a.k.a. Damián 666) (1961–), Mexican professional wrestler
*Leonardo Carrera (a.k.a. Bestia 666) (1989–), Mexican professional wrestler
*Martín Carrera (1806–1871), President of Mexico briefly in 1855
*Massimo Carrera (1964-), Italian football player and coach
*Mercedes Carrera (1982–) , American Pornstar
*Norberto Rivera Carrera (1942–), Mexican Roman Catholic archbishop and cardinal
*Pietro Carrera (1573–1647), Sicilian chess player, priest, and author
*Rafael Carrera (1814–1865), ruler of Guatemala 1839–1865
*Sebastián Carrera (1978-), Argentine footballer.
*Tia Carrera (1967–), Filipina-American actress
*Fernando Carrera (1966–), Minister of Foreign Affairs Guatemala 2013-2014

===Fictional characters===
*Carrera, succubus character from video games Viper GTS
* Kiara “Kie” Carrera, a character in the Netflix series &quot;Outer Banks&quot;
*Sally Carrera, character from the Disney/Pixar film &quot;Cars&quot;

== See also ==
* Carriera

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16865398" start="0" end="7" title="Carrera (surname)" label="Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865398" start="9" end="22" title="Carrera (surname)" label="de la Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865398" start="26" end="33" title="Carrera (surname)" label="Karrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="61" end="67" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="90" end="96" title="Basque people" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639961" start="110" end="125" title="Alegia" label="Alegría de Oria"/>
<link wikidata="Q942106" start="130" end="138" title="Amezketa" label="Amezketa"/>
<link wikidata="Q95010" start="143" end="152" title="Guipúzcoa" label="Guipúzcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="154" end="168" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="170" end="175" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573855" start="218" end="227" title="Castilian people" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="286" end="295" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="359" end="366" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q415518" start="386" end="393" title="Carrere (disambiguation)" label="Carrère"/>
<link wikidata="Q540597" start="436" end="448" title="Asia Carrera" label="Asia Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q235294" start="478" end="493" title="Barbara Carrera" label="Barbara Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043441" start="532" end="546" title="Carmen Carrera" label="Carmen Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q599145" start="572" end="586" title="Carrera family" label="Carrera family"/>
<link wikidata="Q734977" start="650" end="669" title="José Miguel Carrera" label="José Miguel Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q201200" start="725" end="737" title="Luis Carrera" label="Luis Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416292" start="803" end="817" title="Evelyn Carrera" label="Evelyn Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511636" start="865" end="884" title="Félix Rigau Carrera" label="Félix Rigau Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582181" start="926" end="941" title="Gonzalo Carrera" label="Gonzalo Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810975" start="1018" end="1039" title="Ignacio Carrera Pinto" label="Ignacio Carrera Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165780" start="1079" end="1094" title="Javiera Carrera" label="Javiera Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q9015622" start="1149" end="1169" title="Juan Ignacio Carrera" label="Juan Ignacio Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6300249" start="1202" end="1219" title="Juan Luis Carrera" label="Juan Luis Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212620" start="1278" end="1294" title="Leonardo Carrera" label="Leonardo Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897074" start="1355" end="1371" title="Bestia 666" label="Leonardo Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q597027" start="1432" end="1446" title="Martín Carrera" label="Martín Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q980189" start="1497" end="1512" title="Massimo Carrera" label="Massimo Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651742" start="1557" end="1573" title="Mercedes Carrera" label="Mercedes Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q152302" start="1603" end="1626" title="Norberto Rivera Carrera" label="Norberto Rivera Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q631673" start="1684" end="1698" title="Pietro Carrera" label="Pietro Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q365381" start="1755" end="1769" title="Rafael Carrera" label="Rafael Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q513319" start="1813" end="1830" title="Sebastián Carrera" label="Sebastián Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q286570" start="1863" end="1874" title="Tia Carrera" label="Tia Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229597" start="1911" end="1927" title="Fernando Carrera" label="Fernando Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q89414035" start="2132" end="2143" title="Outer Banks (TV series)" label="Outer Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q52337104" start="2238" end="2246" title="Carriera" label="Carriera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706282" wikidata="Q292355" url="?curid=706282" title="Betty Davis">
<text>Betty Davis (born Betty Gray Mabry; July 26, 1944 – February 9, 2022) was an American singer, songwriter, and model. She was known for her controversial sexually oriented lyrics and performance style, and was the second wife of trumpeter Miles Davis. Her AllMusic profile describes her as &quot;a wildly flamboyant funk diva with few equals ... [who] combined the gritty emotional realism of Tina Turner, the futurist fashion sense of David Bowie, and the trendsetting flair of Miles Davis&quot;.

== Early life ==
Betty Gray Mabry was born in Durham, North Carolina, on July 26, 1944. She developed an interest in music when she was about ten, and was introduced to various blues musicians by her grandmother, Beulah Blackwell, while staying at her farm in Reidsville, North Carolina. At 12, she wrote one of her first songs, &quot;I&#x27;m Going to Bake That Cake of Love&quot;. The family relocated to Homestead, Pennsylvania, so her father, Henry Mabry, could work at a Pennsylvania steel mill. Davis attended and graduated Homestead High School.

==Career ==
When she was 16, Betty left Homestead for New York City, enrolling at the Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT) while living with her aunt. She soaked up the Greenwich Village culture and folk music of the early 1960s. She associated herself with frequenters of the Cellar, a hip uptown club where young and stylish people congregated. It was a multiracial, artsy crowd of models, design students, actors, and singers. At the Cellar she played records and chatted people up. She was a friend and early muse to fashion designer Stephen Burrows, who also studied at the FIT at the time. She also worked as a model, appearing in photo spreads in &quot;Seventeen&quot;, &quot;Ebony&quot; and &quot;Glamour&quot;.

In New York, she met musicians including Jimi Hendrix and Sly Stone. The seeds of her musical career were planted through her friendship with soul singer Lou Courtney, who reputedly produced her first single, &quot;The Cellar&quot;, though the existence of that record has been questioned. She secured a contract with Don Costa, who had written arrangements for Frank Sinatra. As Betty Mabry, she recorded &quot;Get Ready For Betty&quot; b/w &quot;I&#x27;m Gonna Get My Baby Back&quot; in 1964 for Costa&#x27;s DCP International label. Around the same time, she recorded a single, &quot;I&#x27;ll Be There&quot;, with Roy Arlington for Safice Records, under the joint name &quot;Roy and Betty&quot;.

Her first professional gig came after she wrote &quot;Uptown (to Harlem)&quot; for The Chambers Brothers. Their 1967 album was a major success, but Mabry focused on her modeling career. She was successful as a model but felt bored by the work—&quot;I didn&#x27;t like modeling because you didn&#x27;t need brains to do it. It&#x27;s only going to last as long as you look good.&quot;

In 1968, when she was in a relationship with Hugh Masekela, she recorded several songs for Columbia Records, with Masekela doing the arrangements. Two of them were released as a single: &quot;Live, Love, Learn&quot; b/w &quot;It&#x27;s My Life&quot;. Her relationship with Miles Davis began soon after her breakup from Masekela. She featured on the cover of Miles Davis&#x27;s 1968 album &quot;Filles de Kilimanjaro&quot;, which included his tribute to her, &quot;Mademoiselle Mabry&quot;, and she introduced him to psychedelic rock and the flamboyant clothing styles of the era. In the spring of 1969, Betty returned to Columbia&#x27;s 52nd St. Studios to record a series of demo tracks, with Miles and Teo Macero producing. At least five songs were taped during those sessions, three of which were Mabry originals, two of which were covers of Cream and Creedence Clearwater Revival. Miles attempted to use these demo songs to secure an album deal for Betty, but neither Columbia nor Atlantic were interested and they were archived until 2016, when they were released in the compilation &quot;The Columbia Years, 1968–1969&quot; by Seattle&#x27;s Light in the Attic Records.

After the end of her marriage with Miles, Betty moved to London, probably around 1971, to pursue her modeling career. She wrote music while in the UK and, after about a year, returned to the US with the intention of recording songs with Santana. Instead, she recorded her own songs with a group of West Coast funk musicians including Larry Graham, Greg Errico, the Pointer Sisters, and members of Tower of Power. Davis wrote and arranged all her songs. Her first record, &quot;Betty Davis&quot;, was released in 1973. She released two more studio albums, &quot;They Say I&#x27;m Different&quot; (1974) and her major label debut on Island Records &quot;Nasty Gal&quot; (1975). None of the three albums were a commercial success, but she had two minor hits on the &quot;Billboard&quot; R&amp;B chart: &quot;If I&#x27;m in Luck I Might Get Picked Up&quot;, which reached number 66 in 1973, and &quot;Shut Off the Lights&quot;, which reached number 97 in 1975.

Davis remained a cult figure as a singer, due in part to her unabashedly sexual lyrics and performance style, which were both controversial for the time. She had success in Europe, but in the U.S. she was barred from performing on television because of her sexually aggressive stage persona. Some of her shows were boycotted, and her songs were not played on the radio due to pressure by religious groups and the NAACP. Carlos Santana recalled Betty as &quot;indomitable – she couldn&#x27;t be tamed. Musically, philosophically and physically, she was extreme and attractive.&quot;

==Retirement==
Davis completed another album for Island Records in 1976 (which was shelved and unreleased for 33 years), before being dropped by the label. She spent a year in Japan, spending time with silent monks.

Davis&#x27;s father died in 1980, which prompted her return to the US to live with her mother in Homestead, Pennsylvania. Davis struggled to overcome her father&#x27;s death, and subsequent mental illness. She acknowledged that she suffered a setback at the time, but stayed in Homestead, accepted the end of her career, and lived a quiet life.

The tracks from her final recording sessions in 1979 were released on two bootleg albums, &quot;Crashin&#x27; From Passion&quot; (1995) and &quot;Hangin&#x27; Out in Hollywood&quot; (1996). A greatest hits album, &quot;Anti Love: The Best of Betty Davis&quot;, was also released in 1995.

In 2007, &quot;Betty Davis&quot; (1973) and &quot;They Say I&#x27;m Different&quot; (1974) were reissued by Light in the Attic Records. In 2009, the label reissued &quot;Nasty Gal&quot; and her unreleased fourth studio album recorded in 1976, re-titled &quot;Is It Love or Desire?&quot; Both reissues contained extensive liner notes and shed some light on the mystery of why her fourth album, considered possibly to be her best work by members of her last band (Herbie Hancock, Chuck Rainey, and Alphonse Mouzon), was shelved and remained unreleased for 33 years.

An independent documentary directed by Phil Cox entitled &quot;Betty: They Say I&#x27;m Different&quot; was released in 2017, which renewed interest in her life and music career.
When Cox tracked Davis down, he found her living in the basement of a house with no internet, cell phone, or car. He said: &quot;This wasn&#x27;t a woman with riches or luxury. She was living on the bare essentials.&quot;

In 2019, Davis released &quot;A Little Bit Hot Tonight&quot;, her first new song in more than 40 years, which was performed and sung by Danielle Maggio, an ethnomusicologist who was a close friend and associate producer on &quot;Betty: They Say I&#x27;m Different&quot;.

To commemorate the 50th anniversary of Betty Davis&#x27;s self-titled debut, in 2023 Light in the Attic Records reissued three of her albums: &quot;Betty Davis&quot;, &quot;They Say I&#x27;m Different&quot;, &quot;Is It Love Or Desire?&quot;, as well as the first official release of her 1979 tracks, &quot;Crashin&#x27; From Passion&quot;.

== Personal life and death ==
As a model in 1966, Betty met jazz musician Miles Davis, who was 18 years her senior. He was separated from his first wife, dancer Frances Davis, and was dating actress Cicely Tyson. Betty began dating Miles in early 1968, and they were married that September. During their year of marriage, she introduced him to the fashions and popular music trends of the era that influenced his music. In his autobiography, Miles credited Betty with helping to plant the seeds of his further musical explorations by introducing the trumpeter to psychedelic rock guitarist Jimi Hendrix and funk innovator Sly Stone. The Miles Davis album &quot;Filles de Kilimanjaro&quot; (1968) features Betty on the cover and includes a song named after her.

In his autobiography, Miles said Betty was &quot;too young and wild&quot;, and accused her of having an affair with Jimi Hendrix, which hastened the end of their marriage. Betty denied the affair, stating: &quot;I was so angry with Miles when he wrote that. It was disrespectful to Jimi and to me. Miles and I broke up because of his violent temper.&quot; After accusing her of adultery, he filed for divorce in 1969. Miles told &quot;Jet&quot; magazine that the divorce was obtained on a &quot;temperament&quot; charge. He added: &quot;I&#x27;m just not the kind of cat to be married.&quot; Hendrix and Miles remained close, planning to record, until Hendrix&#x27;s death. The influence of Hendrix and especially Sly Stone on Miles Davis was obvious on the album &quot;Bitches Brew&quot; (1970), which ushered in the era of jazz fusion. It has been said that he wanted to call the album &quot;Witches Brew&quot; but Betty convinced him to change it.

Davis briefly dated musician Eric Clapton, but she refused to collaborate with him.

In 1975 Davis&#x27; lover Robert Palmer helped her secure a deal with Island Records. Shortly thereafter she released her album &quot;Nasty Gal&quot;.

Davis died from cancer at her home in Homestead, Pennsylvania, on February 9, 2022, at the age of 77.

==Legacy==
The live action/animated TV series &quot;Mike Judge Presents: Tales from the Tour Bus&quot; ended its 2018 season with an episode focusing on Davis&#x27; controversial career.

Davis&#x27; music has been featured in television series including &quot;Orange Is the New Black&quot;, &quot;Girlboss&quot;, &quot;Mixed-ish&quot;, &quot;High Fidelity&quot; and &quot;Pistol&quot;.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Compilation albums===
===Singles===
==Notes==
== References ==
== Literature ==
* Liner notes to Light in the Attic Records&#x27; 2007 re-issue of Betty Davis&#x27; self-titled 1973 debut album.

==External links==
* Betty Davis at &quot;AllAboutJazz&quot;
* 
* &quot;The Sound of Young America&quot; – interview on Maximum Fun June 21, 2007 (her first radio interview in 30 years)
* &quot;The Beautiful Dichotomy of Betty Davis: A Rare Conversation with the Elusive Mistress of Funk&quot; – interview on No Depression, February 2010, by J. Hayes
* Neil Spencer, &quot;Miles Davis: The muse who changed him, and the heady Brew that rewrote jazz&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, September 5, 2010 (including 2010 interview).
*Emily Lordi, &quot;The Artful, Erotic and Still Misunderstood Funk of Betty Davis&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, May 2, 2018.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q292355" start="0" end="11" title="Betty Davis" label="Betty Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q292355" start="18" end="34" title="Betty Davis" label="Betty Gray Mabry"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="238" end="249" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="255" end="263" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="392" end="403" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="435" end="446" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="544" end="566" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q269015" start="758" end="784" title="Reidsville, North Carolina" label="Reidsville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q912465" start="905" end="928" title="Homestead, Pennsylvania" label="Homestead, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="974" end="986" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q844999" start="1138" end="1169" title="Fashion Institute of Technology" label="Fashion Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="1222" end="1239" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="1252" end="1262" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608814" start="1591" end="1606" title="Stephen Burrows (designer)" label="Stephen Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296499" start="1713" end="1722" title="Seventeen (American magazine)" label="Seventeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280017" start="1736" end="1741" title="Ebony (magazine)" label="Ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="1758" end="1765" title="Glamour (magazine)" label="Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="1815" end="1827" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q713829" start="1832" end="1841" title="Sly Stone" label="Sly Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663028" start="1928" end="1940" title="Lou Courtney" label="Lou Courtney"/>
<link wikidata="Q705356" start="2092" end="2101" title="Don Costa" label="Don Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="2136" end="2149" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410177" start="2558" end="2579" title="The Chambers Brothers" label="The Chambers Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q246594" start="2905" end="2918" title="Hugh Masekela" label="Hugh Masekela"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="2951" end="2967" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414168" start="3254" end="3275" title="Filles de Kilimanjaro" label="Filles de Kilimanjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="3376" end="3392" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q265494" start="3564" end="3574" title="Teo Macero" label="Teo Macero"/>
<link wikidata="Q203736" start="3705" end="3710" title="Cream (band)" label="Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q192463" start="3715" end="3743" title="Creedence Clearwater Revival" label="Creedence Clearwater Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546190" start="4008" end="4034" title="Light in the Attic Records" label="Light in the Attic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q873384" start="4274" end="4281" title="Santana (band)" label="Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q471032" start="4371" end="4383" title="Larry Graham" label="Larry Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544901" start="4385" end="4396" title="Greg Errico" label="Greg Errico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161836" start="4402" end="4417" title="Pointer Sisters" label="Pointer Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569899" start="4434" end="4448" title="Tower of Power" label="Tower of Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898797" start="4514" end="4525" title="Betty Davis (album)" label="Betty Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783757" start="4598" end="4625" title="They Say I&amp;#x27;m Different" label="They Say I&amp;#x27;m Different"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394917" start="4689" end="4698" title="Nasty Gal (album)" label="Nasty Gal"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="4805" end="4814" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="4821" end="4834" title="R&amp;amp;B chart" label="R&amp;amp;B chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="5408" end="5413" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q819016" start="5415" end="5429" title="Carlos Santana" label="Carlos Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q723849" start="6333" end="6346" title="greatest hits" label="greatest hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546190" start="6538" end="6564" title="Light in the Attic Records" label="Light in the Attic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394917" start="6600" end="6609" title="Nasty Gal (album)" label="Nasty Gal"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="6892" end="6906" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q971465" start="6908" end="6920" title="Chuck Rainey" label="Chuck Rainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933351" start="6926" end="6941" title="Alphonse Mouzon" label="Alphonse Mouzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="7553" end="7570" title="ethnomusicologist" label="ethnomusicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546190" start="7754" end="7780" title="Light in the Attic Records" label="Light in the Attic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="8085" end="8096" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78580570" start="8172" end="8185" title="Frances Taylor Davis" label="Frances Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q238081" start="8210" end="8222" title="Cicely Tyson" label="Cicely Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="8574" end="8590" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="8601" end="8613" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q713829" start="8633" end="8642" title="Sly Stone" label="Sly Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414168" start="8672" end="8693" title="Filles de Kilimanjaro" label="Filles de Kilimanjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177768" start="9208" end="9211" title="Jet (magazine)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q804096" start="9543" end="9555" title="Bitches Brew" label="Bitches Brew"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="9598" end="9609" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="9754" end="9766" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q325412" start="9836" end="9849" title="Robert Palmer (singer)" label="Robert Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="9880" end="9894" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394917" start="9944" end="9953" title="Nasty Gal (album)" label="Nasty Gal"/>
<link wikidata="Q912465" start="10000" end="10023" title="Homestead, Pennsylvania" label="Homestead, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10117" end="10161" title="Mike Judge Presents: Tales from the Tour Bus" label="Mike Judge Presents: Tales from the Tour Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099650" start="10326" end="10349" title="Orange Is the New Black" label="Orange Is the New Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q28087902" start="10363" end="10371" title="Girlboss (TV series)" label="Girlboss"/>
<link wikidata="Q65068955" start="10385" end="10394" title="Mixed-ish" label="Mixed-ish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83961623" start="10408" end="10421" title="High Fidelity (TV series)" label="High Fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q106362893" start="10438" end="10444" title="Pistol (miniseries)" label="Pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546190" start="10589" end="10615" title="Light in the Attic Records" label="Light in the Attic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722580" start="10730" end="10742" title="AllAboutJazz" label="AllAboutJazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11150" end="11162" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706285" wikidata="Q3820375" url="?curid=706285" title="Irish Brigade (Union army)">
<text>The Irish Brigade was an infantry brigade, consisting predominantly of Irish Americans, who served in the Union Army in the American Civil War. The designation of the first regiment in the brigade, the 69th New York Infantry, or the &quot;Fighting 69th,&quot; continued in later wars. The Irish Brigade was known in part for its famous war cry, the &quot;Faugh a Ballaugh&quot; which is an anglicization of the Irish phrase, &quot;fág an bealach&quot;, meaning &quot;clear the way&quot; and used in various Irish-majority military units founded due to the Irish diaspora. According to Fox&#x27;s &quot;Regimental Losses&quot;, of all Union army brigades, only the 1st Vermont Brigade and Iron Brigade suffered more combat dead than the Irish Brigade during America&#x27;s Civil War.

==Formation and subordinate regiments==
The formation of an Irish Brigade was authorized by the Secretary of War Simon Cameron in September 1861. The brigade originally consisted of the 63rd New York Infantry, the 69th New York Infantry, and the 88th New York Infantry. The three New York regiments were soon joined by a predominantly &quot;Yankee&quot; regiment from Massachusetts, the 29th Massachusetts. The 29th was never fond of being brigaded with three Irish &quot;Fenian&quot; regiments from New York and soon after the Battle of Antietam the 29th was replaced by the 28th Massachusetts Infantry regiment, made up mostly of Irish immigrants. Soon after that, the City of Philadelphia offered a regiment to the brigade and soon after the 116th Pennsylvania Infantry was added to the brigade, bringing the total number of regiments in the Irish Brigade to five.

There were three core regiments of the Irish Brigade, the 69th, 88th, and the 63rd. The 69th New York Volunteers, was largely made up of the pre-war 69th New York Militia, a unit which first gained notoriety prior to the Civil War, when Colonel Michael Corcoran refused an order to parade the regiment for the Prince of Wales during the latter&#x27;s visit to New York City. The 63rd New York Volunteers, known as the &quot;Third Irish&quot; was composed mainly of the Irish in &quot;the Old 9th&quot; New York Militia and several hundred Irish recruited in Boston. The 63rd was organized by Lt Col Patrick Daniel Kelly and later commanded by Major then Colonel Richard C. Enright. The 88th was numbered out of sequence after the British 88th Connaught Rangers, and was the 2nd Regiment Irish Brigade. After Chancellorsville, the new Brigade Commander, Col Patrick Kelly of the 88th, formed these &quot;core&quot; NY regiments, now together only numbering 220 effectives, into a single battalion under the flag of the 88th.

==American Civil War==

Col. Corcoran was in the process of being court-martialed when the Civil War erupted. As the Army needed as many men at arms as quickly as possible, the charges were dropped and the Army rushed the 69th to Virginia.

At the First Battle of Bull Run (First Manassas), the regiment served under the command of Colonel William T. Sherman, and was one of the few Union regiments to retain cohesion after the defeat, despite the wounding and capture of Col. Corcoran by Confederate forces. The 69th served as the Army of the Potomac&#x27;s rear guard during the disorganized retreat to the defenses of Washington.

After Bull Run, Thomas Francis Meagher, the Captain of Company K, applied to have the 69th New York Volunteer Militia reorganized into Federal service as the core unit of a larger brigade composed predominantly of Irish immigrants. Meagher was promoted to brigadier general and designated the brigade&#x27;s commander. Before the war, he was a leading agitator for Irish independence. A visible participant in the failed Rebellion of 1848, he was afterward tried and sentenced to death (commuted to life imprisonment in Australia, but he escaped to San Francisco CA). Gen. Meagher&#x27;s battle sword, made by Tiffany &amp; Co, is now on permanent exhibit at the Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park.

Leaders of the Federal Government were reluctant to form ethnically based brigades, which would undermine the notion of a Union. However, by mid-1861 the formation of an ethnically based, Irish brigade served two purposes for the North. First of all, it warned Britain that there could be Union-supported consequences in Ireland if Britain intervened (most of the brigade&#x27;s leadership were known Irish revolutionaries). Secondly, it served to solidify Irish-American support for the Union. Many Irish were divided between supporting the Confederate States in their struggles for independence or to preserve the Union, which gave the Irish a set of rights and freedoms under the Constitution but which they had to struggle to obtain. There were also concerns by some Irish about a flood of freed slaves migrating north and competing for the lowly jobs for which they already had to scrabble. An ethnically based brigade would thus solidify the support of the largest Catholic minority for the Union cause. Several officers were permitted to purchase and carry non-regulation model 1850 Staff and Field officer&#x27;s swords bearing a large four-leaf clover pierced into the hand guard. Having their own paid Catholic chaplains within the brigade implied a social acceptance for Irish Catholics which had eluded them in the antebellum period. Their head chaplain was Fr. William Corby, CSC, a Holy Cross priest and future president of the University of Notre Dame. He became famous for his giving general absolution to the troops of the Irish Brigade before the Battle of Gettysburg.

The Irish Brigade distinguished itself from the rest of the Army of the Potomac by Meagher&#x27;s insistence on arming the eight line companies of each NY regiment with Model 1842 smoothbore muskets, an obsolete weapon that was largely phased out during 1862, because he wanted his men to be able to fire buck-and-ball shot (a .69 caliber musket ball with four smaller balls), which produced a shotgun effect in close-range combat and could not be used with rifles. The three original New York regiments carried Model 1842 muskets all through the AoP&#x27;s campaigns and battles in 1862–63, using buck-and-ball shot with deadly effect in the Sunken Road on September 17, 1862 at Antietam and in the Wheatfield on July 2, 1863, at Gettysburg. The two light companies of each NY regiment were issued with either Springfield Models 1854 (A rifled modification of the Model 1842 musket), 1861, 1863 or Enfield rifles and with these sniped at Pettigrew&#x27;s command during Pickett&#x27;s Charge. The 28th Massachusetts (which joined in October 1862) had Enfield rifles and were with the 6 Company, NY &quot;Light Battalion&quot; often detailed for skirmishing duty.

Meagher assumed his brigade would perform most fighting at close range where smoothbores were effective and his officers generally agreed. The majority of the soldiers continued to use their Model 1842s through the Overland Campaign until the depleted outfit was temporarily broken up in June 1864. The 116th Pennsylvania was separated from its fellow regiments and finally got Model 1861 Springfield rifles. Ordnance records also indicate that the New York regiments received the newer weapons as well. In any case, by 1864, officers had at last realized the power of rifles and firing was now typically being done from distances of up to 200 yards. There are relatively few complaints on record from the enlisted men about their outdated muskets, although one veteran of the 88th New York recalled that &quot;we were sometimes at a disadvantage because of the short range&quot; and that he had to pick up a discarded rifle from the field at Antietam to deal with Confederate skirmishers.

Before the full five regiments of a typical brigade could be raised, the unit was called to combat. In March 1862 the brigade, composed of the 63rd, 69th, and 88th New York regiments, was assigned to Major General Edwin V. Sumner&#x27;s division in the Army of the Potomac as the 2nd Brigade and shipped to the Virginia Peninsula. While the Army of the Potomac crept slowly toward Richmond, a fourth regiment joined the brigade: the 29th Massachusetts, a regiment formed mainly of Puritan descendants. Massachusetts had pledged to provide an Irish regiment, intending to send the 28th Massachusetts, but that Irish regiment was not complete when the Army of the Potomac went into action. Instead, the next available unit, the 29th, was sent.

Despite their divergent backgrounds, the 29th Massachusetts and the rest of the brigade fought well together, earning plaudits for hard campaigning during the Seven Days Battles; most notably at Savage&#x27;s Station, Glendale, and Malvern Hill. The total casualties for the Irish Brigade during the Peninsula Campaign were 493. After Malvern Hill, the Army of the Potomac languished at Harrison&#x27;s Landing on the Peninsula and Meagher gained permission to recruit in New York to replenish the brigade&#x27;s losses. While other units were transferred to northern Virginia during the summer of 1862 to fight under Gen. John Pope, the Irish Brigade remained on the Peninsula with Gen. George B. McClellan.

After Pope&#x27;s defeat at Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas), Gen. Robert E. Lee took the offensive, moving into Maryland. McClellan and the remainder of Army of the Potomac were rushed north. The brigade&#x27;s new recruits, approximately a tenth of the number that Meagher had hoped to raise, joined the unit at Tennallytown, Maryland, in time to march in pursuit of the Confederates.
On September 17, 1862, the Union and Confederate armies met at Sharpsburg, Maryland, in the Battle of Antietam. Command confusion led to the disjointed use of the II Corps, and instead of supporting renewed assaults on the Confederate left at the West Woods, the Irish Brigade found itself facing the center of the Confederate line, entrenched in an old sunken farm road. The brigade again acted conspicuously, assaulting the road, referred to after the battle as &quot;Bloody Lane&quot;. Several Irishmen would be awarded the Medal Of Honor for dismantling some fence rails under fire. Although unsuccessful, the brigade&#x27;s attack gave supporting troops enough time to flank and break the Confederate position, at the cost of 60% casualties for the Irish Brigade. the outdated Springfield muskets came in use when they used Buck n&#x27; Ball, which turned the musket into a shotgun, which was very effective at close range. 

The brigade suffered its most severe casualties in December at the Battle of Fredericksburg where its fighting force was reduced from over 1600 to 1036. The brigade was involved in the northern battleground at Fredericksburg where they assaulted the sunken road in front of Marye&#x27;s Heights. The brigade advanced under heavy fire, but, staying resolute, it got close to Confederate lines; however, due to staggering casualties the brigade pulled back. A shattered shell of its former self. The 69th would lose 112 effective soldiers, The 88th would suffer 121 effectives. 

After the Battle of Fredericksburg, Gen. Meagher again requested to recruit the brigade back to strength. This time the request was denied. In May 1863, the brigade sustained further casualties at the Battle of Chancellorsville; Meagher repeated his request to recruit replacements, was denied, and resigned his commission in protest. He was replaced by Colonel Patrick Kelly.

Leading up to the Battle of Gettysburg, the brigade recovered several hundred of its injured from Fredericksburg and was able to field nearly 600 men - in reality, barely at regimental size. At Gettysburg, the brigade distinguished itself in the Wheatfield under the command of Col. Kelly as the 2nd Brigade of the 1st Division (Brigadier General John C. Caldwell) of the II Corps (Major General Winfield S. Hancock). Under overwhelming pressure this shattered Brigade held its ground for a lengthy period of time. The brigade has a monument on the Loop on the Gettysburg Battlefield.

While continuing to serve with distinction, casualties continued to increase and by June 1864 the Irish Brigade had been reduced to regimental size, and its commander Richard Byrne killed. The U.S. Army disbanded it and incorporated the remaining elements of the brigade into the 3rd and 4th Brigades of the 1st Division, II Corps.

A Second Irish Brigade was reformed from the old Irish Brigade of the 63rd, 69th, and 88th New York, 116th Pennsylvania, and 28th Massachusetts Regiments as well as the addition of the 7th New York Heavy Artillery (later replaced by the 4th New York Heavy Artillery in early 1865).

==Modern history==
The lineage of the Irish Brigade has been officially assigned to &quot;Fighting 69th&quot; of the New York National Guard, which is the only currently active military unit that formed part of it.

The &quot;Fighting 69th&quot; fought in World War I as part of the Rainbow Division. For bravery displayed in Lorraine, Champagne-Marne, and Meuse-Argonne, the Medal of Honor was awarded to regiment members, including William Joseph Donovan and Richard O&#x27;Neill. By World War II, the Irish influence in the regiment had diminished somewhat, but the regiment served with distinction in the Pacific Theater as part of the 27th &quot;New York&quot; Infantry Division.

Since 1907, the Fighting 69th has been a unit of the New York National Guard.

In 1963 President Kennedy presented Ireland with a flag of the Irish Brigade. 

1st Battalion, 69th Infantry served with distinction in Iraq from 2004-2005. The unit fought in and around Baghdad, most notably securing Route Irish and the surrounding area of Baghdad suburbs, and companies from it have since served in Afghanistan.

==In popular media==
* James Cagney and Pat O&#x27;Brien starred in &quot;The Fighting 69th&quot;, a 1940 WWI film based on the Irish Brigade successor unit based in New York.
* In &quot;Fort Apache&quot;, Ward Bond plays a cavalry sergeant major who had served in The Irish Brigade as a major and had been awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor (likely based on St. Clair Augustine Mulholland, who earned the Medal of Honor at Chancellorsville in May 1863).
* Meagher and the Irish Brigade, as well as the charge at Marye&#x27;s Heights, are featured in the novel and film &quot;Gods and Generals&quot;.
* The brigade is shown receiving general absolution from Rev. William Corby before going into battle at Gettysburg in the film &quot;Gettysburg&quot;.
* In HBO&#x27;s &quot;Deadwood&quot;, George Hearst&#x27;s Pinkerton henchman discusses with Al Swearengen his service in the New York 69th Regiment during the Civil War. He gives no details, but gives the impression that the outcome was not good.
* The unit was the original intended subject of a song, &quot;Kelly&#x27;s Irish Brigade&quot;, which was later adapted to refer to a Confederate unit from Missouri with an Irish commander.
* Musician David Kincaid arranged and performed two albums of Civil War era songs about Irish soldiers in the Civil War. The first &quot;The Irish Volunteer&quot; includes songs specifically about or referring to the Irish Brigade, Thomas Francis Meagher, and Michael Corcoran. The second album &quot;The Irish American&#x27;s Song&quot; features a variety of songs about Irish soldiers on both the Union and Confederate sides.
*The Irish band Wolfe Tones recorded a song called &quot;The Fighting 69th&quot; which was then covered by Dropkick Murphys on their album &#x27;&quot;The Gang&#x27;s All Here.&quot; It uses the melody of &quot;The Star of the County Down.&quot;
*The song &quot;By the Hush&quot;, from the album of the same name by Andy M. Stewart, mentions the Irish immigrants fighting under Gen. Meagher during the Civil War.
*On their 2017 album &quot;Incorruptible&quot;, American heavy metal band Iced Earth released a song called &#x27;Clear The Way (December 13, 1862)&#x27; about the Irish Brigade&#x27;s involvement in the Battle of Fredericksburg.
*Many songs have been written about the Irish Brigade exploits during the civil war.
*In Harry Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Stars and Stripes&quot; alternate history trilogy of the Civil War,the Irish Brigade is featured in the battle up the Hudson Valley against the British in the first book. It is featured prominently in the second book, &quot;Stars and Stripes in Peril&quot;, concerning the invasion of Ireland in that book.
*In HBO&#x27;s &quot;Warrior&quot;, the character, Dylan Leary, states that he served in the Irish Brigade&#x27;s 88th infantry in the American Civil War.
*The 66th album of the Belgian comic strip &quot;Les Tuniques Bleues&quot; is based on the Irish brigade. Titled “Irish Melody,” the story follows the protagonists as they discovers that Irish are fighting in the American Civil War for the Union and the Confederacy alike.

==References==

*69th New York State Volunteers Historical Association
*28th Massachusetts Regiment Website
*Irish Volunteers: History of the Irish Brigade
*Irish Brigade &quot;Fearless Sons of Erin&quot;
*Civil War Battles of the Irish Brigade

==Further reading==
* 
* &quot;Irish Green and Union Blue: The Civil War Letters of Peter Welsh&quot; (1986) ed. Lawrence Frederick Kohl with Margaret Cosse Richard .New York: Fordham University Press. 

==External links==

*Irish Brigade Monument at Antietam
*Irish Brigade Monument at Gettysburg

* Irish Brigade The Story of the 38th (Irish) Brigade, 1941-47</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3820375" start="4" end="17" title="Irish Brigade (Union army)" label="Irish Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="25" end="33" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="34" end="41" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="71" end="86" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="106" end="116" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="124" end="142" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642412" start="202" end="224" title="69th New York Infantry" label="69th New York Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438064" start="355" end="371" title="Faugh A Ballagh" label="Faugh a Ballaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="411" end="416" title="Irish Language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="556" end="570" title="Irish diaspora" label="Irish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596661" start="664" end="683" title="1st Vermont Brigade" label="1st Vermont Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382693" start="688" end="700" title="Iron Brigade" label="Iron Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="880" end="896" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348975" start="897" end="910" title="Simon Cameron" label="Simon Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641975" start="970" end="992" title="63rd New York Infantry" label="63rd New York Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642412" start="998" end="1020" title="69th New York Infantry" label="69th New York Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645086" start="1030" end="1052" title="88th New York Infantry" label="88th New York Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632978" start="1171" end="1189" title="29th Massachusetts Infantry" label="29th Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632825" start="1360" end="1396" title="28th Massachusetts Infantry regiment" label="28th Massachusetts Infantry regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547579" start="1529" end="1556" title="116th Pennsylvania Infantry" label="116th Pennsylvania Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829464" start="1898" end="1914" title="Michael Corcoran" label="Michael Corcoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="1963" end="1978" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2013" end="2026" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="2245" end="2251" title="Lt Col" label="Lt Col"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="2296" end="2301" title="Major (rank)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="2307" end="2314" title="Colonel (United States)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="2744" end="2757" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="2908" end="2916" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="2926" end="2950" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="3018" end="3036" title="William T. Sherman" label="William T. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="3167" end="3185" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q653089" start="3210" end="3229" title="Army of the Potomac" label="Army of the Potomac"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3299" end="3309" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q522396" start="3328" end="3350" title="Thomas Francis Meagher" label="Thomas Francis Meagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="3568" end="3585" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321690" start="3733" end="3750" title="Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848" label="Rebellion of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3832" end="3841" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="4293" end="4300" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4353" end="4360" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="4489" end="4503" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5003" end="5011" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="5314" end="5328" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007116" start="5402" end="5424" title="William Corby" label="Fr. William Corby, CSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068503" start="5428" end="5438" title="Congregation of Holy Cross" label="Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="5474" end="5498" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5532" end="5550" title="Absolution#General absolution" label="general absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="5597" end="5617" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Battle of Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277604" start="5789" end="5818" title="Springfield Model 1842" label="Model 1842 smoothbore muskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q680898" start="6519" end="6526" title="Pattern 1853 Enfield" label="Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q532313" start="7163" end="7192" title="Springfield Model 1861" label="Model 1861 Springfield rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="7976" end="7989" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q887218" start="7990" end="8005" title="Edwin V. Sumner" label="Edwin V. Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="8013" end="8021" title="division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q653089" start="8029" end="8048" title="Army of the Potomac" label="Army of the Potomac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="8087" end="8105" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="8157" end="8165" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="8257" end="8264" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q492324" start="8678" end="8696" title="Seven Days Battles" label="Seven Days Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052708" start="8714" end="8735" title="Battle of Savage&amp;#x27;s Station" label="Savage&amp;#x27;s Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000189" start="8737" end="8745" title="Battle of Glendale" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934345" start="8751" end="8763" title="Battle of Malvern Hill" label="Malvern Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="8819" end="8837" title="Peninsula campaign" label="Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391534" start="8906" end="8929" title="Harrison&amp;#x27;s Landing" label="Harrison&amp;#x27;s Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q465291" start="9142" end="9151" title="John Pope (military officer)" label="John Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="9207" end="9226" title="George B. McClellan" label="George B. McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="9257" end="9282" title="Second Battle of Bull Run" label="Second Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="9307" end="9320" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699929" start="9554" end="9566" title="Tenleytown" label="Tennallytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="9568" end="9576" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q754473" start="9690" end="9710" title="Sharpsburg, Maryland" label="Sharpsburg, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="9719" end="9737" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Antietam"/>
<link wikidata="Q854967" start="9790" end="9798" title="II Corps (Union Army)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="10154" end="10168" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal Of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q751186" start="10625" end="10649" title="Battle of Fredericksburg" label="Battle of Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="11337" end="11363" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="Battle of Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146924" start="11498" end="11511" title="Patrick Kelly (colonel)" label="Patrick Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q195328" start="11861" end="11877" title="John C. Caldwell" label="John C. Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q854967" start="11886" end="11894" title="II Corps (ACW)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q435517" start="11910" end="11929" title="Winfield S. Hancock" label="Winfield S. Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554755" start="12075" end="12097" title="Gettysburg Battlefield" label="Gettysburg Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324518" start="12267" end="12280" title="Richard Byrne (brevet brigadier general)" label="Richard Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311224" start="12618" end="12646" title="7th New York Heavy Artillery Regiment" label="7th New York Heavy Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q20312907" start="12670" end="12698" title="4th New York Heavy Artillery Regiment" label="4th New York Heavy Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12972" end="12983" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637801" start="12999" end="13015" title="Rainbow Division" label="Rainbow Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="13042" end="13050" title="Lorraine (province)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q876417" start="13052" end="13067" title="Champagne-Marne" label="Champagne-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926157" start="13073" end="13086" title="Meuse-Argonne" label="Meuse-Argonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="13092" end="13106" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q541981" start="13150" end="13172" title="William Joseph Donovan" label="William Joseph Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329721" start="13177" end="13197" title="Richard W. O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13202" end="13214" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="13325" end="13340" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="Pacific Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="13464" end="13478" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="13617" end="13621" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841801" start="13699" end="13710" title="Route Irish" label="Route Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="13739" end="13746" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="13799" end="13810" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q94041" start="13836" end="13848" title="James Cagney" label="James Cagney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790788" start="13853" end="13869" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Brien (actor)" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733812" start="13887" end="13904" title="The Fighting 69th" label="The Fighting 69th"/>
<link wikidata="Q773276" start="14000" end="14011" title="Fort Apache (film)" label="Fort Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="14037" end="14044" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="14045" end="14059" title="sergeant major" label="sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="14101" end="14106" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="14128" end="14160" title="Medal of Honor" label="the Congressional Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587557" start="14178" end="14208" title="St. Clair Augustine Mulholland" label="St. Clair Augustine Mulholland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533901" start="14395" end="14412" title="Gods and Generals (film)" label="Gods and Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q164361" start="14453" end="14471" title="Absolution" label="general absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007116" start="14482" end="14495" title="William Corby" label="William Corby"/>
<link wikidata="Q123166" start="14553" end="14563" title="Gettysburg (1993 film)" label="Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="14576" end="14579" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050603" start="14593" end="14601" title="Deadwood (TV series)" label="Deadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q561826" start="14609" end="14622" title="George Hearst" label="George Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321823" start="14630" end="14639" title="Pinkerton National Detective Agency" label="Pinkerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45353" start="14664" end="14677" title="Al Swearengen" label="Al Swearengen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971694" start="14953" end="15007" title="Washington Blues" label="Confederate unit from Missouri with an Irish commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229100" start="15020" end="15033" title="Dave Kincaid" label="David Kincaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742571" start="15146" end="15165" title="The Irish Volunteer (album)" label="The Irish Volunteer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15310" end="15340" title="The Irish American&amp;#x27;s Song" label="The Irish American&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="15544" end="15560" title="Dropkick Murphys" label="Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931804" start="15588" end="15612" title="The Gang&amp;#x27;s All Here (Dropkick Murphys album)" label="The Gang&amp;#x27;s All Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q29056992" start="15877" end="15890" title="Incorruptible (album)" label="Incorruptible"/>
<link wikidata="Q728109" start="15924" end="15934" title="Iced Earth" label="Iced Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="16508" end="16511" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q46992827" start="16525" end="16532" title="Warrior (TV series)" label="Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030833" start="16708" end="16727" title="Les Tuniques Bleues" label="Les Tuniques Bleues"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070487" start="16846" end="16890" title="Irish Americans in the American Civil War" label="Irish are fighting in the American Civil War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706288" wikidata="Q6145633" url="?curid=706288" title="James Williams (Revolutionary War)">
<text>James Henderson Williams (November 10, 1740 – October 7, 1780) was an American pioneer, farmer, and miller from Ninety-Six District in South Carolina. In 1775 and 1776, Williams was a member of the state&#x27;s Provisional Assembly. During the War of Independence, he held a colonel&#x27;s rank in the South Carolina militia. He was killed at the decisive Battle of Kings Mountain.

==Early life==
Williams was born in Hanover County, Virginia and was the son of Daniel Williams and Ursula Clark Henderson. His siblings included James, Joseph, John, Daniel, Henry, Mariah Goodman, and Mary Mitchell. He was orphaned the week after his 17th birthday. He moved into the home of his brother, John, in Granville County, North Carolina. John, being a lawyer, gave him a basic education before James set out on his own. He settled on the Little River in South Carolina.

By 1773, Williams had started a farm and built a mill in Ninety-Six District on the South Carolina western frontier (in what is modern Laurens County, South Carolina), and was an officer in the local militia. Tensions rose before the revolution, as many of his neighbors took a Loyalist stance. Williams supported the Patriot cause. He joined the local Committee of Safety, and was elected to the state&#x27;s Provincial Congress in 1775 and again in 1776.

==War of Independence==
In 1776, the Ninety-Six District militia split into Loyalist and Patriot factions. Williams was made a lieutenant colonel of a regiment, but he had to recruit and train the new men. He succeeded in organizing a militia group, but pressure from Britain and her Indian allies meant that Williams always had to leave some troops behind for home defense. Williams led forces of local men into action at nearby Briar Creek and Stono Ferry, and as far afield as the expedition to the Second Battle of Savannah.

On August 19, 1780, he led his detachment into the Battle of Musgrove Mill. The Patriots&#x27; success there, even in such a limited engagement and coming so soon after the disaster of Camden, earned him a promotion to colonel.

===Battle of Kings Mountain===
Williams led a 100-man detachment to meet up with other militia from the overmountain settlements which were gathering to engage Cornwallis&#x27; western force led by Major Patrick Ferguson. He joined with the other units at Cowpens on October 6. The next day these forces won a major victory at the Battle of Kings Mountain, where the out-numbered Americans overwhelmed a 1,100 man Loyalist force, while suffering only twenty-eight fatalities. Col. Williams was one of them.

== Buried on John B. Mintz Property ==
Williams&#x27; original hastily dug grave was on John B. Mintz&#x27;s property, on top of a hill at the intersection of Buffalo Creek and the Broad River, near Blacksburg, South Carolina. His body was dug up in May 1898 and kept secret for several years before being re-interred on the lawn in front of the Administration building, on Limestone Street in Gaffney, South Carolina and marked by a large memorial. The following newspaper article relates the story of his body being dug up. &quot;Several days ago a party of men consisting of A. G. Mintz, Rev. Mr. Bailey, J. E. Mintz, J. H. Mintz, Lee Broom, F. L. White and several others opened the grave of Colonel Williams, who was seriously wounded at the battle of King&#x27;s Mountain and was carried by the Americans on their retreat eastward, back across Broad River. That night he died and was buried on a hill near the intersection of Buffalo Creek and Broad River. His bones were found in a good state of preservation and were all removed except the skull, which are hidden away for a future funeral. Mr. A. G. Mintz was exhibiting the skull on the streets of Blacksburg. It is proposed that his remains be buried in Berkley Park at Blacksburg and a monument be erected over them. - Yorkville Yeoman. Story published in The Laurens Advertiser (Laurens, South Carolina), Tuesday, 17 May 1898, page 3.

His death was unknown for several weeks and during that time the South Carolina Provincial Congress had promoted Col. James Williams to the rank of brigadier general; the commission could not be delivered. In 2005, the South Carolina General Assembly confirmed the rank originally bestowed upon him 225 years before. In the same act, Gen. Williams was further honored by renaming the Little River Bridge, &quot;James Williams Memorial Bridge&quot;, marking the northeast corner of what had been his plantation.

==See also==

Gideon Gibson Jr.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6145633" start="0" end="24" title="James Williams (Revolutionary War)" label="James Henderson Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038563" start="112" end="131" title="Ninety-Six District, South Carolina" label="Ninety-Six District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="135" end="149" title="Province of South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947912" start="211" end="231" title="Provincial Congress" label="Provisional Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="244" end="263" title="American Revolutionary War" label="War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="317" end="324" title="Militia (United States)#Colonial era pre-1774" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035455" start="356" end="380" title="Battle of Kings Mountain" label="Battle of Kings Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q341679" start="419" end="433" title="Hanover County, Virginia" label="Hanover County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="435" end="443" title="Province of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411100" start="544" end="548" title="John Williams (delegate)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q502503" start="698" end="714" title="Granville County, North Carolina" label="Granville County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="716" end="730" title="Province of North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157385" start="832" end="844" title="Little River, South Carolina" label="Little River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038563" start="922" end="941" title="Ninety-Six District, South Carolina" label="Ninety-Six District"/>
<link wikidata="Q508288" start="1000" end="1030" title="Laurens County, South Carolina" label="Laurens County, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="1143" end="1151" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985399" start="1218" end="1237" title="Committee of Safety (American Revolution)" label="Committee of Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947912" start="1275" end="1294" title="Provincial Congress" label="Provincial Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="1412" end="1419" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1591" end="1598" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1607" end="1613" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391287" start="1753" end="1764" title="Battle of Brier Creek" label="Briar Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872446" start="1769" end="1780" title="Battle of Stono Ferry" label="Stono Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744875" start="1825" end="1850" title="Siege of Savannah" label="Second Battle of Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237633" start="1904" end="1927" title="Battle of Musgrove Mill" label="Battle of Musgrove Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539513" start="2026" end="2044" title="Battle of Camden" label="disaster of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971844" start="2186" end="2210" title="Washington District, North Carolina" label="overmountain settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="2242" end="2258" title="Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess Cornwallis" label="Cornwallis&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146485" start="2286" end="2302" title="Patrick Ferguson" label="Patrick Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138234" start="2338" end="2345" title="Cowpens, South Carolina" label="Cowpens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023649" start="2984" end="3007" title="Gaffney, South Carolina" label="Gaffney, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="4223" end="4239" title="Legislature" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q23074223" start="4515" end="4532" title="Gideon Gibson Jr." label="Gideon Gibson Jr."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706295" wikidata="Q473322" url="?curid=706295" title="Canonical commutation relation">
<text>In quantum mechanics, the canonical commutation relation is the fundamental relation between canonical conjugate quantities (quantities which are related by definition such that one is the Fourier transform of another). For example,
formula_1

between the position operator and momentum operator in the direction of a point particle in one dimension, where is the commutator of and , is the imaginary unit, and is the reduced Planck constant , and formula_2 is the unit operator. In general, position and momentum are vectors of operators and their commutation relation between different components of position and momentum can be expressed as
formula_3
where formula_4 is the Kronecker delta.

This relation is attributed to Werner Heisenberg, Max Born and Pascual Jordan (1925), who called it a &quot;quantum condition&quot; serving as a postulate of the theory; it was noted by E. Kennard (1927) to imply the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. The Stone–von Neumann theorem gives a uniqueness result for operators satisfying (an exponentiated form of) the canonical commutation relation.

== Relation to classical mechanics ==
By contrast, in classical physics, all observables commute and the commutator would be zero. However, an analogous relation exists, which is obtained by replacing the commutator with the Poisson bracket multiplied by formula_5,
formula_6

This observation led Dirac to propose that the quantum counterparts formula_7, formula_8 of classical observables , satisfy
formula_9

In 1946, Hip Groenewold demonstrated that a &quot;general systematic correspondence&quot; between quantum commutators and Poisson brackets could not hold consistently.

However, he further appreciated that such a systematic correspondence does, in fact, exist between the quantum commutator and a &quot;deformation&quot; of the Poisson bracket, today called the Moyal bracket, and, in general, quantum operators and classical observables and distributions in phase space. He thus finally elucidated the consistent correspondence mechanism, the Wigner–Weyl transform, that underlies an alternate equivalent mathematical representation of quantum mechanics known as deformation quantization.

=== Derivation from Hamiltonian mechanics ===
According to the correspondence principle, in certain limits the quantum equations of states must approach Hamilton&#x27;s equations of motion. The latter state the following relation between the generalized coordinate &quot;q&quot; (e.g. position) and the generalized momentum &quot;p&quot;:
formula_10

In quantum mechanics the Hamiltonian formula_11, (generalized) coordinate formula_12 and (generalized) momentum formula_13 are all linear operators.

The time derivative of a quantum state is represented by the operator formula_14 (by the Schrödinger equation). Equivalently, since in the Schrödinger picture the operators are not explicitly time-dependent, the operators can be seen to be evolving in time (for a contrary perspective where the operators are time dependent, see Heisenberg picture) according to their commutation relation with the Hamiltonian:
formula_15
formula_16

In order for that to reconcile in the classical limit with Hamilton&#x27;s equations of motion, formula_17 must depend entirely on the appearance of formula_13 in the Hamiltonian and formula_19 must depend entirely on the appearance of formula_12 in the Hamiltonian. Further, since the Hamiltonian operator depends on the (generalized) coordinate and momentum operators, it can be viewed as a functional, and we may write (using functional derivatives):
formula_21
formula_22

In order to obtain the classical limit we must then have
formula_23

== Weyl relations ==
The group formula_24 generated by exponentiation of the 3-dimensional Lie algebra determined by the commutation relation formula_25 is called the Heisenberg group. This group can be realized as the group of formula_26 upper triangular matrices with ones on the diagonal.

According to the standard mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, quantum observables such as formula_27 and formula_28 should be represented as self-adjoint operators on some Hilbert space. It is relatively easy to see that two operators satisfying the above canonical commutation relations cannot both be bounded. Certainly, if formula_27 and formula_28 were trace class operators, the relation formula_31 gives a nonzero number on the right and zero on the left.

Alternately, if formula_27 and formula_28 were bounded operators, note that formula_34, hence the operator norms would satisfy
formula_35 so that, for any &quot;n&quot;,
formula_36
However, can be arbitrarily large, so at least one operator cannot be bounded, and the dimension of the underlying Hilbert space cannot be finite. If the operators satisfy the Weyl relations (an exponentiated version of the canonical commutation relations, described below) then as a consequence of the Stone–von Neumann theorem, &quot;both&quot; operators must be unbounded.

Still, these canonical commutation relations can be rendered somewhat &quot;tamer&quot; by writing them in terms of the (bounded) unitary operators formula_37 and formula_38. The resulting braiding relations for these operators are the so-called Weyl relations
formula_39
These relations may be thought of as an exponentiated version of the canonical commutation relations; they reflect that translations in position and translations in momentum do not commute. One can easily reformulate the Weyl relations in terms of the representations of the Heisenberg group.

The uniqueness of the canonical commutation relations—in the form of the Weyl relations—is then guaranteed by the Stone–von Neumann theorem.

For technical reasons, the Weyl relations are not strictly equivalent to the canonical commutation relation formula_25. If formula_27 and formula_28 were bounded operators, then a special case of the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula would allow one to &quot;exponentiate&quot; the canonical commutation relations to the Weyl relations. Since, as we have noted, any operators satisfying the canonical commutation relations must be unbounded, the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula does not apply without additional domain assumptions. Indeed, counterexamples exist satisfying the canonical commutation relations but not the Weyl relations. (These same operators give a counterexample to the naive form of the uncertainty principle.) These technical issues are the reason that the Stone–von Neumann theorem is formulated in terms of the Weyl relations.

A discrete version of the Weyl relations, in which the parameters &quot;s&quot; and &quot;t&quot; range over formula_43, can be realized on a finite-dimensional Hilbert space by means of the clock and shift matrices.

== Generalizations ==
It can be shown that
formula_44

Using formula_45, it can be shown that by mathematical induction
formula_46
generally known as McCoy&#x27;s formula.

In addition, the simple formula
formula_47
valid for the quantization of the simplest classical system, can be generalized to the case of an arbitrary Lagrangian formula_48. We identify canonical coordinates (such as in the example above, or a field in the case of quantum field theory) and canonical momenta (in the example above it is , or more generally, some functions involving the derivatives of the canonical coordinates with respect to time):
formula_49

This definition of the canonical momentum ensures that one of the Euler–Lagrange equations has the form
formula_50

The canonical commutation relations then amount to
formula_51
where is the Kronecker delta.

== Gauge invariance ==
Canonical quantization is applied, by definition, on canonical coordinates. However, in the presence of an electromagnetic field, the canonical momentum is not gauge invariant. The correct gauge-invariant momentum (or &quot;kinetic momentum&quot;) is
: formula_52 (SI units) formula_53 (cgs units),
where is the particle&#x27;s electric charge, is the vector potential, and is the speed of light. Although the quantity is the &quot;physical momentum&quot;, in that it is the quantity to be identified with momentum in laboratory experiments, it &quot;does not&quot; satisfy the canonical commutation relations; only the canonical momentum does that. This can be seen as follows.

The non-relativistic Hamiltonian for a quantized charged particle of mass in a classical electromagnetic field is (in cgs units)
formula_54
where is the three-vector potential and is the scalar potential. This form of the Hamiltonian, as well as the Schrödinger equation , the Maxwell equations and the Lorentz force law are invariant under the gauge transformation
formula_55
formula_56
formula_57
formula_58
where formula_59 and is the gauge function.

The angular momentum operator is
formula_60
and obeys the canonical quantization relations
formula_61
defining the Lie algebra for so(3), where formula_62 is the Levi-Civita symbol. Under gauge transformations, the angular momentum transforms as
formula_63

The gauge-invariant angular momentum (or &quot;kinetic angular momentum&quot;) is given by
formula_64
which has the commutation relations
formula_65
where formula_66 is the magnetic field. The inequivalence of these two formulations shows up in the Zeeman effect and the Aharonov–Bohm effect.

== Uncertainty relation and commutators ==
All such nontrivial commutation relations for pairs of operators lead to corresponding uncertainty relations, involving positive semi-definite expectation contributions by their respective commutators and anticommutators. In general, for two Hermitian operators and , consider expectation values in a system in the state , the variances around the corresponding expectation values being , etc.

Then
formula_67
where is the commutator of and , and is the anticommutator.

This follows through use of the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, since
, and ; and similarly for the shifted operators and . (Cf. uncertainty principle derivations.)

Substituting for and (and taking care with the analysis) yield Heisenberg&#x27;s familiar uncertainty relation for and , as usual.

== Uncertainty relation for angular momentum operators ==
For the angular momentum operators , etc., one has that
formula_68
where formula_69 is the Levi-Civita symbol and simply reverses the sign of the answer under pairwise interchange of the indices. An analogous relation holds for the spin operators.

Here, for and , in angular momentum multiplets , one has, for the transverse components of the Casimir invariant , the -symmetric relations
as well as .

Consequently, the above inequality applied to this commutation relation specifies
formula_70
hence
formula_71
and therefore
formula_72
so, then, it yields useful constraints such as a lower bound on the Casimir invariant: , and hence , among others.

== See also ==
* Canonical quantization
* CCR and CAR algebras
* Conformastatic spacetimes
* Lie derivative
* Moyal bracket
* Stone–von Neumann theorem

== References ==
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="3" end="20" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q473322" start="26" end="56" title="Canonical commutation relation" label="canonical commutation relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054654" start="93" end="112" title="canonical conjugate" label="canonical conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="189" end="206" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="364" end="374" title="Commutator#Ring theory" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="391" end="405" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="418" end="441" title="reduced Planck constant" label="reduced Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="677" end="692" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="726" end="743" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58978" start="745" end="753" title="Max Born" label="Max Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q61761" start="758" end="772" title="Pascual Jordan" label="Pascual Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326431" start="881" end="891" title="Earle Hesse Kennard" label="E. Kennard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="912" end="922" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="923" end="944" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619449" start="950" end="975" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem" label="Stone–von Neumann theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="1145" end="1162" title="classical physics" label="classical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989763" start="1196" end="1206" title="commutator" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052775" start="1316" end="1331" title="Poisson bracket" label="Poisson bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="1389" end="1394" title="Paul Dirac" label="Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761267" start="1512" end="1526" title="Hilbrand J. Groenewold" label="Hip Groenewold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251702" start="1806" end="1817" title="Deformation theory" label="deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927585" start="1865" end="1878" title="Moyal bracket" label="Moyal bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="1962" end="1973" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431119" start="2047" end="2068" title="Wigner–Weyl transform" label="Wigner–Weyl transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180966" start="2167" end="2191" title="Phase-space formulation" label="deformation quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136644" start="2257" end="2281" title="correspondence principle" label="correspondence principle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2347" end="2382" title="Poisson bracket#Hamilton&amp;#x27;s equations of motion" label="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s equations of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="2784" end="2804" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q900653" start="3024" end="3042" title="Heisenberg picture" label="Heisenberg picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621220" start="3558" end="3579" title="functional derivative" label="functional derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="3700" end="3705" title="Lie group" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810382" start="3730" end="3744" title="exponential map (Lie theory)" label="exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="3766" end="3777" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601337" start="3842" end="3858" title="Heisenberg group" label="Heisenberg group"/>
<link wikidata="Q606855" start="3994" end="4039" title="mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics" label="mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500908" start="4120" end="4141" title="self-adjoint operator" label="self-adjoint operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="4151" end="4164" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q131030" start="4204" end="4212" title="operator (mathematics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342396" start="4282" end="4289" title="bounded operator" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q977297" start="4336" end="4347" title="trace class" label="trace class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619449" start="4926" end="4951" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem" label="Stone–von Neumann theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972470" start="5130" end="5146" title="unitary operator" label="unitary operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619449" start="5246" end="5260" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem" label="Weyl relations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5524" end="5563" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem#The Heisenberg group" label="representations of the Heisenberg group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619449" start="5680" end="5705" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem" label="Stone–von Neumann theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q804316" start="5908" end="5940" title="Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula" label="Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6374" end="6388" title="Uncertainty principle#A counterexample" label="counterexample"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619449" start="6485" end="6510" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem" label="Stone–von Neumann theorem"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6749" end="6773" title="Generalizations of Pauli matrices#Construction: The clock and shift matrices" label="clock and shift matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q178377" start="6873" end="6895" title="mathematical induction" label="mathematical induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961083" start="7006" end="7018" title="Canonical quantization" label="quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q505735" start="7100" end="7110" title="Lagrangian (field theory)" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="7214" end="7234" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="7336" end="7346" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q875744" start="7478" end="7501" title="Euler–Lagrange equation" label="Euler–Lagrange equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="7603" end="7618" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501876" start="7697" end="7718" title="canonical coordinates" label="canonical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="7751" end="7772" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="7804" end="7819" title="gauge invariant" label="gauge invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="7909" end="7917" title="SI units" label="SI units"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234036" start="7931" end="7940" title="Gaussian units" label="cgs units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="7972" end="7987" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299100" start="7996" end="8012" title="Magnetic vector potential" label="vector potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="8025" end="8039" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q660488" start="8345" end="8356" title="Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856609" start="8511" end="8527" title="scalar potential" label="scalar potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="8574" end="8594" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="8601" end="8617" title="Maxwell equation" label="Maxwell equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172137" start="8627" end="8644" title="Lorentz force law" label="Lorentz force law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190143" start="8783" end="8808" title="angular momentum operator" label="angular momentum operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="8894" end="8905" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256500" start="8910" end="8915" title="so(3)" label="so(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q623761" start="8941" end="8959" title="Levi-Civita symbol" label="Levi-Civita symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="9210" end="9224" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q201805" start="9286" end="9299" title="Zeeman effect" label="Zeeman effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q400083" start="9308" end="9328" title="Aharonov–Bohm effect" label="Aharonov–Bohm effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="9461" end="9482" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500908" start="9616" end="9635" title="Self-adjoint operator" label="Hermitian operators"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9798" end="9808" title="Commutator#Ring theory" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989763" start="9829" end="9843" title="anticommutator" label="anticommutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190546" start="9878" end="9903" title="Cauchy–Schwarz inequality" label="Cauchy–Schwarz inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="9970" end="10003" title="uncertainty principle derivations" label="uncertainty principle derivations"/>
<link wikidata="Q623761" start="10288" end="10306" title="Levi-Civita symbol" label="Levi-Civita symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="10429" end="10433" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047475" start="10541" end="10558" title="Casimir invariant" label="Casimir invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047475" start="10803" end="10820" title="Casimir invariant" label="Casimir invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961083" start="10868" end="10890" title="Canonical quantization" label="Canonical quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022829" start="10893" end="10913" title="CCR and CAR algebras" label="CCR and CAR algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245791" start="10916" end="10941" title="Conformastatic spacetimes" label="Conformastatic spacetimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q579267" start="10944" end="10958" title="Lie derivative" label="Lie derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927585" start="10961" end="10974" title="Moyal bracket" label="Moyal bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619449" start="10977" end="11002" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem" label="Stone–von Neumann theorem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706301" wikidata="Q1789847" url="?curid=706301" title="Kronecker symbol">
<text>In number theory, the Kronecker symbol, written as formula_1 or formula_2, is a generalization of the Jacobi symbol to all integers formula_3. It was introduced by .

==Definition==
Let formula_3 be a non-zero integer, with prime factorization 

:formula_5

where formula_6 is a unit (i.e., formula_7), and the formula_8 are primes. Let formula_9 be an integer. The Kronecker symbol formula_10 is defined by 

:formula_11

For odd formula_8, the number formula_13 is simply the usual Legendre symbol. This leaves the case when formula_14. We define formula_15 by 

:formula_16

Since it extends the Jacobi symbol, the quantity formula_17 is simply formula_18 when formula_19. When formula_20, we define it by

:formula_21

Finally, we put

:formula_22

These extensions suffice to define the Kronecker symbol for all integer values formula_23.

Some authors only define the Kronecker symbol for more restricted values; for example, formula_9 congruent to formula_25 and formula_26.

==Table of values==

The following is a table of values of Kronecker symbol formula_27 with 1 ≤ &quot;n&quot;, &quot;k&quot; ≤ 30.

==Properties==
The Kronecker symbol shares many basic properties of the Jacobi symbol, under certain restrictions:
*formula_28 if formula_29, otherwise formula_30.
*formula_31 unless formula_32, one of formula_33 is zero and the other one is negative.
*formula_34 unless formula_35, one of formula_36 is zero and the other one has odd part (definition below) congruent to formula_37.
*For formula_26, we have formula_39 whenever formula_40 If additionally formula_33 have the same sign, the same also holds for formula_42.
*For formula_43, formula_44, we have formula_45 whenever formula_46

On the other hand, the Kronecker symbol does not have the same connection to quadratic residues as the Jacobi symbol. In particular, the Kronecker symbol formula_47 for formula_48 can take values independently on whether formula_9 is a quadratic residue or nonresidue modulo formula_3.

=== Quadratic reciprocity ===
The Kronecker symbol also satisfies the following versions of quadratic reciprocity law. 

For any nonzero integer formula_3, let formula_52 denote its &quot;odd part&quot;: formula_53 where formula_52 is odd (for formula_55, we put formula_56). Then the following &quot;symmetric version&quot; of quadratic reciprocity holds for every pair of integers formula_36 such that formula_58:

: formula_59
where the formula_60 sign is equal to formula_61 if formula_62 or formula_63 and is equal to formula_64 if formula_65 and formula_42.

There is also equivalent &quot;non-symmetric version&quot; of quadratic reciprocity that holds for every pair of relatively prime integers formula_36:

: formula_68

For any integer formula_3 let formula_70. Then we have another equivalent non-symmetric version that states

: formula_71

for every pair of integers formula_36 (not necessarily relatively prime).

The &quot;supplementary laws&quot; generalize to the Kronecker symbol as well. These laws follow easily from each version of quadratic reciprocity law stated above (unlike with Legendre and Jacobi symbol where both the main law and the supplementary laws are needed to fully describe the quadratic reciprocity).

For any integer formula_3 we have
: formula_74
and for any odd integer formula_3 it&#x27;s
: formula_76

==Connection to Dirichlet characters==
If formula_77 and formula_44, the map formula_79 is a real Dirichlet character of modulus formula_80 Conversely, every real Dirichlet character can be written in this form with formula_81 (for formula_82 it&#x27;s formula_83).

In particular, &quot;primitive&quot; real Dirichlet characters formula_84 are in a 1–1 correspondence with quadratic fields formula_85, where formula_86 is a nonzero square-free integer (we can include the case formula_87 to represent the principal character, even though it is not a quadratic field). The character formula_84 can be recovered from the field as the Artin symbol formula_89: that is, for a positive prime formula_90, the value of formula_91 depends on the behaviour of the ideal formula_92 in the ring of integers formula_93:
:formula_94
Then formula_95 equals the Kronecker symbol formula_96, where
:formula_97
is the discriminant of formula_98. The conductor of formula_84 is formula_100.

Similarly, if formula_26, the map formula_102 is a real Dirichlet character of modulus formula_103 However, not all real characters can be represented in this way, for example the character formula_104 cannot be written as formula_105 for any formula_3. By the law of quadratic reciprocity, we have formula_107. A character formula_108 can be represented as formula_105 if and only if its odd part formula_110, in which case we can take formula_111.

==See also==
* Hilbert symbol

==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="3" end="16" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789847" start="22" end="38" title="Kronecker symbol" label="Kronecker symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q241015" start="102" end="115" title="Jacobi symbol" label="Jacobi symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="123" end="130" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="224" end="243" title="prime factorization" label="prime factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="279" end="283" title="unit (ring theory)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="325" end="330" title="Prime number" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="427" end="430" title="odd number" label="odd"/>
<link wikidata="Q748339" start="484" end="499" title="Legendre symbol" label="Legendre symbol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1456" end="1472" title="#Quadratic reciprocity" label="definition below"/>
<link wikidata="Q878259" start="1784" end="1801" title="quadratic residue" label="quadratic residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q472883" start="2086" end="2107" title="quadratic reciprocity" label="quadratic reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063579" start="3439" end="3458" title="Dirichlet character" label="Dirichlet character"/>
<link wikidata="Q625519" start="3715" end="3730" title="quadratic field" label="quadratic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q50706" start="3774" end="3793" title="square-free integer" label="square-free integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q713069" start="3974" end="3986" title="Artin symbol" label="Artin symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358313" start="4121" end="4137" title="ring of integers" label="ring of integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228885" start="4243" end="4255" title="discriminant of an algebraic number field" label="discriminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q740060" start="4782" end="4796" title="Hilbert symbol" label="Hilbert symbol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706305" wikidata="Q1138651" url="?curid=706305" title="Watcher (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)">
<text>In the fictional universe of the television series&#x27; &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; and &quot;Angel, a&quot; Watcher is a member of a secret organization of parapsychologists: &quot;The Watchers&#x27; Council&quot;, which seeks to prepare the Slayer to fight demonic forces. A notable example of a Watcher is &quot;Buffy&quot; main character Rupert Giles. They are typically modelled after the fictional character Abraham Van Helsing from Bram Stoker&#x27;s novel &quot;Dracula&quot;.

==Description==

Watchers are devoted to tracking and fighting malevolent supernatural entities, particularly vampires, primarily by locating individuals with the talents required to combat such beings and emerge victorious. More specifically, Watchers are assigned to Slayers, girls who are part of a succession of mystically powered individuals destined to confront these foes. Upon a Slayer&#x27;s demise, the next Slayer is called into duty and assigned a Watcher.

The Watchers&#x27; Council trains new Watchers in a private school of sorts. In &quot;Never Kill a Boy on the First Date,&quot; Giles implies that Watchers are, to a certain extent, &quot;called&quot; or assigned to become Watchers before attending university. This concept is supported by Watcher families like the Giles and Wyndam-Pryces.

Rupert Giles was Buffy&#x27;s Watcher at the beginning of the series. It was revealed that he had never been invited to the Watchers&#x27; retreat. After being fired by the Council for having &quot;a father&#x27;s love&quot; for the Slayer in season 3, he remained her unofficial Watcher for the rest of the series. Wesley Wyndam-Pryce became Buffy and Faith&#x27;s Watcher for a short period. Wyndam-Pryce was fired after Faith turned rogue and Buffy &quot;quit&quot;. Rupert Giles was reinstated as Buffy&#x27;s official Watcher in the season 5 episode &quot;Checkpoint,&quot; and he remains so until the events at the end of season 5, though Giles maintains his contacts with Buffy.

==Powers and abilities==

A standard Watcher has at least some proficiency in the use of magic, with certain individuals being more powerful than others. One episode in &quot;Angel&quot; (&quot;Sanctuary&quot;) reveals that numerous members of the board of directors are alchemists. They are students of demonology and as such have a wide knowledge of various incarnations of evil, but their expertise is usually the vampire. They are also highly educated and can speak a wide variety of languages, both human and demonic in nature.

Watchers are typically well versed in hand-to-hand combat techniques, though they generally confine themselves to training Slayers or supporting them in battles, as their lower strength relatively limits their effectiveness in directly engaging vampires.

==Shadow Men==
In ancient times, a group known as the Shadow Men used magic to infuse a captive girl with the essence of a demon, thereby creating the First Slayer, whom they use to fight demonic forces. The descendants of the Shadow Men go on to form the Watchers&#x27; Council.

In 2003, Slayer Buffy Anne Summers uses a strange mystical device to meet with the Shadow Men about the threat she faces from the First Evil, where she learns how the Slayers were created. They attempt to repeat history by infusing an unwilling Buffy with the same demonic essence that they used on the First Slayer to increase her power; however, Buffy refused, as she had come to seek only knowledge, not power, especially if that power meant that she would lose her humanity. After Buffy defeats them, one of the Shadow Men gives Buffy what she wants: knowledge of what is coming. He shows her a vision of the First&#x27;s army of Turok-Han in the Hellmouth, causing her to start to reconsider her decision, but she is brought back by her friends before she can do anything else.

The Shadow Men first appeared in &quot;Fray&quot; issue #3 and were later shown onscreen in the episode &quot;Get It Done&quot;.

== Watchers&#x27; Council ==

The Watchers&#x27; Council of Britain is an organization dedicated to finding, training, and supervising Slayers. Over the years, however, the Council has become increasingly arrogant and egocentric, believing themselves to be the supreme authority while the Slayers are just their tools.

The Council eventually bases its headquarters in London, England. It tries to locate potential Slayers and then send Watchers to inform and train them. It is not always successful in doing so, and therefore some Slayers are fully trained when they are called, while others know nothing of the heritage or purpose of their power. Each potential Slayer is assigned her own Watcher – a Council employee who is responsible for training the Slayer in combat techniques as well as researching demons, vampires, and magics. Watchers also maintain diaries chronicling the lives of the Slayers under their charge.

In late 2002, the Council learns that The First is systematically eliminating potential Slayers around the world in an effort to end the Slayer line. Unfortunately, before this information can be acted on, the Council headquarters is destroyed by agents of The First, specifically Caleb – &quot;At long last. All this time. All the work I&#x27;ve done for you... Blowing up the Council&quot;. The Council leadership is killed, and the Council is not able to offer assistance in the struggle against The First.

In the aftermath of the battle with the army of The First and the destruction of the Sunnydale Hellmouth, the Watchers&#x27; Council begins the process of rebuilding. The work to be done is considerable, especially in light of the creation of hundreds of active Slayers around the world. The structure of this new Council is unknown, but it appears that Rupert Giles is its new head and is training Andrew Wells as a Watcher. Only three members of the Watchers&#x27; Council have been shown to have survived the First&#x27;s attacks: Rupert Giles; an acquaintance to him named Robson who survived a Bringer attack; and Roger Wyndham-Pryce. His son, Wesley, and Rutherford Sirk were ex-members of the Council and thus not targeted by the First Evil.

In the canonical comic &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight&quot;, Giles informs Faith that he is, for all intents and purposes, the Watcher&#x27;s Council. Andrew, Xander Harris, and Robin Wood are functioning as Watchers (though Xander dislikes that term and insists that others do not call him such), assisting in the training and supervision of the new Slayers in separate squads around the world (Rome, Scotland, and Cleveland respectively). Their duties have expanded to monitoring Slayers as well; Giles offers Faith Lehane a new identity in exchange for her undertaking the mission to kill Genevieve Savidge, a sociopathic Slayer. Later, the two form a &quot;Slayer social worker&quot; program to try to prevent more Slayers from going rogue.

According to the comic &quot;Fray&quot;, a Slayer in the 21st century banishes all demons and magics from the world. When evil returns, a new Slayer – Melaka Fray – is called. The Watchers&#x27; Council in this era apparently retains the resources to locate Slayers. Melaka Fray is approached by her assigned Watcher, but rather than assist or train her, he immolates himself in front of her. Melaka is instead trained by a demon who says that the remaining Council consists of fanatics and fools.

=== Methods ===
The Watchers&#x27; Council has been known to use ethically questionable methods to accomplish its goals. The Council employs a trio of operatives known as the Special Operations Team. This team is responsible for some of the more unsavory aspects of the Council&#x27;s work, such as interrogations, smuggling, and, if necessary, assassinations. When Faith Lehane stakes and kills a human, the Special Ops Team was dispatched to retrieve the rogue Slayer, circumventing local and international authorities.

The Council is also known for placing its principles and perceived goals ahead of the well-being of the Slayer. A test known as the Cruciamentum involves suppressing the Slayer&#x27;s natural abilities with a drug and pitting her against a particularly dangerous vampire on the Slayer&#x27;s eighteenth birthday in order to test the Slayer&#x27;s intelligence and practical capabilities. When one particular Watcher, Rupert Giles, defies the rules of the test and interferes in the Cruciamentum of his Slayer – Buffy Summers – he is dismissed from his position immediately.

In 2001, representatives of the Council visit Sunnydale, California to deliver vital information on the seemingly unstoppable Glory to the Slayer, Buffy Summers. However, the Council refuses to turn over the information until an extensive review of Buffy&#x27;s abilities is completed. This assessment includes a review of Buffy&#x27;s combat skills, as well as interviews with many of her closest friends. Eventually, the Slayer turns the tables on the Watchers, declaring that they need her to validate their existence more than she needs their help. She defends the frequent assistance of her friends (Slayers typically operate alone) and demands that Rupert Giles be reinstated as her Watcher, with retroactive pay to the time of his dismissal. The Council agrees to this, changing the nature of the Council/Slayer relationship until the Council&#x27;s destruction two years later.

When the Scoobies rebuilt the Council after the war with the First, they did so under better circumstances. Thus, the new Council is far more moral and ethical, in contrast to the moral ambiguity of the original.

== Guardians ==
The Guardians is an organization of long-lived women who developed parallel to the Shadow Men and Watchers. They forge a weapon, the Scythe, for the Slayer to use. They are apparently mistrustful of the Shadow Men and Watchers who followed, as they keep this weapon, along with their very existence, a secret. They allow the Watchers to observe and manage the Slayer for centuries, but all the while the Guardians are watching the Watchers. They remain in hiding until Buffy Summers discovers the Scythe and tracks its origin to an Egyptian-style tomb, where the last Guardian waits. Immediately after explaining herself to Buffy, the Guardian is killed by Caleb, putting an end to the organization.

==List of Watchers==

&quot;Note: Some Slayers have had more than one Watcher in the course of their careers.&quot;

* Watcher fraudulently &quot;assigned&quot; herself to Faith after being expelled from the Council.

&quot;The following have been featured with no significant details known about them&quot;. Not all of these are true Watchers, some of them are merely operatives on payroll.
* Blair
* Hobson
* Lydia—Wrote a thesis on William the Bloody
* Nigel
* Phillip
* Robson
* Faith&#x27;s first Watcher
* Giles&#x27; father
* Giles&#x27; paternal grandmother (named Edna in a Tales of the Vampires comic by Joss Whedon)
* Collins, Weatherby and Smith—The Council Special Ops Team
* Faith&#x27;s nurse
* Wesley&#x27;s thugs

The (non-canon) novels and comics, especially those focusing on previous Slayers, show or mention other Watchers including: Michaela Tomassi (&quot;The Gatekeeper&quot; trilogy), Archibald Lassiter (&quot;Giles&quot;), Harold and John Travers (&quot;Pretty Maids All in a Row&quot;), Yanna Narvik (watched over the Slayer, Sophie Carstensen in &quot;Pretty Maids All in a Row&quot;), Marie-Christine Fontaine (watched Slayer, Eleanor Boudreau in &quot;Pretty Maids All in a Row&quot;), Diana Dormer (the name given to Faith&#x27;s first Watcher in &quot;Go Ask Malice&quot;).

== Interpretation ==
=== The Watcher&#x27;s Council as a religious organization ===
J&#x27;annine Jobling believes that there is a parallel between the Watcher&#x27;s Council and religious organizations, because they are &quot;bound by tradition and hierarchy&quot;, while Buffy and her friends act more democratically and are motivated by love. James Rocha and Mona Rocha add that members of the Council do not even question the institution, which for them is always right. They are valuing their old customs and do not want to change it. They portray themselves in a very positive way and believe in their own portrayal. This makes them unable to do any moral thinking and leads them to betraying the values, they pretend to have.

==References==
==See also==
* Slayer
* Rupert Giles
* Wesley Wyndam-Pryce
* Watcher (&quot;Highlander&quot;)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2524381" start="17" end="25" title="Buffyverse" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="63" end="87" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212156" start="104" end="109" title="Angel (1999 TV series)" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138651" start="119" end="126" title="Watcher (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Watcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="167" end="184" title="Parapsychology" label="parapsychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517292" start="253" end="259" title="Slayer (Buffyverse)" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340312" start="352" end="364" title="Rupert Giles" label="Rupert Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622359" start="424" end="443" title="Abraham Van Helsing" label="Abraham Van Helsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="449" end="460" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="480" end="487" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008465" start="606" end="614" title="Vampire (Buffyverse)" label="vampires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108146" start="1052" end="1086" title="Never Kill a Boy on the First Date" label="Never Kill a Boy on the First Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340312" start="1308" end="1320" title="Rupert Giles" label="Rupert Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605546" start="1624" end="1643" title="Wesley Wyndam-Pryce" label="Wesley Wyndam-Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419636" start="1661" end="1666" title="Faith (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204224" start="1869" end="1879" title="Checkpoint (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739729" start="1925" end="1944" title="The Gift (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="the end of season 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q386879" start="2189" end="2198" title="Sanctuary (Angel)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008465" start="2412" end="2419" title="vampire (Buffyverse)" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517292" start="2936" end="2948" title="First Slayer" label="First Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799459" start="3082" end="3100" title="Buffy Summers" label="Buffy Anne Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519364" start="3196" end="3206" title="First Evil" label="First Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517292" start="3233" end="3240" title="Slayer (Buffyverse)" label="Slayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="3535" end="3543" title="Human nature" label="humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334647" start="3889" end="3893" title="Fray (comic)" label="Fray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428146" start="3960" end="3971" title="Get It Done (Buffy episode)" label="Get It Done"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517292" start="4115" end="4122" title="Slayer (Buffyverse)" label="Slayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4349" end="4355" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4357" end="4364" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138651" start="4417" end="4425" title="Watcher (Buffyverse)" label="Watchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519364" start="4944" end="4953" title="First Evil" label="The First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118020" start="5187" end="5192" title="Caleb (Buffyverse)" label="Caleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714206" start="5816" end="5828" title="Andrew Wells" label="Andrew Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519364" start="6016" end="6023" title="Bringers of the First Evil" label="Bringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660793" start="6196" end="6233" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340324" start="6339" end="6352" title="Xander Harris" label="Xander Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q496085" start="6358" end="6368" title="Robin Wood (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Robin Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419636" start="6692" end="6704" title="Faith (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Faith Lehane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334647" start="6955" end="6959" title="Fray (comic)" label="Fray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419636" start="7791" end="7803" title="Faith (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Faith Lehane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340312" start="8365" end="8377" title="Rupert Giles" label="Rupert Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799459" start="8459" end="8472" title="Buffy Summers" label="Buffy Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479024" start="8569" end="8590" title="Sunnydale" label="Sunnydale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q376961" start="8649" end="8654" title="Glorificus" label="Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192568" start="9590" end="9605" title="moral ambiguity" label="moral ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9773" end="9779" title="Slayer (Buffyverse)#Scythe" label="Scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118020" start="10297" end="10302" title="Caleb (Buffyverse)" label="Caleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014357" start="10752" end="10757" title="Lydia (Buffyverse)" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276742" start="10776" end="10794" title="Spike (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="William the Bloody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102139" start="10924" end="10945" title="Tales of the Vampires" label="Tales of the Vampires"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986004" start="11077" end="11086" title="Buffyverse canon" label="non-canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441104" start="11214" end="11248" title="The Gatekeeper (Buffy novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Gatekeeper&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102139" start="11277" end="11282" title="Giles (Buffy comic)" label="Giles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11322" end="11347" title="Spike and Dru: Pretty Maids All in a Row" label="Pretty Maids All in a Row"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11395" end="11412" title="Buffyverse Slayer timeline#Sophie Carstensen" label="Sophie Carstensen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11498" end="11514" title="Buffyverse Slayer timeline#Eleanor Boudreau" label="Eleanor Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441104" start="11626" end="11639" title="Go Ask Malice" label="Go Ask Malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517292" start="12413" end="12419" title="Slayer (Buffyverse)" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340312" start="12422" end="12434" title="Rupert Giles" label="Rupert Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605546" start="12437" end="12456" title="Wesley Wyndam-Pryce" label="Wesley Wyndam-Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001261" start="12459" end="12491" title="Watcher (Highlander)" label="Watcher (&amp;quot;Highlander&amp;quot;)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706307" wikidata="Q2176982" url="?curid=706307" title="Zwijnaarde">
<text>Zwijnaarde () is a sub-municipality of the city of Ghent located in the province of East Flanders, Flemish Region, Belgium. It was a separate municipality until 1977. On 1 January 1977, it was merged into Ghent.

It is known for its fair and its &quot;Zwijntjes&quot; beer. A cluster of biotech companies is located at the Zwijnaarde science park, including Innogenetics and DevGen. In 2013 at Zwijnaarde, the Flemish Institute for Biotechnology supervised a trial of 448 poplar trees genetically engineered to produce less lignin so that they would be more suitable for conversion into biofuels.

Different youth organisations are active in Zwijnaarde, such as &quot;Jeugdhuis Chaos&quot;, &quot;Chiro Ambo&quot; and &quot;KLJ Zwijnaarde&quot;.

== Notable inhabitants ==
* Karel van de Woestijne (1878–1929), writer
* Gilbert Declercq (1946), painter, illustrator and comic-artist

== Industry ==
* DOMO Group, carpet manufacturer

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2176982" start="0" end="10" title="Zwijnaarde" label="Zwijnaarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q28081313" start="19" end="35" title="sub-municipality" label="sub-municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273785" start="43" end="47" title="City status in Belgium" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="51" end="56" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114" start="72" end="97" title="East Flanders" label="province of East Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9337" start="99" end="113" title="Flemish Region" label="Flemish Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="115" end="122" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q493522" start="142" end="154" title="Municipalities of Belgium" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q230671" start="193" end="199" title="Fusion of the Belgian municipalities" label="merged"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="268" end="272" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075702" start="323" end="346" title="Zwijnaarde science park" label="Zwijnaarde science park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352790" start="358" end="370" title="Innogenetics" label="Innogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266374" start="375" end="381" title="DevGen" label="DevGen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463367" start="410" end="445" title="Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie" label="Flemish Institute for Biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="472" end="478" title="Populus" label="poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="524" end="530" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="587" end="595" title="biofuels" label="biofuels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="668" end="683" title="Jeugdhuis Chaos" label="Jeugdhuis Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="697" end="707" title="Chiro Ambo" label="Chiro Ambo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="724" end="738" title="KLJ Zwijnaarde" label="KLJ Zwijnaarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813000" start="775" end="797" title="Karel van de Woestijne" label="Karel van de Woestijne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268805" start="820" end="836" title="Gilbert Declercq" label="Gilbert Declercq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205872" start="901" end="911" title="DOMO Group" label="DOMO Group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706311" wikidata="Q1501876" url="?curid=706311" title="Canonical coordinates">
<text>In mathematics and classical mechanics, canonical coordinates are sets of coordinates on phase space which can be used to describe a physical system at any given point in time. Canonical coordinates are used in the Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics. A closely related concept also appears in quantum mechanics; see the Stone–von Neumann theorem and canonical commutation relations for details.

As Hamiltonian mechanics are generalized by symplectic geometry and canonical transformations are generalized by contact transformations, so the 19th century definition of canonical coordinates in classical mechanics may be generalized to a more abstract 20th century definition of coordinates on the cotangent bundle of a manifold (the mathematical notion of phase space).

==Definition in classical mechanics==
In classical mechanics, canonical coordinates are coordinates formula_1 and formula_2 in phase space that are used in the Hamiltonian formalism. The canonical coordinates satisfy the fundamental Poisson bracket relations:

:formula_3

A typical example of canonical coordinates is for formula_1 to be the usual Cartesian coordinates, and formula_2 to be the components of momentum. Hence in general, the formula_2 coordinates are referred to as &quot;conjugate momenta&quot;.

Canonical coordinates can be obtained from the generalized coordinates of the Lagrangian formalism by a Legendre transformation, or from another set of canonical coordinates by a canonical transformation.

==Definition on cotangent bundles==
Canonical coordinates are defined as a special set of coordinates on the cotangent bundle of a manifold. They are usually written as a set of formula_7 or formula_8 with the &quot;x&quot;″s or &quot;q&quot;″s denoting the coordinates on the underlying manifold and the &quot;p&quot;″s denoting the conjugate momentum, which are 1-forms in the cotangent bundle at point &quot;q&quot; in the manifold.

A common definition of canonical coordinates is any set of coordinates on the cotangent bundle that allow the canonical one-form to be written in the form
:formula_9

up to a total differential. A change of coordinates that preserves this form is a canonical transformation; these are a special case of a symplectomorphism, which are essentially a change of coordinates on a symplectic manifold.

In the following exposition, we assume that the manifolds are real manifolds, so that cotangent vectors acting on tangent vectors produce real numbers.

==Formal development==
Given a manifold , a vector field on (a section of the tangent bundle ) can be thought of as a function acting on the cotangent bundle, by the duality between the tangent and cotangent spaces. That is, define a function

:formula_10

such that

:formula_11

holds for all cotangent vectors in formula_12. Here, formula_13 is a vector in formula_14, the tangent space to the manifold at point . The function formula_15 is called the &quot;momentum function&quot; corresponding to .

In local coordinates, the vector field at point may be written as

:formula_16

where the formula_17 are the coordinate frame on . The conjugate momentum then has the expression

:formula_18

where the formula_2 are defined as the momentum functions corresponding to the vectors formula_17:

:formula_21

The formula_1 together with the formula_23 together form a coordinate system on the cotangent bundle formula_24; these coordinates are called the &quot;canonical coordinates&quot;.

==Generalized coordinates==
In Lagrangian mechanics, a different set of coordinates are used, called the generalized coordinates. These are commonly denoted as formula_25 with formula_1 called the generalized position and formula_27 the generalized velocity. When a Hamiltonian is defined on the cotangent bundle, then the generalized coordinates are related to the canonical coordinates by means of the Hamilton–Jacobi equations.

==See also==

* Linear discriminant analysis
* Symplectic manifold
* Symplectic vector field
* Symplectomorphism
* Kinetic momentum
* Complementarity (physics)
* Canonical quantization
* Canonical quantum gravity
==References==
* Ralph Abraham and Jerrold E. Marsden, &quot;Foundations of Mechanics&quot;, (1978) Benjamin-Cummings, London &quot;See section 3.2&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="19" end="38" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501876" start="40" end="61" title="Canonical coordinates" label="canonical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="74" end="85" title="coordinates" label="coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="89" end="100" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q477921" start="215" end="238" title="Hamiltonian mechanics" label="Hamiltonian formulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="242" end="261" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="305" end="322" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619449" start="332" end="357" title="Stone–von Neumann theorem" label="Stone–von Neumann theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q473322" start="362" end="392" title="canonical commutation relation" label="canonical commutation relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190991" start="452" end="471" title="symplectic geometry" label="symplectic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366892" start="476" end="500" title="canonical transformation" label="canonical transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783105" start="521" end="543" title="contact transformation" label="contact transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142143" start="709" end="725" title="cotangent bundle" label="cotangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="731" end="739" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="824" end="843" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="910" end="921" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q477921" start="943" end="954" title="Hamiltonian mechanics" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052775" start="1016" end="1031" title="Poisson bracket" label="Poisson bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="1132" end="1153" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="1193" end="1201" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057607" start="1345" end="1368" title="generalized coordinates" label="generalized coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="1376" end="1386" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q908652" start="1402" end="1425" title="Legendre transformation" label="Legendre transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366892" start="1477" end="1501" title="canonical transformation" label="canonical transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="1594" end="1605" title="coordinates" label="coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142143" start="1613" end="1629" title="cotangent bundle" label="cotangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="1635" end="1643" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608202" start="1868" end="1874" title="1-form" label="1-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014878" start="2051" end="2069" title="canonical one-form" label="canonical one-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366892" start="2190" end="2214" title="canonical transformation" label="canonical transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049064" start="2246" end="2263" title="symplectomorphism" label="symplectomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064500" start="2316" end="2335" title="symplectic manifold" label="symplectic manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="2535" end="2547" title="vector field" label="vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703678" start="2554" end="2561" title="section (fiber bundle)" label="section"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="2569" end="2583" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142143" start="2632" end="2648" title="cotangent bundle" label="cotangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303310" start="2999" end="3016" title="atlas (topology)" label="local coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="3514" end="3534" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057607" start="3588" end="3611" title="generalized coordinates" label="generalized coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661853" start="3749" end="3760" title="symplectic vector field" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060137" start="3887" end="3911" title="Hamilton–Jacobi equation" label="Hamilton–Jacobi equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228929" start="3931" end="3959" title="Linear discriminant analysis" label="Linear discriminant analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064500" start="3962" end="3981" title="Symplectic manifold" label="Symplectic manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661853" start="3984" end="4007" title="Symplectic vector field" label="Symplectic vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049064" start="4010" end="4027" title="Symplectomorphism" label="Symplectomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="4030" end="4046" title="Kinetic momentum" label="Kinetic momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q899805" start="4049" end="4074" title="Complementarity (physics)" label="Complementarity (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961083" start="4077" end="4099" title="Canonical quantization" label="Canonical quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067074" start="4102" end="4127" title="Canonical quantum gravity" label="Canonical quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q973595" start="4145" end="4158" title="Ralph Abraham (mathematician)" label="Ralph Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q574589" start="4163" end="4181" title="Jerrold E. Marsden" label="Jerrold E. Marsden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706314" wikidata="Q1033635" url="?curid=706314" title="Canso">
<text>Canso may refer to:

==Places==
* Canso, Nova Scotia, a small fishing community in eastern Nova Scotia, Canada
* Canso Islands, a small group of islands off the coast of Canso and a national historic site
* Cape Canso, a cape near the abovementioned community in Nova Scotia, Canada
* Strait of Canso, between Cape Breton Island and mainland Nova Scotia, Canada
* Canso Rocks, Graham Land, Antarctica
* Canso (crater), a crater on Mars, named after the Nova Scotian town

==Military==
* , a Royal Canadian Navy minesweeper in commission from 1942 to 1945
* , more than one ship of the British Royal Navy
* PBY Canso, a World War II-era patrol bomber flying boat flown by the Royal Canadian Air Force

==Transportation==
* Acadian Canso, an automobile produced by General Motors of Canada
* Canso Causeway, a rock-fill causeway connecting Cape Breton Island to mainland Nova Scotia, Canada
* Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation (CANSO), an international representative body of companies that provide air traffic control services

==Other uses==
* Canso (song), a troubadour form

==See also==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1033635" start="0" end="5" title="Canso" label="Canso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936541" start="34" end="52" title="Canso, Nova Scotia" label="Canso, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936541" start="113" end="126" title="Canso Islands" label="Canso Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q40410" start="207" end="217" title="Cape Canso" label="Cape Canso"/>
<link wikidata="Q40410" start="285" end="300" title="Strait of Canso" label="Strait of Canso"/>
<link wikidata="Q26762834" start="364" end="375" title="Canso Rocks" label="Canso Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423517" start="403" end="417" title="Canso (crater)" label="Canso (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q648864" start="606" end="615" title="PBY Canso" label="PBY Canso"/>
<link wikidata="Q337391" start="722" end="735" title="Acadian Canso" label="Acadian Canso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961677" start="790" end="804" title="Canso Causeway" label="Canso Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q643141" start="891" end="933" title="Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation" label="Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086984" start="1053" end="1065" title="Canso (song)" label="Canso (song)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706315" wikidata="Q3522849" url="?curid=706315" title="The Steve Harvey Show">
<text>The Steve Harvey Show is an American television sitcom created by Winifred Hervey and directed by Stan Lathan that aired on The WB from August 25, 1996 to February 17, 2002, with a total of 122 half-hour episodes spanning six seasons.

==Synopsis==
Steve Hightower (Steve Harvey) is a 1970s funk legend and a very successful music star with his musical group who is now a music teacher/vice principal at Booker T. Washington High School on Chicago&#x27;s West Side. Budget cutbacks meant Steve also had to teach drama and art, much to his surprise. Cedric Robinson (Cedric the Entertainer) is a coach at the high school, and Steve&#x27;s longtime best friend. The principal of Booker T. Washington High is Steve&#x27;s former classmate, Regina Grier (Wendy Raquel Robinson), whom Steve affectionately calls &quot;Piggy&quot;, because she was overweight in childhood.

Steve forms a strong bond with two of his students: Romeo Santana (Merlin Santana), a stylish, self-absorbed ladies&#x27; man, and the equally vacuous Stanley Kuznocki, nicknamed Bullethead (William Lee Scott) – acting as their mentor, and gradually, accepts them as friends.

In season 2, the show introduced a new character, a secretary named Lovita Jenkins (Terri J. Vaughn), a woman who is fundamentally in the good mood, but nonetheless, considerably unrefined in terms of disposition. Cedric and Lovita begin dating, and eventually marry and gave birth to a child. The show also featured a succession of young actresses who served as female foils to Romeo and Bullethead; the longest-lasting of these was Lori Beth Denberg as the overachieving, socially inept Lydia Gutman. Rapper The Lady of Rage also had a recurring role as Coretta &quot;The Ox&quot; Cox, a physically massive, brutish teenage girl in romantic pursuit of Romeo. Coretta would call Bullethead a &quot;broke Brad Pitt&quot; whenever he annoyed her, but would usually refer to Lydia as &quot;Linda&quot;, &quot;Lisa&quot;, or &quot;Lucy&quot; (correctly calling her &quot;Lydia&quot; only once).

Steve was part of a fictional music group called &quot;Steve Hightower and the High Tops,&quot; who would temporarily reunite to perform on occasion. The members consisted of Steve, T-Bone (played by T. K. Carter, later by Don &#x27;D.C.&#x27; Curry), Pretty Tony (played by Ronald Isley of the Isley Brothers), and Clyde (played by Jonathan Slocumb). Two of their signature songs (performed several times on the show) were &quot;When the Funk Hits the Fan&quot; (and later on Harvey&#x27;s eponymous talk show), and &quot;Break Me Off a Piece of That Funk.&quot; Though Cedric was not an original member of the group, he usually sang with them on several events.

Minor recurring characters throughout the series included Cedric&#x27;s grandmother named &quot;Grandma Puddin&#x27;&quot; (played by Cedric the Entertainer) and Regina&#x27;s boyfriend, former NFL star Warrington Steele (played by Dorien Wilson). Kenan Thompson and Kel Mitchell appeared in several episodes as &quot;Junior&quot; and &quot;Vincent&quot; (which &quot;All That&quot; cast member Lori Beth Denberg starred in). Wayne Wilderson played Byron, a &quot;bougie&quot; type character who was a television producer and a member of the Onyx Club (a professional men&#x27;s group that Steve and Cedric tried to join). Dwayne Adway played Jordan Maddox, a professional basketball player who was briefly married to Regina before dying during their honeymoon. Ernest Lee Thomas made a few appearances as the Reverend who eulogized Maddox, and who married Cedric and Lovita.

==Episodes==

==Cast==

===Main===
* Steve Harvey as Steven &quot;Steve&quot; Hightower
* Cedric the Entertainer as Cedric Jackie Robinson
* Merlin Santana as Romeo Santana
* William Lee Scott as Stanley &quot;Bullethead&quot; Kuznocki
* Wendy Raquel Robinson as Principal Regina Grier-Maddox
* Tracy Vilar as Sophia Ortiz (season 1)
* Netfa Perry as Sara (season 1)
* Terri J. Vaughn as Lovita Alizay Jenkins-Robinson (seasons 2–6)
* Ariyan A. Johnson as Aisha (season 2)
* Lori Beth Denberg as Lydia Liza Guttman (seasons 4–6; recurring season 3)

===Recurring===
* Kel Mitchell as Vincent (1996–1998)
* Kenan Thompson as Junior (1996–1998)
* T. K. Carter as T-Bone (1996–1998)
* Ronald Isley as Pretty Tony (1996–2001)
* Jonathan Slocumb as Clyde (1996–2001)
* The Lady of Rage as Coretta &quot;The Ox&quot; Cox (1997–2000; credited during season 4 episodes as &quot;Robin Yvette&quot;)
* Wayne Wilderson as Byron (1998–2001)
* Dorien Wilson as Warrington Steele (1997–1998)
* Samm Levine as Arthur Rabinowitz (2001)
* Don &quot;D.C.&quot; Curry as T-Bone (2001)
* Dwayne Adway as Jordan Maddox (2000)

===Special guest appearances===
* Marissa Jaret Winokur
* Teena Marie
* Meagan Good
* Jerry Springer
* Bow Wow
* Jermaine Dupri
* Teddy Riley
* Snoop Dogg
* Sean Combs
* Kim Fields
* Isabel Sanford
* Judge Greg Mathis
* Antonio Fargas
* Busta Rhymes
* Brian McKnight
* Nikki Cox
* Boris Kodjoe
* Gabrielle Union
* Bumper Robinson
* Adrian Zmed
* Jennifer Lyons
* Ja&#x27;net Dubois
* Megalyn Echikunwoke

==Seasonal ratings in the United States==
==Series end==
In 2001, Harvey decided to pursue other projects. He wished to end the show after the fifth season, but at the insistence of the WB network, filmed a 13-episode sixth season.

The series ended with Regina mulling over a job offer to be a principal at a private school in California. Steve, who refused to go with Regina, acts supportive despite his feelings. Regina ends up taking the job; with encouragement from Lydia, Bullethead, and Romeo, Steve decides to go after her to reveal his true feelings. Lydia, Romeo, and Bullethead have all graduated by the series&#x27; finale. Meanwhile, Cedric and Lovita win the lottery and Lovita goes into labor (Terri J. Vaughn&#x27;s real-life pregnancy was written into the show that season).

==Syndication==
The series was first distributed to syndication to The WB, Fox, UPN, and independent affiliates in the United States by Columbia TriStar Television Distribution in September 2001, and remained airing in broadcast syndication in some U.S. markets on various local stations (such as WCIU and MeTV in Chicago) as late as 2008. From 2001 to 2005, reruns aired on Secaucus, New Jersey Based UPN station, WWOR-TV. From 2014 to June 2016, after Bill Cosby&#x27;s sexual harassment allegations, &quot;The Cosby Show&quot; reruns were replaced on The WB&#x27;s New York flagship station, WPIX by reruns of &quot;The Steve Harvey Show&quot;. The show has started airing again in syndication as of 2015.

The series aired on BET until March 2009, and was on TBS in the United States until September 24, 2011, and aired on the UK channel Trouble. It was broadcast on Ion Television until March 16, 2009.

As of 2019 and 2023 reruns of the show can be seen on BET Her, getTV and Aspire TV.

, the series is currently available for streaming online on Pluto TV and Tubi and Amazon Prime in the United States and the CTV Television Network&#x27;s streaming service, CTV Throwback in Canada.

In 2022, Sony Pictures&#x27; channel Throw Back TV on YouTube posted several clips and episodes from the series for streaming purposes, led to the show&#x27;s distributor Sony Pictures Television launched the channel dedicated to the series on August 24, 2022.

In November 2023, all six seasons of the series have also made available for streaming online on Hulu.

==Home media==
In 2003, Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment released &quot;The Best of the Steve Harvey Show, Vol. 1&quot;, on Region 1 DVD. The disc features five episodes of the series.

==Awards and nominations==
==See also==
* Steve Harvey
* List of &quot;The Steve Harvey Show&quot; episodes
* List of Award Nominations received by The Steve Harvey Show
* &quot;The Steve Harvey Morning Show&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="48" end="54" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025394" start="66" end="81" title="Winifred Hervey" label="Winifred Hervey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496492" start="98" end="109" title="Stan Lathan" label="Stan Lathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="124" end="130" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347009" start="266" end="278" title="Steve Harvey" label="Steve Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="291" end="295" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q319871" start="404" end="424" title="Booker T. Washington" label="Booker T. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="440" end="447" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q492327" start="566" end="588" title="Cedric the Entertainer" label="Cedric the Entertainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396471" start="751" end="772" title="Wendy Raquel Robinson" label="Wendy Raquel Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q445375" start="935" end="949" title="Merlin Santana" label="Merlin Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320560" start="1059" end="1076" title="William Lee Scott" label="William Lee Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554586" start="1229" end="1244" title="Terri J. Vaughn" label="Terri J. Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681034" start="1579" end="1596" title="Lori Beth Denberg" label="Lori Beth Denberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q963740" start="1655" end="1671" title="The Lady of Rage" label="The Lady of Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="1850" end="1859" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061785" start="2238" end="2250" title="T. K. Carter" label="T. K. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292477" start="2261" end="2287" title="Don Curry" label="Don &amp;#x27;D.C.&amp;#x27; Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364963" start="2313" end="2325" title="Ronald Isley" label="Ronald Isley"/>
<link wikidata="Q178134" start="2329" end="2347" title="the Isley Brothers" label="the Isley Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612788" start="2515" end="2548" title="Steve Harvey (talk show)" label="Harvey&amp;#x27;s eponymous talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297826" start="2935" end="2948" title="Dorien Wilson" label="Dorien Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q552900" start="2951" end="2965" title="Kenan Thompson" label="Kenan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657882" start="2970" end="2982" title="Kel Mitchell" label="Kel Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q280154" start="3071" end="3079" title="All That" label="All That"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566871" start="3129" end="3144" title="Wayne Wilderson" label="Wayne Wilderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393446" start="3465" end="3482" title="Ernest Lee Thomas" label="Ernest Lee Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347009" start="3617" end="3629" title="Steve Harvey" label="Steve Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q492327" start="3670" end="3692" title="Cedric the Entertainer" label="Cedric the Entertainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q445375" start="3721" end="3735" title="Merlin Santana" label="Merlin Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320560" start="3755" end="3772" title="William Lee Scott" label="William Lee Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396471" start="3818" end="3839" title="Wendy Raquel Robinson" label="Wendy Raquel Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q535998" start="3875" end="3886" title="Tracy Vilar" label="Tracy Vilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998908" start="3916" end="3927" title="Netfa Perry" label="Netfa Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554586" start="3949" end="3964" title="Terri J. Vaughn" label="Terri J. Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791181" start="4015" end="4032" title="Ariyan A. Johnson" label="Ariyan A. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681034" start="4055" end="4072" title="Lori Beth Denberg" label="Lori Beth Denberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657882" start="4148" end="4160" title="Kel Mitchell" label="Kel Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q552900" start="4186" end="4200" title="Kenan Thompson" label="Kenan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061785" start="4225" end="4237" title="T. K. Carter" label="T. K. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364963" start="4262" end="4274" title="Ronald Isley" label="Ronald Isley"/>
<link wikidata="Q963740" start="4344" end="4360" title="The Lady of Rage" label="The Lady of Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566871" start="4472" end="4487" title="Wayne Wilderson" label="Wayne Wilderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297826" start="4511" end="4524" title="Dorien Wilson" label="Dorien Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q943613" start="4560" end="4571" title="Samm Levine" label="Samm Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292477" start="4602" end="4628" title="Don Curry" label="Don &amp;quot;D.C.&amp;quot; Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q459363" start="4720" end="4741" title="Marissa Jaret Winokur" label="Marissa Jaret Winokur"/>
<link wikidata="Q235931" start="4744" end="4755" title="Teena Marie" label="Teena Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q257286" start="4758" end="4769" title="Meagan Good" label="Meagan Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q27214" start="4772" end="4786" title="Jerry Springer" label="Jerry Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312173" start="4789" end="4796" title="Bow Wow (rapper)" label="Bow Wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q349434" start="4799" end="4813" title="Jermaine Dupri" label="Jermaine Dupri"/>
<link wikidata="Q927450" start="4816" end="4827" title="Teddy Riley (producer)" label="Teddy Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="4830" end="4840" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="4843" end="4853" title="Sean Combs" label="Sean Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q772031" start="4856" end="4866" title="Kim Fields" label="Kim Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q271863" start="4869" end="4883" title="Isabel Sanford" label="Isabel Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965056" start="4886" end="4903" title="Greg Mathis" label="Judge Greg Mathis"/>
<link wikidata="Q601922" start="4906" end="4920" title="Antonio Fargas" label="Antonio Fargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q59185" start="4923" end="4935" title="Busta Rhymes" label="Busta Rhymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153370" start="4938" end="4952" title="Brian McKnight" label="Brian McKnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q233840" start="4955" end="4964" title="Nikki Cox" label="Nikki Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q112167" start="4967" end="4979" title="Boris Kodjoe" label="Boris Kodjoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q231648" start="4982" end="4997" title="Gabrielle Union" label="Gabrielle Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004881" start="5000" end="5015" title="Bumper Robinson" label="Bumper Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q374710" start="5018" end="5029" title="Adrian Zmed" label="Adrian Zmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156989" start="5049" end="5067" title="Ja&amp;#x27;Net DuBois" label="Ja&amp;#x27;net Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q438065" start="5070" end="5089" title="Megalyn Echikunwoke" label="Megalyn Echikunwoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="5951" end="5957" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="5959" end="5962" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="5964" end="5967" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919007" start="5973" end="5995" title="Independent station (North America)" label="independent affiliates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149883" start="6020" end="6060" title="Columbia TriStar Television" label="Columbia TriStar Television Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947823" start="6181" end="6185" title="WCIU-TV" label="WCIU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="6190" end="6194" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044253" start="6299" end="6306" title="WWOR-TV" label="WWOR-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q213512" start="6338" end="6348" title="Bill Cosby" label="Bill Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q20917517" start="6356" end="6385" title="Bill Cosby sexual assault cases" label="sexual harassment allegations"/>
<link wikidata="Q463999" start="6393" end="6407" title="The Cosby Show" label="The Cosby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068955" start="6479" end="6483" title="WPIX" label="WPIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="6614" end="6617" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="6647" end="6650" title="TBS (American TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846398" start="6726" end="6733" title="Trouble (TV channel)" label="Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="6755" end="6769" title="Ion Television" label="Ion Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876998" start="6847" end="6854" title="BET Her" label="BET Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627596" start="6856" end="6861" title="getTV" label="getTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808089" start="6866" end="6875" title="Aspire TV (American TV network)" label="Aspire TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022235" start="6938" end="6946" title="Pluto TV" label="Pluto TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189826" start="6951" end="6955" title="Tubi" label="Tubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="7002" end="7024" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="7131" end="7138" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="7436" end="7440" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q734401" start="7467" end="7502" title="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7570" end="7578" title="DVD region code#1" label="Region 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347009" start="7674" end="7686" title="Steve Harvey" label="Steve Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600022" start="7689" end="7739" title="List of The Steve Harvey Show episodes" label="List of &amp;quot;The Steve Harvey Show&amp;quot; episodes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7742" end="7801" title="The Steve Harvey Show#Awards and nominations" label="List of Award Nominations received by The Steve Harvey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766503" start="7810" end="7839" title="The Steve Harvey Morning Show" label="The Steve Harvey Morning Show"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706319" wikidata="Q5003377" url="?curid=706319" title="Buying a Fishing Rod for My Grandfather">
<text>Buying a Fishing Rod for My Grandfather, also rendered from Chinese as A Fishing Rod for My Grandpa, is a 2004 collection of six short stories by the Chinese writer Gao Xingjian. All of the stories were originally written between 1983 and 1990. The stories were translated to English by Mabel Lee.

The book was published in New York by HarperCollins, in 2004, with ,
and in London as &quot;Buying a Fishing Rod for my Grandfather&quot;, translation by Mabel Lee, flamingo, London, 2004, 

==Plot==
*In &quot;The Temple&quot;, the narrator is on his honeymoon and mysteriously anxious despite being &quot;deliriously happy&quot; during his and his wife&#x27;s outing.
*&quot;In the Park&quot; has two friends from childhood meet after many years and then part once more.
*&quot;Cramp&quot; has a man about a kilometer from shore on the verge of drowning barely survive, only to have no one notice he&#x27;s been gone.
*&quot;The Accident&quot; portrays a cyclist being hit by a bus and the pedestrians&#x27; momentary reaction to the event.
*In the title story, a man sees a fiberglass fishing rod in a store window and is reminded of the times he went fishing and hunting with his grandfather.
*&quot;In an Instant&quot; traces the lives of three people on a typical day.

==Critical reception==
&quot;Kirkus Reviews&quot; noted, &#x27;The 2000 Nobel laureate’s declaration “that his fiction does not set out to tell a story” is supported by the six tales in this first translated collection. That aesthetic is thus summarized by scholar Lee, who has translated Gao’s ramshackle major novels &quot;Soul Mountain&quot; (2000) and &quot;One Man’s Bible&quot; (2002) and now these terse chamber pieces, which appeared separately during the years 1983–91 and together as part of a larger Chinese language collection. They’re generally “about” individual experiences seen in relation to larger contexts.&#x27;

The anonymous reviewer concluded, &quot;Inconsistently developed, but precisely detailed and delicately suggestive: the best work of Gao’s yet to appear in English translation&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="60" end="67" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q18143" start="165" end="177" title="Gao Xingjian" label="Gao Xingjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721470" start="287" end="296" title="Mabel Lee" label="Mabel Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="1075" end="1085" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197403" start="1303" end="1317" title="Kirkus Reviews" label="Kirkus Reviews"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706321" wikidata="Q2426596" url="?curid=706321" title="Owlman">
<text>In Cornish folklore, the Owlman (), sometimes referred to as the Cornish Owlman or the Owlman of Mawnan, is an owl-like humanoid creature said to have been seen in 1976 in the village of Mawnan, Cornwall, UK. Reported sightings of it flying above the church tower have led some to believe the creature may have been a barn owl, a species that commonly nests in such places.

==History==
The story originated when Tony &quot;Doc&quot; Shiels, who had been involved in a series of &#x27;monster-raising&#x27; exploits in 1976, claimed to have investigated a report of two young girls on holiday in Mawnan who saw a large winged creature hovering above the tower of St Mawnan and St Stephen&#x27;s Church, Mawnan on 17 April 1976. According to most versions of the story, the girls, identified as June and Vicky Melling, were so frightened by the sight of a large &quot;feathered bird-man&quot; that their father Don immediately cut short their family holiday after hearing their tale. According to Shiels, one of the girls provided him with a drawing of the creature, which he dubbed &quot;Owlman&quot;.

The story was subsequently related in a pamphlet entitled &quot;Morgawr: The Monster of Falmouth Bay&quot; by Anthony Mawnan-Peller, which circulated throughout Cornwall in 1976. According to Shiels, &quot;Owlman&quot; was reported again on 3 July by two 14-year-old girls identified as Sally Chapman and Barbara Perry, who were aware of the &quot;Owlman&quot; tale. According to the story, the two girls were camping when they were confronted by &quot;a big owl with pointed ears, as big as a man&quot; with glowing eyes and black, pincer-like claws.

Sporadic claims of &quot;Owlman&quot; sightings in the vicinity of the church circulated in 1978, 1979, 1989, and 1995, and according to legend, a &quot;loud, owl-like sound&quot; could be heard at night in the Mullion church yard during the year 2000.

==Explanation==
According to author Joe Nickell, church towers are common nesting places for barn owls, which were likely the source of the sightings. Author and &quot;Fortean TV&quot; presenter Reverend Lionel Fanthorpe identifies the sighting of a Eurasian eagle-owl as a likely source of the legend.

Occult historian Gareth Medway suggested that the whole thing may have been a hoax by Shiels, who had a reputation for hoaxing. Medway noted that witnesses claiming encounters with a similar legendary monster promoted by Shiels &quot;were either Doc Shiels, or friends of Doc Shiels, or relatives of Doc Shiels, or reported their sightings to Doc Shiels (and to no one else), or else wrote letters describing what they had seen to newspapers and were never interviewed by anyone.&quot;

==In popular culture==
* In 2009, the episode &quot;Death Raptor&quot; focused on the Owlman in the Animal Planet TV series &quot;Lost Tapes&quot;. 
* &quot;The Owlman Feeds at Midnight&quot; is an episode in Season 1 of the children&#x27;s TV show &quot;The Secret Saturdays.&quot; The plot of the episode involves a town terrorised by an Owlman.
*The 2012 play &#x27;Horse Piss for Blood&#x27; written by Carl Grose, features the Owlman as a key plot point.
* The Owlman is depicted in the 2013 Scottish independent horror film &quot;Lord of Tears&quot;. In this film, The Owlman represents the Semitic god Muloch.

==See also==

* Eurasian eagle-owl
* Morgawr (folklore)
* Mothman
* Spring-heeled Jack

== References ==

== Books ==
* (pp135–139, 141)
* (pp150–153)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5171853" start="3" end="19" title="Cornish folklore" label="Cornish folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426596" start="25" end="31" title="Owlman" label="Owlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426596" start="65" end="79" title="Owlman" label="Cornish Owlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426596" start="87" end="103" title="Owlman" label="Owlman of Mawnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="111" end="114" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q502931" start="120" end="128" title="humanoid" label="humanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301968" start="187" end="193" title="Mawnan" label="Mawnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="195" end="203" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q25317" start="318" end="326" title="Western barn owl" label="barn owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531886" start="413" end="440" title="Tony &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Shiels" label="Tony &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Shiels"/>
<link wikidata="Q17532388" start="663" end="709" title="St Mawnan and St Stephen&amp;#x27;s Church, Mawnan" label="St Mawnan and St Stephen&amp;#x27;s Church, Mawnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389124" start="1946" end="1957" title="Joe Nickell" label="Joe Nickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472553" start="2078" end="2088" title="Fortean TV" label="Fortean TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555631" start="2114" end="2130" title="Lionel Fanthorpe" label="Lionel Fanthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130933" start="2160" end="2178" title="Eurasian eagle-owl" label="Eurasian eagle-owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="2292" end="2296" title="hoax" label="hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q43429" start="2801" end="2814" title="Animal Planet" label="Animal Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684266" start="2831" end="2841" title="Lost Tapes" label="Lost Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068743" start="2956" end="2976" title="The Secret Saturdays" label="The Secret Saturdays"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="3219" end="3230" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996958" start="3237" end="3250" title="Lord of Tears" label="Lord of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q275010" start="3310" end="3316" title="Moloch" label="Muloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q130933" start="3335" end="3353" title="Eurasian eagle-owl" label="Eurasian eagle-owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257300" start="3356" end="3374" title="Morgawr (folklore)" label="Morgawr (folklore)"/>
<link wikidata="Q746248" start="3377" end="3384" title="Mothman" label="Mothman"/>
<link wikidata="Q301860" start="3387" end="3405" title="Spring-heeled Jack" label="Spring-heeled Jack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706323" wikidata="Q1350196" url="?curid=706323" title="Francis Preston Blair Jr.">
<text>Francis Preston Blair Jr. (February 19, 1821 – July 8, 1875) was a United States Senator, a United States Congressman and a Union Army major general during the American Civil War. He represented Missouri in both the House of Representatives and the Senate, and was active in preventing the state of Missouri from being absorbed into the Confederacy at the beginning of the war.

Blair was instrumental in appointing Nathaniel Lyon as the new military commander of the Western Department of the U.S. Army. He assisted Lyon in securing help of the St. Louis Home Guard in moving over 20,000 rifles and muskets from the St. Louis Arsenal to Illinois. Missouri secessionists considered this event as breaking of informal truce established in the state. This set the scene for the Camp Jackson Affair and continuing guerrilla activity by outraged pro-slavery elements. In 1862, Blair joined the Missouri volunteers, being promoted major general, commanded a division at Vicksburg under Sherman, took part in Sherman&#x27;s March to the Sea and ended the war as a corps commander.

In 1868, he was Horatio Seymour&#x27;s vice-presidential candidate, but his dramatic speeches about the dangers of black emancipation were believed by some to have cost the Democrats the election. Blair suffered a paralyzing stroke in 1872, but continued to be active in state politics until his death three years later.

==Early life and career==
Blair was born in Lexington, Kentucky. He was the third and youngest son of newspaper editor and politician Francis Preston Blair, and Eliza Violet (née Gist) Blair. He was the brother of Montgomery Blair, a Mayor of St. Louis and Postmaster General under Lincoln, and the cousin of B. Gratz Brown, a U.S. Senator and Governor of Missouri. Blair attended schools in Washington, D.C., was matriculated in Yale and the University of North Carolina, but graduated from Princeton University in 1841, and then studied law at Transylvania University. After his admission to the Kentucky bar in Lexington, he went on to practice in St. Louis in 1842 with his elder brother; in 1842–1845, he worked in the law office of Thomas Hart Benton.

==Mexican–American War==
In fall 1845, Blair traveled to the West for buffalo hunt and stayed for a winter in eastern Colorado with his cousin George Bent in Bent&#x27;s Fort, a settlement on the Santa Fe Trail. Blair played the banjo at some of the parties at the fort. After the Mexican–American War started he joined the expedition of General Stephen W. Kearny in Santa Fe, who then appointed Blair as an attorney general for the New Mexico Territory after it was secured. In collaboration with Alexander William Doniphan, Willard Preble Hall, and David Waldo, Blair developed an American Code of Law for the region and became a judge of the newly established circuit court.

==In the political arena==
Being more interested in politics than law, Blair came back to St. Louis in the summer of 1847. A personal and political friend of Thomas Hart Benton, he became known for his views opposing slavery and strong advocacy of free soil politics, though he was a slaveholder himself. Blair served in the Missouri House of Representatives from 1852 to 1856, when he was elected to Congress. Missouri and the nation were in the midst of a sweeping political realignment which left Blair&#x27;s partisan identity uncertain. According to the March 24, 1857 issue of &quot;The Western Democrat&quot;, a newspaper from Charlotte, North Carolina, Blair was elected as a Democrat and was &quot;generally classed with the Opposition&quot; due to his views on slavery. Other sources from this period refer to Blair as a &quot;Free Democrat&quot; and an &quot;anti-Administration Democratic candidate ... of the Douglas and Wise stamp.&quot; The &quot;Biographical Directory of the United States Congress&quot; states he was seated as a Republican in the United States House of Representatives. Blair was an outspoken supporter of the Wilmot Proviso and opposed the proslavery Lecompton Constitution for the Kansas Territory. On January 14, 1858, he delivered a major speech describing slavery as a national problem, proposing to solve it by both gradual emancipation and the settling of freed slaves in Latin and Central America. A year later in Boston, he gained national prominence with his speech, &quot;The Destiny of the Races of This Continent&quot;.

Towards the end of his first term, Blair was defeated in his bid for re-election in 1858 by John R. Barret. He went on to successfully contest the results and was finally seated in the 36th Congress on June 8, 1860. However, he resigned just seventeen days later on June 25, then lost his bid in the subsequent special election, the seat instead being refilled by Barret on December 3. In the regular election of 1860, he was subsequently re-elected to the 37th Congress, serving in it as chairman of the important Military Affairs Committee. He again resigned in July 1861 in order to become a colonel in the Union Army. In 1862, he won election to the 38th Congress but in a reversal of fortune was himself forced to relinquish his seat on June 10, 1864, after his opponent, Samuel Knox, successfully contested the results.

The Blairs were unwavering supporters of Abraham Lincoln during his rise to the presidency and years in office and in return enjoyed his political patronage. In December 1863, Lincoln said, &quot;The Blairs have to an unusual degree the spirit of clan. Their family is a close corporation. Frank is their hope and pride. They have a way of going with a rush for anything they undertake, especially have Montgomery and the Old Gentleman.&quot;

In the days following Lincoln&#x27;s election as president, when it became evident that several Southern states were advocating secession, Blair was among the leaders of the Unionist political movement in Missouri which advocated the use of its paramilitary &quot;Home Guard&quot;, if necessary, to prevent Missouri from seceding. In time, Blair became alienated from Radical Unionists like B. Gratz Brown who favored the immediate emancipation of all enslaved people in Missouri, instead favoring Lincoln&#x27;s proposal for gradual emancipation. Brown emerged as the leader of the Radical Union Party in Missouri, while Blair&#x27;s faction became known as the Conservative Party.

==Civil War==

Immediately after South Carolina&#x27;s secession in December 1860, Blair, believing that the southern leaders were planning to carry Missouri into the movement, began active efforts to prevent it. He personally organized and equipped a force of several thousand strong &quot;Home Guard&quot;, drawn from the Wide Awakes, the Republican marching clubs of the 1860 presidential campaign, and the members of the German gymnastic movement in St. Louis, Turnverein. When tensions rose, Blair and Captain (later brigadier general) Nathaniel Lyon suddenly transferred the arms in the U.S. Arsenal at St. Louis to Alton, Illinois. On May 10, 1861, Lyon, with the Home Guards and a U.S. regular Army company, captured several hundred secessionist state militia which had been positioned to seize the Arsenal. The Camp Jackson Affair gave the Federal cause a decisive initial advantage in Missouri but also inflamed secessionist sentiments in the state.

Open warfare between Union forces and the followers of pro-Southern Missouri governor Claiborne Jackson was imminent. To avoid this, General William S. Harney, the Army commander in Missouri, agreed to the Price-Harney Truce with Missouri State Guard commander Sterling Price on May 21.

Blair objected, and contacted Republican leaders in Washington. Within a few weeks, Harney was replaced by Lyon as temporary commander. Lyon drove Jackson and Price to the southwestern corner of Missouri before he was killed at the Battle of Wilson&#x27;s Creek, while Blair helped organize a new all-Unionist state government, and John C. Frémont took over as the U.S. Army Western Department commander.

Frémont was himself a prominent Republican with Missouri connections. Blair soon came to regard Frémont as a political rival, and they clashed over many aspects of Frémont&#x27;s operations in Missouri. Frémont as the regional Army commander was responsible for spending a lot of money in a great hurry for supplies and equipment. Blair expected most of this money to go to his allies in the St. Louis business community, but Frémont and his staff had their own ideas. Blair&#x27;s bitter complaints, added to the waste and corruption, helped discredit Frémont, who was replaced on November 2.

Blair was appointed a colonel of Missouri volunteers in July 1862. He was promoted brigadier general of volunteers in August 1862 and then to major general in November. After winning re-election to the House of Representatives, Blair resigned his commission, but he retracted it at a request/order from Lincoln dated in April 1864. In response to this, &quot;the Senate passed a resolution that, thereafter, no officers whose resignations had been duly accepted should be restored to the service without a new appointment and confirmation by the Senate.&quot; 

In Missouri, Blair commanded a brigade consisting of the 13th Illinois Infantry, the 29th, 30th, 31st, and 32nd Missouri Infantry, the 58th Ohio Infantry, 4th Company, Ohio Light Artillery, and Company C, 10th Missouri Cavalry.


Blair subsequently commanded a division in the Vicksburg campaign and in the fighting about Chattanooga, and was one of William T. Sherman&#x27;s corps commanders in the final campaigns in Georgia and the Carolinas. His XVII Corps was engaged protecting the rear areas of Sherman&#x27;s army until later in the Atlanta Campaign. Before it left on the March to the Sea, XVII Corps absorbed part of the detachment of XVI Corps that had served with Sherman.

==Postbellum activities==
At the close of the war, Blair, having spent much of his private fortune in support of the Union, was financially ruined. In 1866, like his father and brother he opposed the Congressional Reconstruction policy, and on that issue left the Republican Party.

In 1866 he ran for a seat on the Missouri General Assembly against Charles Branscomb. The election was contested, but in the end, Blair was defeated after the Missouri Attorney General Robert Franklin Wingate ruled that votes cast after sundown were valid.

In 1868, he was the unsuccessful Democratic candidate for vice president, running with Horatio Seymour. Blair contributed to the Democratic defeat by going on a speaking tour in which he framed the contest with Ulysses S. Grant and the pro-Reconstruction Republicans in stark racial terms, warning of the rule of &quot;a semi-barbarous race of blacks who are worshipers of fetishes and poligamists&quot; and wanted to &quot;subject the white women to their unbridled lust.&quot; At least one Democratic Congressman saw Blair as the cause of Seymour&#x27;s defeat, calling his behavior &quot;stupid and indefensible.&quot;

Blair had an odd minor notoriety, when on July 29, 1870, he was an accidental witness to an incident in a famous homicide case. Staying at the then famous Fifth Avenue Hotel, facing West 23rd Street off Fifth Avenue, Blair woke up to cries of help from across the street. He watched from his hotel window as two men ran out of a brownstone mansion across the street. They were two of the sons of Benjamin Nathan, the Vice President of the New York Stock Exchange. Benjamin Nathan was found in the mansion, bludgeoned to death. There was a series of hearings, and even suspicion towards several people, but the mystery was never solved.

In 1871 Blair was chosen by the Missouri Legislature as a United States Senator. On November 16, 1872, he was stricken with paralysis, from which he never recovered. Largely owing to his stricken condition, he was defeated for reelection to the Senate in January 1873. Blair learned to write painfully with his left hand and continued his political efforts.

Blair&#x27;s consuming interest in politics kept him active and he served as Missouri&#x27;s state superintendent of insurance until his death from head injuries after a fall on July 8, 1875, at the age of 54. He is interred in Bellefontaine Cemetery.

==Family==
In 1847, Blair married Appoline Alexander; they had eight children.

==Recognition==
William T. Sherman after hearing about Blair&#x27;s death said, &quot;I always regarded him as one of the truest patriots, most honest and honorable men, and one of the most courageous soldiers this country ever produced.&quot; Ulysses S. Grant wrote about Frank Blair in his memoir that, &quot;There was no man braver than he, nor was there any who obeyed all orders of his superior in rank with more unquestioning alacrity. He was one man as a soldier, another as a politician.&quot;

In 1885, a statue to Senator Blair was erected at the entrance to Forest Park in St. Louis at the intersection of Kingshighway and Lindell Blvds.

In 1899, the state of Missouri donated a marble statue of Blair by Alexander Doyle to the U.S. Capitol&#x27;s National Statuary Hall Collection.

==See also==

* List of American Civil War generals (Union)
* 1st Missouri, US Reserve Corps Infantry (3 months, 1861)

==References==

==Further reading==
* Smith, Elbert B. &quot;Francis Preston Blair&quot; (1980) online
* Smith, William Ernest. &quot;The Francis Preston Blair Family in Politics&quot; (2 Vol Macmillan, 1933) online.

==External links==
*Blair family papers from Princeton University Library. Special Collections
*Apolline Alexander Blair, Wife Of Union General And Senator Francis P. Blair, Jr.

 Retrieved on 2008-02-12
* Blair in Statuary Hall at the U.S. Capitol


|-
|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1350196" start="0" end="25" title="Francis Preston Blair Jr." label="Francis Preston Blair Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="124" end="134" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="160" end="178" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="195" end="203" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="216" end="240" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="249" end="255" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="337" end="348" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q517116" start="416" end="430" title="Nathaniel Lyon" label="Nathaniel Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260567" start="468" end="503" title="Department of the West" label="Western Department of the U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888413" start="556" end="566" title="Home Guard (Union)" label="Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589559" start="617" end="634" title="St. Louis Arsenal" label="St. Louis Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="638" end="646" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027283" start="776" end="795" title="Camp Jackson Affair" label="Camp Jackson Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590533" start="890" end="909" title="List of Missouri Union Civil War units" label="Missouri volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066253" start="965" end="974" title="Siege of Vicksburg" label="Vicksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="981" end="988" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="1003" end="1034" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q698955" start="1079" end="1083" title="1868 United States presidential election" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q887320" start="1092" end="1107" title="Horatio Seymour" label="Horatio Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="1442" end="1461" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q937791" start="1532" end="1553" title="Francis Preston Blair" label="Francis Preston Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q56011063" start="1559" end="1588" title="Eliza Violet Gist Blair" label="Eliza Violet (née Gist) Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665428" start="1612" end="1628" title="Montgomery Blair" label="Montgomery Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753094" start="1655" end="1673" title="United States Postmaster General" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q376825" start="1707" end="1721" title="B. Gratz Brown" label="B. Gratz Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1790" end="1806" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1828" end="1832" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="1841" end="1869" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1890" end="1910" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q956056" start="1944" end="1967" title="Transylvania University" label="Transylvania University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="2012" end="2021" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="2049" end="2058" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317969" start="2136" end="2154" title="Thomas Hart Benton (politician)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068524" start="2227" end="2239" title="Bison hunting" label="buffalo hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q120405" start="2315" end="2331" title="Bent&amp;#x27;s Old Fort National Historic Site" label="Bent&amp;#x27;s Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="2353" end="2367" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="2438" end="2458" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q518351" start="2503" end="2520" title="Stephen W. Kearny" label="Stephen W. Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="2524" end="2532" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="2565" end="2581" title="attorney general" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="2590" end="2610" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q881051" start="2655" end="2681" title="Alexander William Doniphan" label="Alexander William Doniphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694742" start="2683" end="2702" title="Willard Preble Hall" label="Willard Preble Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317969" start="2994" end="3012" title="Thomas Hart Benton (senator)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3053" end="3060" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525922" start="3161" end="3194" title="Missouri House of Representatives" label="Missouri House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306826" start="3303" end="3324" title="political realignment" label="political realignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="3470" end="3495" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098629" start="3570" end="3580" title="Opposition Party (Southern U.S.)" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="3758" end="3765" title="Stephen Douglas" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q878516" start="3770" end="3774" title="Henry A. Wise" label="Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150348" start="3798" end="3850" title="Biographical Directory of the United States Congress" label="Biographical Directory of the United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3901" end="3939" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661295" start="3981" end="3995" title="Wilmot Proviso" label="Wilmot Proviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995078" start="4023" end="4045" title="Lecompton Constitution" label="Lecompton Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723905" start="4054" end="4070" title="Kansas Territory" label="Kansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="4250" end="4255" title="Latin America" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="4260" end="4275" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701565" start="4497" end="4511" title="John Richard Barret" label="John R. Barret"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635787" start="4590" end="4603" title="36th United States Congress" label="36th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635921" start="4862" end="4875" title="37th United States Congress" label="37th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508630" start="4920" end="4946" title="United States House Committee on Armed Services" label="Military Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="5015" end="5025" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636059" start="5059" end="5072" title="38th United States Congress" label="38th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218503" start="5182" end="5193" title="Samuel Knox" label="Samuel Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="5273" end="5288" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665428" start="5635" end="5645" title="Montgomery Blair" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="5804" end="5813" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q129322021" start="5850" end="5858" title="Unionist politician (American Civil War)" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q376825" start="6067" end="6081" title="B. Gratz Brown" label="B. Gratz Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506736" start="6098" end="6120" title="Fremont Emancipation" label="immediate emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="6393" end="6407" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998573" start="6684" end="6695" title="Wide Awakes" label="Wide Awakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542364" start="6825" end="6835" title="Turners" label="Turnverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q517116" start="6901" end="6915" title="Nathaniel Lyon" label="Nathaniel Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589559" start="6953" end="6978" title="St. Louis Arsenal" label="U.S. Arsenal at St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q443852" start="6982" end="6997" title="Alton, Illinois" label="Alton, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027283" start="7180" end="7199" title="Camp Jackson Affair" label="Camp Jackson Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q373923" start="7407" end="7424" title="Claiborne Fox Jackson" label="Claiborne Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568925" start="7462" end="7479" title="William S. Harney" label="William S. Harney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242670" start="7527" end="7545" title="Price-Harney Truce" label="Price-Harney Truce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095394" start="7551" end="7571" title="Missouri State Guard" label="Missouri State Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q532248" start="7582" end="7596" title="Sterling Price" label="Sterling Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q180659" start="7841" end="7870" title="Battle of Wilson&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="Battle of Wilson&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="7941" end="7956" title="John C. Frémont" label="John C. Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="8693" end="8710" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="8752" end="8765" title="Major general (United States)" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187871" start="9257" end="9261" title="29th Missouri Volunteer Infantry" label="29th"/>
<link wikidata="Q22021567" start="9279" end="9301" title="32nd Missouri Volunteer Infantry" label="32nd Missouri Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640927" start="9307" end="9325" title="58th Ohio Infantry" label="58th Ohio Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547103" start="9377" end="9398" title="10th Missouri Volunteer Cavalry" label="10th Missouri Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066253" start="9449" end="9458" title="Battle of Vicksburg" label="Vicksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="9494" end="9505" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="9522" end="9540" title="William T. Sherman" label="William T. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="9591" end="9598" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747220" start="9603" end="9616" title="the Carolinas" label="the Carolinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042540" start="9622" end="9632" title="XVII Corps (ACW)" label="XVII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q756118" start="9713" end="9729" title="Atlanta Campaign" label="Atlanta Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042550" start="9817" end="9826" title="XVI Corps (ACW)" label="XVI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="10072" end="10086" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="10122" end="10138" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="10174" end="10199" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="Missouri General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q56073219" start="10208" end="10225" title="Charles Branscomb" label="Charles Branscomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879488" start="10300" end="10325" title="Missouri Attorney General" label="Missouri Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="10432" end="10442" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q887320" start="10486" end="10501" title="Horatio Seymour" label="Horatio Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="10610" end="10626" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447471" start="11177" end="11195" title="Fifth Avenue Hotel" label="Fifth Avenue Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889059" start="11418" end="11433" title="Benjamin Nathan" label="Benjamin Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="11461" end="11484" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="11691" end="11711" title="Missouri Legislature" label="Missouri Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="11717" end="11738" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972444" start="12246" end="12268" title="Bellefontaine Cemetery" label="Bellefontaine Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031653" start="12305" end="12323" title="Appoline Alexander Blair" label="Appoline Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="12367" end="12385" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William T. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="12595" end="12611" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q594411" start="12920" end="12931" title="Forest Park (St. Louis)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="13023" end="13031" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718758" start="13068" end="13083" title="Alexander Doyle" label="Alexander Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="13091" end="13103" title="U.S. Capitol" label="U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134223" start="13111" end="13144" title="National Statuary Hall Collection" label="National Statuary Hall Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009036" start="13163" end="13206" title="List of American Civil War generals (Union)" label="List of American Civil War generals (Union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596484" start="13209" end="13265" title="1st Missouri, US Reserve Corps Infantry (3 months, 1861)" label="1st Missouri, US Reserve Corps Infantry (3 months, 1861)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706324" wikidata="Q229011" url="?curid=706324" title="Leslie Mann">
<text>Leslie Jean Mann (born March 26, 1972) is an American actress. She has appeared in numerous films, including &quot;The Cable Guy&quot; (1996), &quot;She&#x27;s the One&quot; (1996), &quot;George of the Jungle&quot; (1997), &quot;Big Daddy&quot; (1999), &quot;Orange County&quot; (2002), &quot;The 40-Year-Old Virgin&quot; (2005), &quot;Knocked Up&quot; (2007), &quot;Drillbit Taylor&quot; (2008), &quot;I Love You Phillip Morris&quot; (2009), &quot;17 Again&quot; (2009), &quot;Funny People&quot; (2009), &quot;This Is 40&quot; (2012), &quot;The Other Woman&quot; (2014), and &quot;Blockers&quot; (2018).

==Early life==
Mann was born in San Francisco, and grew up in Newport Beach. She was raised by her mother, Janet, who led design and quality programs for eight years at Ayres Hotel group. Mann has stated of her father, &quot;My dad is...I don&#x27;t really have one. I mean, he does exist, but I have zero relationship with him.&quot; She has two siblings and three older step-brothers. Her maternal grandmother, Sadie Viola Heljä Räsänen, was the daughter of Finnish immigrants.

Mann has said that she was &quot;very shy, kind of pent-up&quot; during her youth. She graduated from Corona del Mar High School, and studied acting at the Joanne Baron / D.W. Brown Acting Studio and alongside comedy improv troupe The Groundlings. She attended college and studied communications, but dropped out before graduating.

==Career==
Mann began her career at 18, appearing in a number of television commercials. In 1996, she appeared in &quot;The Cable Guy&quot;, followed with performances in &quot;Freaks &amp; Geeks&quot;, Sam Weisman&#x27;s &quot;George of The Jungle&quot; alongside Brendan Fraser, &quot;Big Daddy&quot; with Adam Sandler, &quot;Orange County&quot; opposite Jack Black, and &quot;The 40-Year-Old Virgin&quot; with Steve Carell.

In 2007, Mann starred alongside Seth Rogen, Katherine Heigl, and Paul Rudd in Judd Apatow&#x27;s comedy &quot;Knocked Up&quot;, which grossed more than $218 million worldwide. Her performance brought rave reviews and a &quot;Best Supporting Actress&quot; nomination from the Chicago Film Critics Association. The film won the People&#x27;s Choice Award for &quot;Favorite Movie Comedy&quot;, was named one of AFI&#x27;s &quot;Top Ten Films of the Year&quot;, and received a &quot;Best Comedy&quot; nomination from the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards.

In 2009, Mann reunited with her &quot;Big Daddy&quot; co-star Adam Sandler and &quot;Knocked Up&quot; co-star Seth Rogen for Apatow&#x27;s &quot;Funny People&quot;. This film was named to many of the year&#x27;s top ten lists, including &quot;The New Yorker&quot; and &quot;The New York Times&quot;. &quot;Elle&quot; writer Mickey Rapkin said that &quot;[Mann] owns the second half of 2009&#x27;s &quot;Funny People&quot;, where her character does the most unlikely thing a woman can do in a major studio picture: has an affair with an ex-boyfriend on a whim.&quot; That same year, Mann also starred in Burr Steers&#x27; successful comedy &quot;17 Again&quot; opposite Zac Efron and Matthew Perry, which grossed over $125 million worldwide.

She was also seen in the indie hit &quot;I Love You Phillip Morris&quot; alongside Jim Carrey and Ewan McGregor. It premiered at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival and, on release, received critical acclaim, including a &quot;Best Comedy&quot; nomination for a 2011 Broadcast Film Critics Association Award. Mann also starred alongside Elizabeth Banks in the film &quot;What Was I Thinking?&quot;, based on the book by Barbara Davilman and Liz Dubelman, which was filmed in 2009 but never released.

In 2011, Mann starred opposite Ryan Reynolds and Jason Bateman in David Dobkin&#x27;s comedy &quot;The Change-Up.&quot; She also lent her voice to &quot;Linda&quot;, the main human character in Carlos Saldanha&#x27;s animated film &quot;Rio&quot;, which earned over $484 million worldwide and also featured vocal performances by Jamie Foxx and Anne Hathaway; as well as to Jonah Hill&#x27;s animated FOX television series &quot;Allen Gregory&quot;, as the title character&#x27;s second-grade teacher.

Mann continued her voice performance work in 2012 with her role in &quot;ParaNorman&quot;, an animated 3D stop-motion film from Chris Butler and Sam Fell.

In December 2012, she appeared opposite Paul Rudd in Apatow&#x27;s &quot;This Is 40&quot;, the sequel to &quot;Knocked Up&quot;. The movie reunited the trio from the first film, with Mann and Rudd reprising their characters. The sequel was written and directed by Judd Apatow, and included the couple&#x27;s two daughters in the cast. In contrast to &quot;Knocked Up&quot;, &quot;This Is 40&quot; centered squarely on Mann&#x27;s character and her family. An early response to Mann&#x27;s performance from &quot;Elle Magazine&quot; states that &quot;[she] doesn&#x27;t just walk off with scenes—she steals the show&quot;. Mann was nominated for Best Actress in a Comedy by the Broadcast Film Critics Association for &quot;This Is 40&quot;.

In 2013, Mann appeared in Sofia Coppola&#x27;s &quot;The Bling Ring&quot;, with Emma Watson. Inspired by actual events, the film follows a group of fame-obsessed L.A. teenagers who burgled celebrity homes by tracking their whereabouts on the Internet.

In 2014, she narrated &quot;Women in Comedy&quot;, an episode of Season 2 of &quot;&quot;.

In 2018, Mann starred as a single mother in the sex comedy &quot;Blockers&quot; and reunited with Steve Carell in &quot;Welcome to Marwen&quot;.

==Personal life==
On June 9, 1997, Mann married director and producer Judd Apatow, whom she met while auditioning for &quot;The Cable Guy&quot;. Apatow, one of the film&#x27;s producers, read the lines to auditioning actresses as a stand-in for Jim Carrey. Mann and Apatow have two daughters, Maude and Iris, who both appeared in the films &quot;Knocked Up&quot;, &quot;Funny People&quot;, and &quot;This Is 40&quot; as the children of Mann&#x27;s characters.

Mann and Apatow are both longtime supporters of the nonprofit organization 826LA, which focuses on encouraging and developing the writing skills of disadvantaged youth. They are also involved with the UCLA Rape Treatment Center&#x27;s Stuart House, which serves sexually abused children and their families. Mann and Apatow&#x27;s philanthropic contributions were honored in 2012 by the Bogart Pediatric Cancer Research Program, which awarded them the 2012 &quot;Children&#x27;s Choice Award&quot; for their work with children and families dealing with pediatric cancer. In 2009, they were also recognized by The Fulfillment Fund, which honored them at its annual benefit gala.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
* 2019 interview with &quot;Backstage&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229011" start="0" end="16" title="Leslie Mann" label="Leslie Jean Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q824133" start="115" end="128" title="The Cable Guy" label="The Cable Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480910" start="149" end="167" title="She&amp;#x27;s the One (1996 film)" label="She&amp;#x27;s the One"/>
<link wikidata="Q225260" start="188" end="208" title="George of the Jungle (film)" label="George of the Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q509025" start="229" end="238" title="Big Daddy (1999 film)" label="Big Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q913965" start="259" end="272" title="Orange County (film)" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139794" start="293" end="315" title="The 40-Year-Old Virgin" label="The 40-Year-Old Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q222800" start="336" end="346" title="Knocked Up" label="Knocked Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q604980" start="367" end="382" title="Drillbit Taylor" label="Drillbit Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128867" start="403" end="428" title="I Love You Phillip Morris" label="I Love You Phillip Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q200096" start="449" end="457" title="17 Again (film)" label="17 Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137899" start="478" end="490" title="Funny People" label="Funny People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090390" start="511" end="521" title="This Is 40" label="This Is 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q14272676" start="542" end="557" title="The Other Woman (2014 film)" label="The Other Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314776" start="582" end="590" title="Blockers (film)" label="Blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="668" end="681" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="1066" end="1073" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172136" start="1189" end="1215" title="Corona del Mar High School" label="Corona del Mar High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1243" end="1282" title="Joanne Baron#Joanne Baron / D.W. Brown Acting Studio" label="Joanne Baron / D.W. Brown Acting Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000351" start="1318" end="1333" title="The Groundlings" label="The Groundlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q824133" start="1540" end="1553" title="The Cable Guy" label="The Cable Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q500769" start="1597" end="1615" title="Freaks &amp;amp; Geeks" label="Freaks &amp;amp; Geeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470574" start="1623" end="1634" title="Sam Weisman" label="Sam Weisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q225260" start="1648" end="1668" title="George of the Jungle (film)" label="George of The Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193555" start="1685" end="1699" title="Brendan Fraser" label="Brendan Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q509025" start="1707" end="1716" title="Big Daddy (1999 film)" label="Big Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132952" start="1728" end="1740" title="Adam Sandler" label="Adam Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q913965" start="1748" end="1761" title="Orange County (film)" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="1777" end="1787" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139794" start="1799" end="1821" title="The 40-Year-Old Virgin" label="The 40-Year-Old Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="1833" end="1845" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220308" start="1880" end="1890" title="Seth Rogen" label="Seth Rogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189554" start="1892" end="1907" title="Katherine Heigl" label="Katherine Heigl"/>
<link wikidata="Q276525" start="1913" end="1922" title="Paul Rudd" label="Paul Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q325396" start="1926" end="1937" title="Judd Apatow" label="Judd Apatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q222800" start="1958" end="1968" title="Knocked Up" label="Knocked Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137899" start="2555" end="2567" title="Funny People" label="Funny People"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="2653" end="2667" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2684" end="2702" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016897" start="3013" end="3024" title="Burr Steers" label="Burr Steers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200096" start="3055" end="3063" title="17 Again (film)" label="17 Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q45229" start="3079" end="3088" title="Zac Efron" label="Zac Efron"/>
<link wikidata="Q171758" start="3093" end="3106" title="Matthew Perry" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128867" start="3193" end="3218" title="I Love You Phillip Morris" label="I Love You Phillip Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="3235" end="3245" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="3250" end="3263" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="3290" end="3312" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585305" start="3415" end="3455" title="Broadcast Film Critics Association Award" label="Broadcast Film Critics Association Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q219373" start="3485" end="3500" title="Elizabeth Banks" label="Elizabeth Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="3680" end="3693" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q284636" start="3698" end="3711" title="Jason Bateman" label="Jason Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q607615" start="3715" end="3727" title="David Dobkin (director)" label="David Dobkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574364" start="3748" end="3761" title="The Change-Up" label="The Change-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q518632" start="3843" end="3858" title="Carlos Saldanha" label="Carlos Saldanha"/>
<link wikidata="Q223359" start="3886" end="3889" title="Rio (2011 film)" label="Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="3978" end="3988" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q36301" start="3993" end="4006" title="Anne Hathaway" label="Anne Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q313388" start="4022" end="4032" title="Jonah Hill" label="Jonah Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="4049" end="4052" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="FOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331920" start="4077" end="4090" title="Allen Gregory" label="Allen Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q198028" start="4224" end="4234" title="ParaNorman" label="ParaNorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="4257" end="4268" title="stop-motion" label="stop-motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964669" start="4279" end="4291" title="Chris Butler (filmmaker)" label="Chris Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470486" start="4296" end="4304" title="Sam Fell" label="Sam Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090390" start="4380" end="4390" title="This Is 40" label="This Is 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008615" start="4984" end="5018" title="Broadcast Film Critics Association" label="Broadcast Film Critics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="5074" end="5087" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077738" start="5101" end="5115" title="The Bling Ring" label="The Bling Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q39476" start="5128" end="5139" title="Emma Watson" label="Emma Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314776" start="5458" end="5466" title="Blockers (film)" label="Blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36951156" start="5513" end="5530" title="Welcome to Marwen" label="Welcome to Marwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q325396" start="5609" end="5620" title="Judd Apatow" label="Judd Apatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="5784" end="5794" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147452" start="5832" end="5837" title="Maude Apatow" label="Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q16021057" start="5842" end="5846" title="Iris Apatow" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644608" start="6075" end="6080" title="826LA" label="826LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="6201" end="6205" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706330" wikidata="Q1040580" url="?curid=706330" title="Charles Abbott">
<text>Charles Abbott may refer to:
*Charles Abbott, 1st Baron Tenterden (1762–1832), English jurist
*Charles Abbott, 3rd Baron Tenterden (1834–1882), British diplomat
*Charles Conrad Abbott (1843–1919), American archaeologist and naturalist 
*Charles Lydiard Aubrey Abbott (1886–1975), Administrator of the Northern Territory of Australia
*Charles Abbott (footballer) (born 1939), Australian rules footballer
*Charles Abbott (cricketer) (1815–1889), English lawyer and cricketer
*Sir Charles Abbott (Australian politician) (1889–1960), member of the South Australian House of Assembly, judge
*Charles Abbott (bowls) (1867–?), South African lawn bowls international

==See also==
*Charles Abbot (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1040580" start="0" end="14" title="Charles Abbott" label="Charles Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q336138" start="30" end="65" title="Charles Abbott, 1st Baron Tenterden" label="Charles Abbott, 1st Baron Tenterden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074937" start="95" end="130" title="Charles Abbott, 3rd Baron Tenterden" label="Charles Abbott, 3rd Baron Tenterden"/>
<link wikidata="Q591957" start="162" end="183" title="Charles Conrad Abbott" label="Charles Conrad Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819077" start="253" end="266" title="Aubrey Abbott" label="Aubrey Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074939" start="334" end="361" title="Charles Abbott (footballer)" label="Charles Abbott (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062596" start="404" end="430" title="Charles Abbott (cricketer)" label="Charles Abbott (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983211" start="478" end="516" title="Charles Abbott (Australian politician)" label="Charles Abbott (Australian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62769282" start="587" end="609" title="Charles Abbott (bowls)" label="Charles Abbott (bowls)"/>
<link wikidata="Q417419" start="674" end="704" title="Charles Abbot (disambiguation)" label="Charles Abbot (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706331" wikidata="Q1420721" url="?curid=706331" title="Vega (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Vega]] is a star in the constellation Lyra.

Vega or VEGA may also refer to:

==Places==
===Norway===
* Vega Municipality, a municipality in Nordland county
* Vega (island in Norway), an island within Vega Municipality in Nordland county
* Vega Archipelago, an archipelago and UNESCO site in Nordland county
* Vega Church, a church in Vega Municipality in Nordland county

===Spain===
* Vega (Aller), Asturias
* Vega, Gijón, Asturias
* Vega de Granada, Andalusia

===United States===
* Vega, Georgia
* Vega, Ohio
* Vega, Texas

===Elsewhere===
* Vega (crater), the Moon 
* Vega, Alberta, Canada
* Vega, Copenhagen, a concert hall in Copenhagen
* Vega, Haninge, Sweden
** Vega Station, on Stockholm commuter rail
* La Vega, Dominican Republic
* Vega Island, Antarctica

==Aerospace==
* Vega (crater), on the Moon
* Vega (rocket), an expendable launch system in use by Arianespace, jointly developed by the Italian Space Agency and the European Space Agency
* Lockheed Vega, an American monoplane produced 1927–1931
* Percival Vega Gull, a British aircraft produced 1935–1939
* Slingsby Vega, a British glider
* Stern ST 87 Vega, a French homebuilt aircraft design
* Vega Aircraft Corporation, a subsidiary of Lockheed
* Vega program, a series of space missions
* VEGA Space GmbH, a European aerospace company that merged into Telespazio VEGA Deutschland
* Vega Space UK, a UK-based space company
* Walter Vega, a Czechoslovak radial aeroengine

==Arts, entertainment, and media==

===Fictional characters===
* Vega (&quot;Street Fighter&quot;), a &quot;Street Fighter&quot; character, named Balrog in Japan
** M. Bison, the main antagonist of the &quot;Street Fighter&quot; universe, known as Vega in Japan
* King Vega, a &quot;Ufo Robot Grendizer&quot; character
* Vega Obscura, a &quot;Zoids: New Century Zero&quot; character
* Vega, a &quot;Gear Fighter Dendoh&quot; character
* General Vega, a characters from the video game &quot;Command &amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun&quot;
* James Vega, a character in the &quot;Mass Effect&quot; series
* Tori Vega and Trina Vega, characters in the Nickelodeon sitcom &quot;Victorious&quot;
* Vic and Vincent Vega, brothers from the Quentin Tarantino films &quot;Pulp Fiction&quot; and &quot;Reservoir Dogs&quot;
* VEGA, a sentient artificial intelligence that runs the UAC Mars facility in &quot;Doom&quot; and also runs the Fortress of Doom in &quot;Doom Eternal&quot;

===Music===
* Vega Company, a musical instruments manufacturer
* Vega (British band), a melodic rock/AOR band formed in 2009
* Vega (Turkish band), an alternative rock band formed in 1996
* Vega, Copenhagen, a Danish concert hall 
* &quot;Vega&quot; (album), an album by Janvs
* &quot;Vega&quot; (Anberlin album), 2024
* &quot;Vega&quot;, an outro song by Breaking Benjamin from the 2018 album &quot;Ember&quot;
* &quot;Vega&quot;, a 2018 album by Danheim
* &quot;Vega&quot;, a song by Ed Sheeran from the album &quot;-&quot;, 2023

===Other media===
* Vega (radio network), a now-defunct Australian network
** Smooth 95.3 (formerly &quot;Vega 95.3&quot;), an Australian radio station
* Yle Vega, a Finnish radio channel broadcasting in Swedish

==Businesses and organizations==
* Vega (company), a nutrition brand
* Vega Company, a musical instrument manufacturer 
* Facel Vega, a French car manufacturer (1954–1964)
* Vega Group, a Russian special forces unit
* Vega Industries, a New Zealand marine light manufacturer
* Vega Radio Engineering Corporation, a Russian military surveillance radio maker
* Vega Sicilia, a Spanish winery
* Vega Telecommunications Group, a Ukrainian telecommunications provider
* Volunteers for Economic Growth Alliance, an international development group

==People==

* Vega (singer) (born 1979), Spanish singer-songwriter
* Vega (surname), a list of people so named
* Vega Jurij (1754–1802), Slovene mathematician, physicist and artillery officer
* Vega Tamotia (born 1985), Indian actress

==Schools==
* Vega (South Africa), a private university in South Africa
* Vega High School, Vega, Texas, U.S.
* Vega Schools, Gurgaon, Haryana state, India

==Science, technology and medicine==
* Vega, the GPU architecture from Vivante Corporation
* Vega, line of GPUs manufactured by Video Seven 
* AMD Vega, the GPU architecture featured in the Radeon RX Vega line of GPUs
* Radeon RX Vega series, graphics processors developed by AMD
* Vega machine, an electrodiagnostic device
* Vertebrate and Genome Annotation Project (VEGA), a biological database
* Vega and Vega-Lite visualisation grammars, visualization tools implementing a grammar of graphics in JavaScript

==Ships==
* HMS &quot;Vega&quot;, several ships of the British Royal Navy
* MS &quot;Vega&quot;, now MS &quot;Mytilene&quot;, a Greek ferry ship
* SS &quot;Vega&quot;, various steamships
* USS &quot;Vega&quot;, several ships of the United States Navy
* &quot;Vega&quot;, a Finnish schooner; see Finnish war reparations to the Soviet Union
* Private Security Vehicle Garuda Vega, a fictional ship in the 2017 Indian Telugu-language film &quot;PSV Garuda Vega&quot;

==Vehicles==

* Chevrolet Vega, an American subcompact made in the 1970s
* Vega EVX, a Sri Lankan electric coupe
* Ford Vega, a concept car
* Facel Vega, a French performance luxury car made in the 1950s

==Other uses==
* Vega (grape), a white Italian wine grape
* Vega, or grass valley, a meadow located within a forested and relatively small drainage basin
* Vega, in finance a measure of sensitivity to volatility; see Greeks (finance)
* Vega Medal, awarded by the Swedish Society for Anthropology and Geography

==See also==
* Vegam (disambiguation)
* Bega (disambiguation)
* De la Vega (disambiguation)
* Vegan (disambiguation)
* Vegas (disambiguation)
* Viga (disambiguation)
* WEGA, a radio company, acquired by Sony in 1975</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1420721" start="0" end="8" title="Vega (disambiguation)" label="[[Vega]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420721" start="47" end="51" title="Vega (disambiguation)" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420721" start="55" end="59" title="Vega (disambiguation)" label="VEGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q488375" start="106" end="123" title="Vega Municipality" label="Vega Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q61847194" start="161" end="184" title="Vega (island in Norway)" label="Vega (island in Norway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q829084" start="242" end="258" title="Vega Archipelago" label="Vega Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918256" start="312" end="323" title="Vega Church" label="Vega Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q471503" start="389" end="401" title="Vega (Aller)" label="Vega (Aller)"/>
<link wikidata="Q936026" start="414" end="425" title="Vega, Gijón" label="Vega, Gijón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116489" start="438" end="453" title="Vega de Granada" label="Vega de Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051353" start="488" end="501" title="Vega, Georgia" label="Vega, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812860" start="504" end="514" title="Vega, Ohio" label="Vega, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q982330" start="517" end="528" title="Vega, Texas" label="Vega, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341276" start="548" end="561" title="Vega (crater)" label="Vega (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918243" start="575" end="588" title="Vega, Alberta" label="Vega, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12340608" start="599" end="615" title="Vega, Copenhagen" label="Vega, Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q129176" start="648" end="661" title="Vega, Haninge" label="Vega, Haninge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19946481" start="673" end="685" title="Vega Station" label="Vega Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q538953" start="716" end="743" title="La Vega, Dominican Republic" label="La Vega, Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241818" start="746" end="757" title="Vega Island" label="Vega Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341276" start="787" end="800" title="Vega (crater)" label="Vega (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q262629" start="816" end="829" title="Vega (rocket)" label="Vega (rocket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q976898" start="960" end="973" title="Lockheed Vega" label="Lockheed Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070209" start="1018" end="1036" title="Percival Vega Gull" label="Percival Vega Gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540740" start="1078" end="1091" title="Slingsby Vega" label="Slingsby Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145654" start="1112" end="1128" title="Stern ST 87 Vega" label="Stern ST 87 Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009237" start="1167" end="1192" title="Vega Aircraft Corporation" label="Vega Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q755286" start="1221" end="1233" title="Vega program" label="Vega program"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196057" start="1327" end="1354" title="Telespazio VEGA Deutschland" label="Telespazio VEGA Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696844" start="1357" end="1367" title="Vega Space" label="Vega Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966334" start="1399" end="1410" title="Walter Vega" label="Walter Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901282" start="1511" end="1544" title="Vega (Street Fighter)" label="Vega (&amp;quot;Street Fighter&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31378" start="1611" end="1619" title="M. Bison" label="M. Bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q10760639" start="1710" end="1719" title="King Vega" label="King Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073501" start="1767" end="1779" title="Vega Obscura" label="Vega Obscura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101176" start="1845" end="1864" title="Gear Fighter Dendoh" label="Gear Fighter Dendoh"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1936" end="1971" title="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun" label="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q102348425" start="1980" end="1990" title="James Vega" label="James Vega"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2070" end="2129" title="list of Victorious characters#Tori Vega" label="characters in the Nickelodeon sitcom &amp;quot;Victorious&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q104123" start="2202" end="2214" title="Pulp Fiction" label="Pulp Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q72962" start="2231" end="2245" title="Reservoir Dogs" label="Reservoir Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q513867" start="2336" end="2340" title="Doom (2016 video game)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55662649" start="2391" end="2403" title="Doom Eternal" label="Doom Eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918247" start="2425" end="2437" title="Vega Company" label="Vega Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352072" start="2476" end="2495" title="Vega (British band)" label="Vega (British band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571905" start="2538" end="2557" title="Vega (Turkish band)" label="Vega (Turkish band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12340608" start="2601" end="2617" title="Vega, Copenhagen" label="Vega, Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q559469" start="2644" end="2668" title="Vega (album)" label="&amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752503" start="2690" end="2723" title="Vega (Anberlin album)" label="&amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot; (Anberlin album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488904" start="2811" end="2816" title="Ember (album)" label="Ember"/>
<link wikidata="Q83875287" start="2859" end="2866" title="Danheim" label="Danheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q116949364" start="2929" end="2930" title="- (album)" label="-"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546377" start="2964" end="2984" title="Vega (radio network)" label="Vega (radio network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546383" start="3022" end="3033" title="Smooth 95.3" label="Smooth 95.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219899" start="3098" end="3106" title="Yle Vega" label="Yle Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803460" start="3192" end="3206" title="Vega (company)" label="Vega (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918247" start="3228" end="3240" title="Vega Company" label="Vega Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q743344" start="3279" end="3289" title="Facel Vega" label="Facel Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350636" start="3331" end="3341" title="Vega Group" label="Vega Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918251" start="3375" end="3390" title="Vega Industries" label="Vega Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918255" start="3434" end="3468" title="Vega Radio Engineering Corporation" label="Vega Radio Engineering Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856180" start="3516" end="3528" title="Vega Sicilia" label="Vega Sicilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421134" start="3549" end="3578" title="Vega Telecommunications Group" label="Vega Telecommunications Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941076" start="3622" end="3661" title="Volunteers for Economic Growth Alliance" label="Volunteers for Economic Growth Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143076" start="3713" end="3726" title="Vega (singer)" label="Vega (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049943" start="3768" end="3782" title="Vega (surname)" label="Vega (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q93520" start="3812" end="3822" title="Vega Jurij" label="Vega Jurij"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918259" start="3893" end="3905" title="Vega Tamotia" label="Vega Tamotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212582" start="3949" end="3968" title="Vega (South Africa)" label="Vega (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918250" start="4009" end="4025" title="Vega High School" label="Vega High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q30622068" start="4047" end="4059" title="Vega Schools" label="Vega Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278921" start="4163" end="4182" title="Vivante Corporation" label="Vivante Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619822" start="4220" end="4231" title="Video Seven" label="Video Seven"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4235" end="4243" title="Graphics Core Next#fifth" label="AMD Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q30640197" start="4312" end="4333" title="Radeon RX Vega series" label="Radeon RX Vega series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918263" start="4374" end="4386" title="Vega machine" label="Vega machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922759" start="4418" end="4458" title="Vertebrate and Genome Annotation Project" label="Vertebrate and Genome Annotation Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856562" start="4491" end="4532" title="Vega and Vega-Lite visualisation grammars" label="Vega and Vega-Lite visualisation grammars"/>
<link wikidata="Q10515235" start="4616" end="4636" title="HMS Vega" label="HMS &amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277632" start="4705" end="4728" title="MS Mytilene" label="MS &amp;quot;Mytilene&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394501" start="4751" end="4770" title="SS Vega" label="SS &amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875038" start="4793" end="4813" title="USS Vega" label="USS &amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450879" start="4899" end="4942" title="Finnish war reparations to the Soviet Union" label="Finnish war reparations to the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q38805251" start="4945" end="4981" title="Private Security Vehicle Garuda Vega" label="Private Security Vehicle Garuda Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q38805251" start="5046" end="5061" title="PSV Garuda Vega" label="PSV Garuda Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303236" start="5085" end="5099" title="Chevrolet Vega" label="Chevrolet Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q86613817" start="5144" end="5152" title="Vega EVX" label="Vega EVX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467995" start="5184" end="5193" title="Ford Vega" label="Ford Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q743344" start="5211" end="5221" title="Facel Vega" label="Facel Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119339" start="5291" end="5303" title="Vega (grape)" label="Vega (grape)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597497" start="5343" end="5355" title="grass valley" label="grass valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321169" start="5491" end="5507" title="Greeks (finance)" label="Greeks (finance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654863" start="5510" end="5520" title="Vega Medal" label="Vega Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17989982" start="5600" end="5622" title="Vegam (disambiguation)" label="Vegam (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q361392" start="5625" end="5646" title="Bega (disambiguation)" label="Bega (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244937" start="5649" end="5676" title="De la Vega (disambiguation)" label="De la Vega (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918274" start="5679" end="5701" title="Vegan (disambiguation)" label="Vegan (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q363646" start="5704" end="5726" title="Vegas (disambiguation)" label="Vegas (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523919" start="5729" end="5750" title="Viga (disambiguation)" label="Viga (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q420389" start="5753" end="5757" title="WEGA" label="WEGA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706334" wikidata="Q3331804" url="?curid=706334" title="Likelike">
<text>Likelike (; Miriam Likelike Kekāuluohi Keahelapalapa Kapili; January 13, 1851February 2, 1887) was a princess of the Hawaiian Kingdom and member of the reigning House of Kalākaua. She was born in Honolulu, on the island of Oʻahu. Likelike&#x27;s parents were Analea Keohokālole and Caesar Kapaʻakea, and the family were members of the aliʻi class of the Hawaiian nobility. Before the age of six, she was raised on the island of Hawaii for her health. Likelike later returned to Honolulu, where she was educated by Roman Catholic and Congregationalist teachers in the city&#x27;s girls&#x27; schools.

She married Scottish businessman Archibald Scott Cleghorn in 1870 and was the mother of Princess Kaʻiulani, the last heir to the throne before the 1893 overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom. Likelike was the first mistress of the ʻĀinahau estate, which became associated with her daughter. She was Governor of the island of Hawaii from 1879 to 1880 and was in the line of succession to the throne after her sister, Liliʻuokalani. Likelike died under mysterious circumstances in 1887, with rumors that she was malevolently &quot;prayed&quot; to death. She and her siblings are recognized by the Hawaiian Music Hall of Fame as Na Lani ʻEhā (The Heavenly Four) for their patronage and enrichment of Hawaii&#x27;s musical culture and history.

== Early life and family ==
Likelike was born on January 13, 1851, in Honolulu on the island of Oʻahu, to Analea Keohokālole and Caesar Kapaʻakea. Her full name was Miriam Likelike Kekāuluohi Keahelapalapa Kapili. Two of her namesakes were Likelike (an earlier Hawaiian chiefess and wife of Kalanimoku) and Miriam Auhea Kekāuluohi, Kuhina Nui (premier) and the mother of King Lunalilo (r. 1873–74).

Her parents were political advisors to King Kamehameha III (r. 1825–54) and later to his successor, Kamehameha IV (r. 1855–64). Likelike&#x27;s mother was the daughter of ʻAikanaka and Kamaʻeokalani, and her father was the son of Kamanawa II (half-brother of ʻAikanaka) and Kamokuiki. Their family belonged to the aliʻi class of Hawaiian nobility and were collateral relatives of the reigning House of Kamehameha, descended from the 18th-century &quot;aliʻi nui&quot; (supreme monarch) Keaweʻīkekahialiʻiokamoku. Likelike was descended from Keaweaheulu and Kameʻeiamoku, two of the five royal counselors of Kamehameha I (r. 1782–1819) during his conquest of the Hawaiian Kingdom. Kameʻeiamoku, her parents&#x27; grandfather, was depicted with his royal twin Kamanawa on the Hawaiian coat of arms.

The youngest daughter and child of a large family, her biological siblings included James Kaliokalani, David Kalākaua, Liliʻuokalani, Anna Kaʻiulani, Kaʻiminaʻauao, and William Pitt Leleiohoku II. They were &quot;hānai&quot; (adopted) by other family members. The Hawaiian custom of &quot;hānai&quot; is an informal form of adoption in extended families.
Because Likelike was not healthy as a child, she was sent to live in the dry climate of Kona on the island of Hawaii. The 1892 obituary of Hawaii Supreme Court Justice Lawrence McCully noted that he was her teacher while he resided in Kona. According to historian George Kanahele, she was raised in Hilo on the wetter windward side of the island of Hawaii: &quot;Little is known about her early years&quot;.

The identities of Likelike&#x27;s hānai parents are unknown. According to historian Sammy Amalu, Likelike was brought up in the household of Peleuli (daughter of High Chief Kalaʻimamahu, half-brother of Kamehameha I) with Peleuli&#x27;s granddaughter Miriam Auhea Kekāuluohi Crowningburg, a second cousin of King Lunalilo. According to newspaper columnist Clarice Taylor, Likelike was raised by her mother and then cared for by Queen Emma after her death.

== Education ==

At age six (), Likelike returned permanently to Honolulu. She was initially educated at the Sacred Hearts Convent and School by the Roman Catholic sisters of the Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary. The sisters arrived in Hawaii in 1859, and established day and boarding schools for Hawaiian girls next to the Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace in Honolulu. The schools were the predecessor of the Sacred Hearts Academy in Kaimuki. Likelike was later educated by American Congregationalist missionary teacher Maria Ogden at the Makiki Family School, established in Honolulu in 1860 with the support of King Kamehameha IV and Queen Emma. Her last school was the Kawaiahaʻo Seminary for Girls; Likelike&#x27;s teacher was Lydia Bingham, daughter of Hiram Bingham I (leader of the first group of American Protestant missionaries to introduce Christianity to the Hawaiian Islands). Her classmates at Kawaiahaʻo included Annie Palekaluhi Kaikioʻewa (sister of Edward Kamakau Lilikalani) and Lily Auld, also members of the Hawaiian nobility.

Likelike was particularly close to her elder sister, Liliʻuokalani, who was warm towards (and protective of) her younger sister. In a September 7, 1865, letter, Liliʻuokalani (who had married John Owen Dominis) advised Likelike about her education:

==Betrothal to Albert Kūnuiākea==

Likelike was betrothed around 1869 to Albert Kūnuiākea, an illegitimate son of King Kamehameha III and the &quot;hānai&quot; son of Queen Dowager Kalama. Contemporary sources noted, &quot;Their betrothal [was] much desired by those in authority as well as the other chiefs&quot;. During the 1869 visit of Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh and the &quot;Galatea&quot;, Likelike&#x27;s sister Liliʻuokalani entertained the British prince with a traditional Hawaiian lūʻau at her Waikiki residence of Hamohamo. Likelike accompanied Queen Dowager Kalama and Kūnuiākea on a carriage of state from Honolulu to Waikiki on the occasion of the festivities. The couple broke off the engagement soon afterwards, for unspecified reasons. Kūnuiākea married Mary Lonokahikini, widow of the Reverend Z. Poli, in 1878.

== Marriage to Archibald Scott Cleghorn ==

Likelike married Archibald Scott Cleghorn, a businessman from Scotland almost twice her age, on September 22, 1870; Cleghorn was 35, and Likelike was 19. They were married in an Anglican ceremony officiated by Reverend Charles George Williamson, rector of St. Andrew&#x27;s Cathedral. The wedding was at Washington Place, her sister Liliʻuokalani&#x27;s residence. Cleghorn had fathered daughters Rose, Helen and Annie with his part-Hawaiian mistress (Elizabeth Lapeka Pauahi Grimes) before the marriage, and Likelike accepted the children.

The couple initially lived in a mansion on Emma Street, the present-day site of The Pacific Club, in Honolulu. Likelike gave birth to their daughter, Kaʻiulani, on October 16, 1875. Liliʻuokalani wrote that Kaʻiulani &quot;was at once recognized as the hope of the Hawaiian people, as the only direct heir by birth to the throne.&quot; The long-awaited future heir to the throne was christened by Bishop Alfred Willis at the pro-cathedral of St. Andrew&#x27;s on December 25, 1875. Princess Ruth Keʻelikōlani and the king and queen were her godparents. Keʻelikōlani gave of her land in Waikīkī (outside Honolulu) to her goddaughter. The family sold their Honolulu property in 1878 and moved to the beachfront district of Waikīkī, where Cleghorn built a family estate which Likelike named ʻĀinahau (cool land).

Kaʻiulani was the couple&#x27;s only child. Likelike had a miscarriage in June 1877 on a ship en route to San Francisco, California, and may have had another miscarriage after a fall from a horse before her final illness.

Like her sister Lydia&#x27;s marriage to John Owen Dominis, her marriage to Cleghorn was bittersweet. Victorian gentlemen expected to be the lord of their castle, their servants, their children, and their wives. Hawaiian nobility (&quot;aliʻi&quot;), however, were raised to rule others. Cleghorn could be blustery and demanding; on several occasions, the princess returned to the island of Hawaii and refused to return until they reconciled.

Likelike was vivacious and well-liked, and her home was open to important people from all over the world. She had a reputation as a gracious hostess at her ʻĀinahau estate. Likelike was &quot;au courant&quot; with the latest fashions, ordering dresses and clothing from San Francisco and Paris. She was known be imperious and quick-tempered, once striking a groom with a whip for not keeping the carriage properly polished. Likelike was baptized and confirmed in the Anglican Church of Hawaii in 1882.

==Public life==
After his accession, Likelike&#x27;s brother Kalākaua bestowed royal titles and ranks upon her and their siblings: sisters became Princess Lydia Kamakaʻeha Dominis (Liliʻuokalani) and Princess Miriam Likelike Cleghorn and their brother became Prince William Pitt Leleiohoku. The latter was also named heir to the Hawaiian throne, as Kalākaua and Queen Kapiʻolani had no children of their own.

After Leleiohoku&#x27;s death on April 9, 1877, Kalākaua proclaimed Liliʻuokalani heir apparent to the throne. Likelike and her daughter were next in the line of succession. Kalākaua bestowed the title of Princess of the Kingdom on Likelike by letters patent on February 10, 1883, also recognizing other members of his family who been using their courtesy titles since 1873. She was ranked in precedence behind the king and queen, Queen Dowager Emma and Liliʻuokalani and her husband, John Owen Dominis, and ranked above her husband and their daughter Princess Kaʻiulani. Likelike participated in Kalākaua&#x27;s coronation, nine years into his reign, on February 12, 1883. She wore &quot;a robe of brocaded white satin trimmed with pearls and feathers&quot; ordered from San Francisco, and was waited on by sisters Clara and Lizzie Coney.
The Cook Monument, an obelisk commemorating Captain James Cook&#x27;s landing on the Hawaiian Islands, was unveiled in November 1874 at the place where he was killed. Great Britain and the United States were seen at the time seen as allies who prevented Russia from seizing the kingdom. On January 26, 1877, Likelike and Cleghorn deeded their land at the Cook Monument at Kealakekua Bay in trust to the British Commissioner to Hawaii James Hay Wodehouse and his subsequent heirs for one dollar &quot;to keep and maintain&quot; the monument. Although the deed names Likelike and her husband, its only signatory was Cleghorn&#x27;s. Because of the deed&#x27;s wording, Wodehouse and his heirs (not the British government) became owners of the land. The error was not discovered until 1939, when the Wodehouse estate conveyed the deed to the British government for $1.

=== Governorship ===
Governor Samuel Kipi died in office on March 11, 1879. Likelike was appointed his successor on March 29, and held the position until September 2, 1880. Her first official meeting as governor was at the Hilo courthouse on May 31. The island of Hawaii was no stranger to a female governor, since Princess Keʻelikōlani (Kaʻiulani&#x27;s godmother) had held the position from 1855 to 1874. During her tenure, Likelike visited all of the island&#x27;s districts and had a special affinity for Kona and Hilo.
In April 1880, the legislature of the Kingdom appropriated an annual allowance of $8,000 (a $5,000 increase from her salary as governor) for Likelike &quot;provided she resigns the office of Governess of Hawaii&quot;. She had resigned her position by September 1880, and Princess Victoria Kinoiki Kekaulike (Queen Kapiʻolani&#x27;s younger sister) was appointed her successor on September 2 of that year. The 1882 legislative session increased her annual salary to $12,000 and appropriate $5,000 for her seven year-old daughter Princess Kaʻiulani.

=== Philanthropy ===
Likelike was involved in a number of philanthropic projects. On February 19, 1874, she created and organized the Hui Hooulu a Hoola La Hui of Kalakaua I, a charity of which she was its first president. Organized one week after her brother&#x27;s ascension to the throne, it took its name from his motto (&quot;Hoʻoulu Lāhui&quot;; &quot;to increase, restore, re-establish and advance the &quot;lāhui&quot; [people]&quot;). The organization provided assistance for the needy, including financial help, clothing, medical care or shelter, food, and family burials. Likelike helped her sister to found the Liliʻuokalani Educational Society, an organization &quot;to interest the Hawaiian ladies in the proper training of young girls of their own race whose parents would be unable to give them advantages by which they would be prepared for the duties of life&quot;, in 1886. She led one division of the organization, and Liliʻuokalani led the other. It supported the education of Hawaiian girls at Likelike&#x27;s alma mater, Kawaiahaʻo Seminary for Girls, and Kamehameha School. After Likelike&#x27;s death, Liliʻuokalani assumed full leadership of the organization.

== Travels to Australia and the United States ==
Likelike traveled abroad three times during her marriage. She visited Auckland, Sydney and Melbourne from August to December 1871 with her husband on their extended honeymoon, and met colonial governors and officials. In 1877, mourning the death of her brother Leleiohoku, she traveled to San Francisco for her health and returned to Honolulu on the steamer &quot;Likelike&quot; on its first voyage between California and Hawaii. Likelike revisited San Francisco in 1884 with Hawaiian banker Charles Reed Bishop and Liliʻuokalani&#x27;s &quot;hānai&quot; sister, Bernice Pauahi Bishop; Bernice was going to the city to undergo surgery for breast cancer, of which she later died. Their visit coincided with the arrival of Queen Marau, wife of King Pōmare V of Tahiti, who was en route to Paris. Before her death, Likelike was planning to travel to Monterey with Kaʻiulani for their health.

== Death and state funeral ==
She had been in failing health for months, but her doctors only advised fresh air and a change of scenery. Likelike became weaker, and was advised to get &quot;more nourishment&quot;. In mid-January 1887, a large school of red &quot;āweoweo&quot; fish was seen off the coast of the island of Hawaii, an omen in native Hawaiian beliefs that foretold the death of a member of royalty. At 5:15 p.m. on February 2, 1887, Likelike died of unknown causes at age 36.

Rumors circulated in Hawaii&#x27;s Euro-American (&quot;haole&quot;) community that she had died of fear due to superstition or had been &quot;prayed&quot; to death by a powerful &quot;kahuna ʻanāʻanā&quot;, or that she sacrificed her life to the goddess Pele to stop the 1887 eruption of Mauna Loa. According to her medical advisors however, they stated that &quot;If Princess Likelike had taken sufficient nourishment there was no reason why she should not have recovered strength.&quot;

According to Hawaiian legend, Likelike asked to see Kaʻiulani on her deathbed, and during her last moments, she prophesied that Kaʻiulani would leave Hawaii for a long time, never marry and never become queen. Kaʻiulani was educated in England from 1889 to 1897. She was declared heir apparent to the Hawaiian throne during the reign of her aunt, Queen Liliʻuokalani (). After the 1893 overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom, Kaʻiulani traveled from London to Washington, D.C. and convinced U.S. President Grover Cleveland to attempt to restore the monarchy. Cleveland sent Commissioner James Henderson Blount to investigate the overthrow and try, unsuccessfully, to restore the queen. Kaʻiulani returned to Hawaii in 1897, and saw the annexation of the Hawaiian Islands by the United States on August 12, 1898. She died of rheumatism at ʻĀinahau on March 6, 1899.

=== Funeral and burial ===

Native Hawaiian protocol dictated that the body of an &quot;aliʻi&quot; could only be moved after midnight following death, and had to be interred on the sabbath. In accordance with those beliefs, Likelike&#x27;s body was moved sometime after midnight on February 3 and arrived at ʻIolani Palace around . She was placed on a catafalque in the throne room, where she lay in state until the following afternoon. The princess was covered by a satin shroud, with &quot;kāhili&quot; wavers on both sides. A private viewing was provided for the royal family and government dignitaries before a public viewing, and government offices were closed. Likelike&#x27;s funeral was weeks later, after her body was embalmed and details of the procession were finalized.

The funeral was held in the throne room on Sunday, February 27. The &quot;kāhili&quot; bearers had waved continuously since February 3, and &quot;no hula had marred the solemnity&quot;. Bishop Willis and Rev. Alexander Macintosh conducted daily services during the 24-day period. A large funeral procession followed, whose participants were mostly native Hawaiian. Likelike was buried in the Royal Mausoleum at Mauna ʻAla. Her coffin was placed at the head of the main mausoleum, in the center of a row of other coffins. Photographers and a sketch artist recorded the event.

Likelike&#x27;s funeral cost $30,337.54 in Hawaiian dollars (), prompting an investigation. The legislative finance committee studied past funeral expenses for Hawaiian royals, and concluded that the costs &quot;are unprecedented in the history of state funerals in this country&quot; and was utter recklessness, lawlessness and lack of proper authorization in the expenditures incurred&quot;. About $22,000 of the total cost was for clothing the over 1,600 mourners. The committee recommended that the legislature approve a payment of $10,772.71, with the remainder to be paid by the trustees of the king&#x27;s estate. The previous state funeral, for Queen Dowager Emma in 1885, cost $5,965.98; four years later, the state funeral of Kalākaua had greater financial oversight and cost $21,442.

In a June 24, 1910, ceremony officiated by Likelike&#x27;s sister, Queen Liliʻuokalani, the remains of the deceased members of the Kalākaua dynasty were transferred to the underground Kalākaua Crypt after the main mausoleum was converted into a chapel. The niche bearing her remains, inscribed &quot;H.R.H. Like Like | Born 1835–Died 1887&quot;, is next to the niches for her daughter Kaʻiulani and Cleghorn (who died shortly after the crypt was completed).

== Musical compositions ==

Likelike was taught music from childhood and learned to play piano, guitar and ukulele. An early part of the entourage of her sister, Liliʻuokalani, music defined their social life in the royal circle. In 1877, Liliʻuokalani composed &quot;Aloha ʻOe&quot; about the parting of two lovers in Maunawili; later historians have speculated that the song was about Likelike and an unknown man. &quot;Sanoe&quot; (another royal composition by Likelike&#x27;s lady-in-waiting, Elizabeth Keawepoʻoʻole Sumner, and Liliʻuokalani) alludes to a secret love affair between an unknown man and a married woman at the royal court.

The two sisters founded a royal choral group, Hui Himeni Kaohuokalani (the Kaohuokalani Singing Club or Kaohuokalani Singing Association), early in their brother&#x27;s reign. They participated in choral competitions with groups founded by their brothers. The group composed a number of &quot;kanikau&quot; (dirges) for the funeral of Princess Likelike in 1887, including songs by Liliʻuokalani and ladies-in-waiting Kapoli Kamakau and Eliza Wood Holt. Kamakau composed &quot;Imi Ia Ka Lani&quot; (&quot;The Heavenly One Is Sought&quot;) as a tribute to Likelike at her death.
Few of Likelike&#x27;s compositions survive, compared to those of her siblings. She signed many of her &quot;mele&quot; (songs) with the name &quot;Kapili&quot;. Notable surviving compositions include &quot;ʻÂinahau&quot; (an ode to her home, where she composed most of her works) and &quot;Kuʻu Ipo Ika Heʻe Pue One&quot; (&quot;My Sweetheart&quot;), also known as &quot;Ka ʻOwē A Ke Kai&quot;, which Kanahele said was &quot;written for a sweetheart she never married&quot;. Other songs included &quot;Maikaʻi Waipiʻo&quot; (&quot;Beautiful Waipiʻo&quot;, her daughter&#x27;s favorite), &quot;ʻAia Hiki Mai&quot; and &quot;Lei Ohaoha&quot;.

Likelike and her siblings are recognized by the Hawaiian Music Hall of Fame as Na Lani ʻEhā (The Heavenly Four) for their patronage and enrichment of Hawaii&#x27;s musical culture and history. According to Kanahele, Likelike is the least recognized of the four royals:
== Memorials and namesakes ==
Likelike Street, near the original ʻIolani Palace, was named in honor of the princess in 1874. After the construction of the second palace on the same spot, Likelike Gate (which faced Likelike Street) was named in her honor and used as a private entrance for members of the royal family.

The Hawaiian postal service issued one-cent, blue-on-green postage stamps with a portrait of Likelike in 1882. They were in use until 1894.

The steamship &quot;Likelike&quot;, named for the princess, was launched on August 2, 1877, from San Francisco and arrived in Honolulu on August 14. Sold to businessman Samuel Gardner Wilder and used for inter-island transport, it was wrecked in 1897 off the coast of Keawe‘ula on the island of Hawaii.

A window at St. Andrew&#x27;s Cathedral in Honolulu was dedicated to Likelike by her daughter, Kaʻiulani.
Several places in Hawaii are named after the princess, including Likelike Highway and Likelike Elementary School.

== Ancestry ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
===Books and journals===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Newspapers and online sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Hawaiian Princess Miriam Likelike, Mother of Crown Princess Kaiulani</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3331804" start="0" end="8" title="Likelike" label="Likelike"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="117" end="133" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324355" start="161" end="178" title="House of Kalākaua" label="House of Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="196" end="204" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="223" end="228" title="Oahu" label="Oʻahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393017" start="259" end="277" title="Keohokālole" label="Analea Keohokālole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212818" start="282" end="298" title="Kapaʻakea" label="Caesar Kapaʻakea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726594" start="335" end="340" title="aliʻi" label="aliʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="428" end="434" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="533" end="550" title="Congregational church" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786513" start="634" end="658" title="Archibald Scott Cleghorn" label="Archibald Scott Cleghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277319" start="698" end="707" title="Kaʻiulani" label="Kaʻiulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931943" start="753" end="786" title="overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083961" start="827" end="835" title="ʻĀinahau" label="ʻĀinahau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589784" start="895" end="927" title="Governors of Hawaii (island)" label="Governor of the island of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q107288" start="1012" end="1025" title="Liliʻuokalani" label="Liliʻuokalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684552" start="1191" end="1218" title="Hawaiian Music Hall of Fame" label="Hawaiian Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394736" start="1222" end="1234" title="Na Lani ʻEhā" label="Na Lani ʻEhā"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="1407" end="1415" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="1433" end="1438" title="Oahu" label="Oʻahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393017" start="1443" end="1461" title="Keohokālole" label="Analea Keohokālole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212818" start="1466" end="1482" title="Kapaʻakea" label="Caesar Kapaʻakea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27901834" start="1577" end="1585" title="Likelike (wife of Kalanimoku)" label="Likelike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350598" start="1628" end="1638" title="Kalanimoku" label="Kalanimoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447891" start="1644" end="1667" title="Kekāuluohi" label="Miriam Auhea Kekāuluohi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460568" start="1669" end="1679" title="Kuhina Nui" label="Kuhina Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q499103" start="1713" end="1721" title="Lunalilo" label="Lunalilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q455795" start="1781" end="1795" title="Kamehameha III" label="Kamehameha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q470398" start="1837" end="1850" title="Kamehameha IV" label="Kamehameha IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696910" start="1908" end="1917" title="ʻAikanaka (father of Keohokālole)" label="ʻAikanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q743219" start="1967" end="1978" title="Kamanawa II" label="Kamanawa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015299" start="2011" end="2020" title="Kamokuiki" label="Kamokuiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726594" start="2051" end="2056" title="aliʻi" label="aliʻi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2093" end="2113" title="Lineal descendant#Collateral descendant" label="collateral relatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q601505" start="2130" end="2149" title="House of Kamehameha" label="House of Kamehameha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382362" start="2223" end="2248" title="Keaweʻīkekahialiʻiokamoku" label="Keaweʻīkekahialiʻiokamoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382360" start="2278" end="2289" title="Keawe-a-Heulu" label="Keaweaheulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6357079" start="2294" end="2306" title="Kameʻeiamoku" label="Kameʻeiamoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q214910" start="2344" end="2356" title="Kamehameha I" label="Kamehameha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="2399" end="2415" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247067" start="2495" end="2503" title="Kamanawa" label="Kamanawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353083" start="2619" end="2636" title="James Kaliokalani" label="James Kaliokalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="2638" end="2652" title="Kalākaua" label="David Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q107288" start="2654" end="2667" title="Liliʻuokalani" label="Liliʻuokalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767129" start="2669" end="2683" title="Anna Kaʻiulani" label="Anna Kaʻiulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348023" start="2685" end="2698" title="Kaʻiminaʻauao" label="Kaʻiminaʻauao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520848" start="2704" end="2730" title="Leleiohoku II" label="William Pitt Leleiohoku II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965051" start="2748" end="2753" title="hānai" label="hānai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260402" start="2978" end="2982" title="Kona District, Hawaii" label="Kona"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="3000" end="3006" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091929" start="3058" end="3074" title="Lawrence McCully" label="Lawrence McCully"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541229" start="3154" end="3169" title="George Kanahele" label="George Kanahele"/>
<link wikidata="Q216258" start="3189" end="3193" title="Hilo, Hawaii" label="Hilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="3208" end="3216" title="Windward and leeward" label="windward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3472" end="3484" title="Kalaʻimamahu" label="Kalaʻimamahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q26208914" start="3550" end="3586" title="Miriam Auhea Kekāuluohi Crowningburg" label="Miriam Auhea Kekāuluohi Crowningburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q372723" start="3655" end="3669" title="Clarice Taylor" label="Clarice Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052499" start="3727" end="3737" title="Queen Emma of Hawaii" label="Queen Emma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681149" start="3905" end="3919" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Honolulu" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q697595" start="3935" end="3986" title="Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary" label="Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052335" start="4099" end="4138" title="Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace" label="Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397288" start="4192" end="4213" title="Sacred Hearts Academy" label="Sacred Hearts Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878263" start="4217" end="4224" title="Kaimuki, Hawaii" label="Kaimuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="4266" end="4283" title="Congregational church" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840781" start="4455" end="4484" title="Mid-Pacific Institute" label="Kawaiahaʻo Seminary for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q497096" start="4541" end="4556" title="Hiram Bingham I" label="Hiram Bingham I"/>
<link wikidata="Q85358775" start="4749" end="4774" title="Edward Kamakau Lilikalani" label="Edward Kamakau Lilikalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441716" start="5023" end="5040" title="John Owen Dominis" label="John Owen Dominis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55590142" start="5154" end="5170" title="Albert Kūnuiākea" label="Albert Kūnuiākea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437678" start="5262" end="5268" title="Kalama" label="Kalama"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="5421" end="5446" title="Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632534" start="5461" end="5468" title="HMS Galatea (1859)" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q277768" start="5572" end="5577" title="lūʻau" label="lūʻau"/>
<link wikidata="Q254861" start="5585" end="5592" title="Waikiki" label="Waikiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786513" start="5973" end="5997" title="Archibald Scott Cleghorn" label="Archibald Scott Cleghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="6018" end="6026" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="6134" end="6142" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052213" start="6212" end="6239" title="Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew (Honolulu)" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972130" start="6260" end="6276" title="Washington Place" label="Washington Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755854" start="6578" end="6594" title="The Pacific Club" label="The Pacific Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277319" start="6648" end="6657" title="Kaʻiulani" label="Kaʻiulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q15693885" start="6902" end="6915" title="Alfred Willis" label="Alfred Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649060" start="6923" end="6936" title="pro-cathedral" label="pro-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447923" start="6989" end="7006" title="Keʻelikōlani" label="Ruth Keʻelikōlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q254861" start="7084" end="7091" title="Waikiki" label="Waikīkī"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083961" start="7286" end="7294" title="ʻĀinahau" label="ʻĀinahau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726594" start="7769" end="7774" title="aliʻi" label="aliʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116896" start="8443" end="8468" title="Church of Hawaii" label="Anglican Church of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322857" start="8841" end="8857" title="Kapiʻolani" label="Queen Kapiʻolani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="9133" end="9147" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="9751" end="9758" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="9781" end="9791" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="9814" end="9830" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879655" start="10101" end="10115" title="Kealakekua Bay" label="Kealakekua Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q27657908" start="10132" end="10162" title="List of diplomats from the United Kingdom to Hawaii" label="British Commissioner to Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10163" end="10182" title="James Hay Wodehouse" label="James Hay Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589784" start="10617" end="10625" title="Governors of Hawaii (island)" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411912" start="10626" end="10637" title="Samuel Kipi" label="Samuel Kipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260402" start="11105" end="11109" title="Kona District, Hawaii" label="Kona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11114" end="11118" title="Hilo, Hawaii#History" label="Hilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896145" start="11139" end="11165" title="Legislature of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="legislature of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926816" start="11400" end="11426" title="Victoria Kinoiki Kekaulike" label="Victoria Kinoiki Kekaulike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11803" end="11842" title="Hui Hooulu a Hoola La Hui of Kalakaua I" label="Hui Hooulu a Hoola La Hui of Kalakaua I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12292" end="12325" title="Liliʻuokalani Educational Society" label="Liliʻuokalani Educational Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356550" start="12748" end="12765" title="Kamehameha Schools" label="Kamehameha School"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="12975" end="12983" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="12985" end="12991" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="12996" end="13005" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081969" start="13397" end="13416" title="Charles Reed Bishop" label="Charles Reed Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878199" start="13468" end="13489" title="Bernice Pauahi Bishop" label="Bernice Pauahi Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216399" start="13626" end="13637" title="Queen Marau" label="Queen Marau"/>
<link wikidata="Q879812" start="13652" end="13660" title="Pōmare V" label="Pōmare V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028514" start="13664" end="13670" title="Kingdom of Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528549" start="14052" end="14071" title="Priacanthus meeki" label="&amp;quot;āweoweo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651514" start="14342" end="14347" title="haole" label="haole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133063" start="14541" end="14545" title="Pele (deity)" label="Pele"/>
<link wikidata="Q159762" start="14575" end="14584" title="Mauna Loa" label="Mauna Loa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931943" start="15163" end="15196" title="overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="15278" end="15294" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680545" start="15359" end="15381" title="James Henderson Blount" label="James Henderson Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="15596" end="15606" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322950" start="15820" end="15827" title="sabbath" label="sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q423525" start="15947" end="15961" title="ʻIolani Palace" label="ʻIolani Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q930343" start="15991" end="16001" title="catafalque" label="catafalque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365316" start="16112" end="16118" title="shroud" label="shroud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784366" start="16131" end="16137" title="kāhili" label="kāhili"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574219" start="16814" end="16843" title="Royal Mausoleum (Mauna ʻAla)" label="Royal Mausoleum at Mauna ʻAla"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="16891" end="16900" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328868" start="17041" end="17056" title="Hawaiian dollar" label="Hawaiian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315782" start="17717" end="17742" title="Death and two state funerals of Kalākaua" label="state funeral of Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608376" start="17978" end="17992" title="List of burials at the Royal Mausoleum (Mauna ʻAla)" label="Kalākaua Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="18360" end="18367" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246484" start="18521" end="18530" title="Aloha ʻOe" label="Aloha ʻOe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477478" start="18572" end="18581" title="Maunawili, Hawaii" label="Maunawili"/>
<link wikidata="Q20809666" start="18750" end="18780" title="Elizabeth Sumner" label="Elizabeth Keawepoʻoʻole Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q83298816" start="19314" end="19328" title="Kapoli Kamakau" label="Kapoli Kamakau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684552" start="20165" end="20192" title="Hawaiian Music Hall of Fame" label="Hawaiian Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394736" start="20196" end="20208" title="Na Lani ʻEhā" label="Na Lani ʻEhā"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20860" end="20880" title="Likelike (steamer)" label="&amp;quot;Likelike&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411463" start="21015" end="21036" title="Samuel Gardner Wilder" label="Samuel Gardner Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21114" end="21123" title="Keawe‘ula" label="Keawe‘ula"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="21141" end="21147" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239779" start="21321" end="21337" title="Hawaii Route 63" label="Likelike Highway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21342" end="21368" title="Likelike Elementary School" label="Likelike Elementary School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706338" wikidata="Q3447923" url="?curid=706338" title="Keʻelikōlani">
<text>Ruth Ke‘elikōlani, or sometimes written as Luka Ke‘elikōlani, also known as Ruth Ke‘elikōlani Keanolani Kanāhoahoa or Ruth Keanolani Kanāhoahoa Ke‘elikōlani (June 17, 1826 – May 24, 1883), was a member of the House of Kamehameha who served as Governor of the Island of Hawaiʻi and for a period, was the largest and wealthiest landowner in the Hawaiian Islands. Keʻelikōlani&#x27;s genealogy is controversial. Her mother&#x27;s identity has never been in question but her grandfather Pauli Kaōleiokū&#x27;s relationship to Kamehameha I is heavily disputed. While her father has been legally identified as early as 1864, disputes to that lineage continued as late as 1919. As one of the primary heirs to the Kamehameha family, Ruth became landholder of much of what would become the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Estate, funding the Kamehameha Schools.

Her name Keʻelikōlani means &quot;leaf bud of heaven&quot;.

==Birth, family and early life==
Keʻelikōlani&#x27;s mother was Kalani Pauahi who died on June 17, 1826, during childbirth after having married the man believed to be her father, Mataio Kekūanaōʻa on November 28, 1825. She was born at Pohukaina near the ʻIolani Palace and &quot;hānai&quot; adopted by Kaʻahumanu

===Maternal ancestry===
Kalani Pauahi, was the daughter of Pauli Kaōleiokū and Keouawahine. Kaōleiokū was one of the three sons of Kānekapōlei that rebelled against their half brother Kīwalaʻō and their uncle Kamehameha I when their father Kalaniʻōpuʻu died and left them no lands. The other two brothers were: Keōua Kūʻahuʻula who started the rebellion and Keōua Peʻeʻale who was speared to death. It was said that Kalani Pauahi was Kamehameha I&#x27;s granddaughter through her father Kaōleiokū however, in 1935 the Hawaiian Historical Society published their Forty-Third Annual Report (for 1934) with an article by archaeologist, John F.G. Stokes entitled; &quot;Kaoleioku, Paternity and Biographical Sketch&quot;, that Stokes believed, if correct, demonstrated that Pauli Kaōleiokū was not a son of Kamehameha l.
Kalani Pauahi&#x27;s mother Keouawahine was a daughter of Kauhiwawaeono, whose parents were Kekauhiwamoku and Haalou. Haalou was a daughter of Haae-a-Mahi who was also the father of Kamehameha I&#x27;s mother Kekuʻiapoiwa II.

Kalani Pauahi died from complications due to child birth. While many sources and writers differ on the date and reason, Francisco de Paula Marín had noted in his journal in 1826 the specific day Kalani Puahi died; &quot;17 June. Today died one of the Queens Craypaguaji (Kalanipauahi i.e., Pauahi)&quot;. Some years later John Papa ʻĪʻī wrote; &quot;The mother died in childbirth on June 17, 1826&quot;, a date that anthropologist Alexander Spoehr agrees with. However professor in Ethnic Studies at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, Noel Kent, gives the date of Keʻelikōlani&#x27;s birth as February 9, 1826, a four-month difference. According to Kristin Zambucka author of: &quot;The High Chiefess, Ruth Keelikolani&quot; this was a date Keʻelikōlani supposedly celebrated herself. Professor Seth Archer in his 2018 publication; &quot;Sharks upon the Land: Colonialism, Indigenous Health, and Culture in Hawai&#x27;i&quot; lists Pauahi among those that died of a whooping cough outbreak.

===Paternal ancestry===
Keʻelikōlani&#x27;s genealogy has always been controversial and disputed as late as 1919. She is sometimes considered to be of &quot;poʻolua&quot; ancestry, a child of two fathers.

====Kahalaiʻa====
While Keʻelikōlani was the half sister of Kamehameha V, he had always considered her the daughter of Kahalaiʻa, a nephew of Kamehameha I, the son of the king&#x27;s half-brother Kalaʻimamahu and Kahakuhaʻakoi Wahinepio from Maui. Kahalaiʻa was a &quot;kahu&quot; (royal attendant) for Kamehameha II. Zambucka states that Kahalaiʻa was caring for Kalani Pauahi while her first husband, Kamehameha II was in England. According to Samuel Mānaiakalani Kamakau, Kalani Pauahi and Kamehamalu, both wives of Kamehameha II, fell in love with him. Kamakau states: &quot;Liholiho had once entertained the notion of disposing of Kahala-iʻa as Kamehameha had of Ka-niho-nui&quot;. In Kamakau&#x27;s version both Pauahi and Kinaʻu were with Kahalaiʻa when the king and queen&#x27;s remains returned in 1825 and that; &quot;&quot;Within a few years Pauahi became the wife of Keku-anaoʻa, and Kinaʻu of Kahala-iʻa. Pauahi was carrying Ruth Ke-ʻeli-kolani at the time, and that is why Ruth was said to be &quot;double headed&quot; (poʻokua) &gt; that is, a child of two fathers&quot;&quot;.

In May 1824 Kaumualiʻi, the aliʻi nui or &quot;supreme ruler&quot; of Kauaʻi died. Not long afterwards Hiram Bingham I, while on the island, announced that a solar eclipse would occur on June 26 at exactly 12:57PM. Bingham had hoped to use the event to explain it as a simple act of nature and not an omen. Many still saw it as a sign of impending war. Kahalaiʻa was appointed governor of the Island of Kauai and took command of the Russian fort with its fifty mounted canons and ordered armed guards to the tops of its walls. On August 8, 1824, the day after Kalanimoku held a failed council to annex the island, those dissatisfied with the land disbursement went to war. By the wars end Kahalaiʻa had been replaced as governor by Kaikioewa. After being replaced Kahalaiʻa returned to Honolulu and was made &quot;kahu hānai&quot; of Kauikeaoūli (Kamehameha III). John Papa ʻĪʻī states Kahalaiʻa was sent to Lahaina, Maui for his safety upon Kekūanaōʻa&#x27;s return as he had supposedly already stated his intention to wed Pauahi.

In 1909 Sheldon Dibble published the date of Kahalaiʻa&#x27;s death as 1826 however, he places Pauahi&#x27;s death in 1825. Also in 1906, Thomas G. Thrum&#x27;s; &quot;Hawaiian Annual&quot; lists Kahalaiʻa&#x27;s death as 1826 as well however, in their 1922 edition state that Kahalaiʻa had died during the battle. John Fawcett Pogue published an account of the rebellion written by Hawaiian students in his book; &quot;Moolelo of Ancient Hawaii&quot; in 1858. In 2002 Peter R. Mills clarified translations and conclusions from Charles W. Kenn about the writings in which Kenn describes a &quot;sacrifice&quot; interpreted as relating to Kahalaiʻa. Mills noted that the figure had not died during the battle and was not buried at the fort. Archer believed that Kahalaiʻa died of whooping cough in an outbreak in 1826 along with Kalani Pauahi. Kamakau mentions an outbreak of &quot;cough and bronchitis&quot; that killed several people including Pauahi and then goes on to discuss Kalanimoku and Kahalaiʻa&#x27;s death but not how they died. Kamakau only mentions that Boki took over as the young king&#x27;s &quot;kahu&quot; after Kahalaiʻa&#x27;s death.

====Kekūanaōʻa====
John Papa ʻĪʻī writes that, whether or not Kekūanaōʻa had spoken of Pauahi before leaving for England, it was common knowledge that Kekūanaōʻa had taken Kalani Pauahi for himself immediately upon his return. ʻĪʻī states that the relationship may possibly have stemmed from &quot;illicit relations&quot; prior to the king&#x27;s death that remained hidden but on Kekūanaōʻa&#x27;s return the &quot;affair was evident&quot;.

Although her paternity was questionable, Mataio Kekūanaōʻa claimed her as his own natural child. He took her into his household after Kaʻahumanu&#x27;s death and included her in his will and inheritance. This made her the half-sister of King Kamehameha IV and King Kamehameha V and Princess Victoria Kamāmalu.

===Kaʻahumanu, Boki and the line of succession===
A dispute between Boki and Kaʻahumanu began in 1829 over the line of succession when a discussion overheard between the Queen-Regent Kaʻahumanu and Kekāuluohi was relayed back to Boki by a royal attendant. Kaʻahumanu had said that Keʻelikōlani could become ruler. Kaʻahumanu believed Kaōleiokū to be Kamehameha&#x27;s first child, and Pauahi being his daughter made Keʻelikōlani grandniece of Kauikeaouli. Kamakau says this is when Boki conceived plans to overthrow Kaʻahumanu. On June 20 Boki visited with Nahienaena and Kamehameha III and advised the king and his sister to conceive a child in order to disqualify any claims saying; &quot;the chiefs would not dare urge your grandniece as your possible successor!&quot; and then told the king what the attendant had said. When Kaʻahumanu and other&#x27;s including Kuakini and Hoapili were told of Boki&#x27;s actions they had harsh words toward Boki calling him; &quot;[T]he one girdled in Kamehameha&#x27;s intestines&quot;, a reference to Kahekili II&#x27;s hatred towards the king and Boki&#x27;s rumored paternity. They stated that Kaʻahumanu had a right to decide such things but he did not. This only infuriated the young man who believed himself to be Kauikeaouli&#x27;s main&quot; kahu&quot; or guardian, giving him the sole right to council the king as tradition had always given past guardians. Boki was held in high esteem by American and English consuls and felt encouraged in quartering soldiers, including some foreign white settlers, guns and ammunitions in Waikiki. When the news of the rebellion reached Kaʻahumanu most of the soldiers stayed with Boki but members of the church and others came to her aid. Kaʻahumanu was defiant and said that Boki would have to come there himself to kill her and her grandchildren, Keʻelikōlani and David Kamehameha. After hearing about Boki&#x27;s purpose Charles Kanaʻina and Kekūanaōʻa headed out on horseback to confront Boki but Kanaʻina became nervous and turned back, leaving Kekūanaōʻa, Keʻelikōlani&#x27;s father, to continue alone. He arrived to a huge gathering of armed people including Boki and his men. When the crowd saw Kekūanaōʻa they shouted out his name and fell silent. He took Boki off to speak with him about his plans to kill Kaʻahumanu. Boki admitted his jealousy of the queen&#x27;s sway over Kamehameha III but was persuaded to end the dispute and return to his home peacefully.

====Line of succession by Order in Council with Kamehameha III====
On June 29, 1844, an &quot;Order in Council of His Majesty King Kamehameha III&quot; designated the 15 eligible royals with rights to the throne. This small pool of individuals became pre-emptory heirs in the absence of a constitutional appointment of a successor to the throne. A full list with one additional name was printed in 1847 by the Polynesian, the official government journal; Moses Kekuaiwa, Jane Loeau, Alexander Liholiho, Abigail Maheha, James Kaliokalani, Mary Paaaina, David Kalakaua, Lydia Kamakaeha, Lot Kamehameha, Bernice Pauahi, William C. Lunalilo, Elizabeth Kekaaniau, Peter Y. Kaeo, Emma Rooke, William Kinau Pitt, Victoria Kamamalu. Keʻelikōlani was not included in this line of succession, although her son is.

==Defender of tradition==
Ruth was a staunch defender of ancient Hawaiian traditions and customs. While the kingdom became Christianized, Anglicized, and urbanized, she preferred to live as a noble woman of antiquity. While her royal estates were filled with elegant palaces and mansions built for her family, she chose to live in a large traditional stone-raised grass house. While she understood English and spoke it well, she used the Hawaiian language exclusively, requiring English-speakers to use a translator. Although trained in the Christian religion and given a Christian name, she honored practices considered pagan, such as patronage of chanters and hula dancers.
She continued to worship the traditional gods and various &quot;aumakua&quot;, or ancestral spirits. When Mauna Loa erupted in 1880, threatening the city of Hilo with a lava flow, her intercession with the goddess Pele was credited by Hawaiians with saving the city. When the ruling monarchs asked her to pose for official photographs, she often refused. Only a dozen photographs of Ruth are known to exist.

Considered a beauty in her youth, she gained weight as she grew older, and a surgery for nasal infection disfigured her nose, although rumors circulated that it was her second husband Davis who had broken her nose in one of their many fights.
She came to adopt some modern ways, such as Victorian fashions in hairstyle and dresses. Christian missionaries caused Hawaiian royal women to become self-conscious about their Hawaiian looks. They were uncomfortable with their dark skin and large bodies which had been considered signs of nobility for centuries. No matter how Westernized their manners, they were seen as a &quot;Hawaiian squaw.&quot; By the last half of the 19th century, Hawaiian women were going in two different directions. Many European men married Hawaiian women they found exotic, favoring those who were thin and had pale complexions.

Ruth defied this ideal, weighing and standing over tall. Her broad features were accentuated by a nose flattened by surgery for an infection. To add on to her stature, listeners described Princess Ruth&#x27;s voice as a &quot;distant rumble of thunder.&quot; She rejected English and the Christian faith. The U.S. minister to Hawaiʻi Henry A. Peirce dismissed the princess as a &quot;woman of no intelligence or ability.&quot; Many Westerners interpreted her clear defense of the traditional ways as backward and stupid.

==Government and business==
As the Governor of Hawaiʻi Island and heir to vast estates, she had more political power and wealth than most women in other parts of the world. For example, American women could not even vote at the time. Ruth&#x27;s assertiveness were characteristic of her ancestors. She hired businessmen such as Sam Parker and Rufus Anderson Lyman who were descended from Americans to help her adapt to the new rules for land ownership. Instead of selling the land, she offered long-term leases, which encouraged settlers to start successful family farms, and gave her a secure income. She was a shrewd businesswoman. In a notorious case, she sold Claus Spreckels her claims to the Crown Lands for $10,000. The lands were worth $750,000, but she knew her claims to them were worthless, since it had been decided in previous court cases that the lands were only entitled to whoever held the office of monarch.

In 1847 she was appointed to the Privy Council of Kamehameha III, and served from 1855 through 1857 in the House of Nobles. January 15, 1855, she was appointed to be the Royal Governor of the Island of Hawaiʻi, where she served until March 2, 1874.
When her last half-brother Kamehameha V died in 1872 leaving no heir to the throne, her controversial family background prevented her from being a serious contender to be monarch herself. Although she was considered a member of the royal family, along with Queen Emma and the king&#x27;s father. In 1874, King Lunalilo then died, and the legislature elected Kalākaua as king, the first to be not descended from Kamehameha I. Keʻelikōlani was not declared as a member of the royal family, merely as a high chiefess by the new king. The young William Pitt Leleiohoku was named Crown prince, and history might have been very different if he had lived past 1877 and became a wealthy king. Instead, the increased reliance of the royal family on the treasury and governmental pensions to fund their lavish expenses is generally considered one factor that led to the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii in 1893.

She died at Huliheʻe Palace, Kailua Kona, Hawaiʻi Island, at 9am on May 24, 1883.
Later sources claimed she died on May 15. Her body was shipped back to Honolulu for a royal funeral, and she was buried in the Kamehameha Crypt of the Royal Mausoleum, Mauna ʻAla, in Nuʻuanu Valley, Oahu. Her will had only one major bequest: to her cousin Princess Bernice Pauahi Bishop the elaborate mansion, Keōua Hale on Emma Street in Honolulu, as well as approximately of Kamehameha lands. This totaled nearly nine percent of the land in the Hawaiian Islands.

==Personal life and marriages==
Before the age of sixteen, she married her first husband High Chief William Pitt Leleiohoku I (1821–1848), Governor of Hawaiʻi, former husband of Princess Nāhiʻenaʻena, and son of High Chief William Pitt Kalanimoku (the Prime Minister of Kamehameha I) and his first wife, High Chiefess Kiliwehi. Soon after she married Leleiohoku, her 27-year-old husband died in a measles epidemic.

On June 2, 1856, she married her second husband, Isaac Young Davis (c. 1826–1882), son of George Hueu Davis and his wife Kahaʻanapilo Papa (therefore grandson of Isaac Davis). Standing at 6 ft 2 in, he was considered rather handsome by many including foreign visitors such as Lady Franklin and her niece Sophia Cracroft. Their marriage was an unhappy one, and they divorced in 1868. The early loss of their son did not help.

===Children===
She bore two sons, who both died young. John William Pitt Kīnaʻu, son of Leleiohoku, was born on December 21, 1842. He was taken away at an early age to attend the Royal School in Honolulu, and died September 9, 1859. Keolaokalani Davis, son of Isaac Young Davis was born in February 1862 and &quot;hānai&quot; (adopted) against his father&#x27;s wishes to Princess Bernice Pauahi Bishop. He died on August 29, 1863, aged one year and 6 months.

Her adopted son, called Leleiohoku II after her first husband, was born January 10, 1854, became Crown Prince of Hawaii, but died April 9, 1877, when only 23 years old. On the death of her adopted son, she demanded that Kalākaua and his family relinquish all rights to the estates she had bequeathed their brother, and that they be returned to her by deed. Her relations with King Kalākaua were distant, although she had close friendships with his sister, Queen Liliʻuokalani, and their mother, Keohokalole.

She was godmother to Princess Kaʻiulani. At Kaʻiulani&#x27;s baptism, Ruth gifted of her land in Waikīkī where Kaʻiulani&#x27;s father Archibald Cleghorn built the ʻĀinahau Estate. Kaʻiulani gave Ruth the pen name of &quot;Mama Nui&quot; meaning &quot;great mother&quot;. Ruth insisted that the princess be raised to one day be fit to sit on the Hawaiian throne. Ruth&#x27;s death in 1883 was the first of many deaths that Kaʻiulani would witness in her short life.

===Personal heir to the Kamehameha line===
Keʻelikōlani was an heir to many of the Kamehameha Dynasty despite her controversial heritage beginning with much of the land holdings of her adopted mother Kaʻahumanu through her father who inherited his daughters holdings that were then passed on to Keʻelikōlani. She was also the sole heir of Kamehameha V and a 1/9 heir to the estate of Charles Kanaʻina&#x27;s estate along with her cousin Bernice Pauahi Bishop that inherited two - 1/9th shares because her genealogy.

==Legacy==
During her life Ruth was considered the wealthiest woman in the islands, owning a considerable amount of land inherited from Kamehameha V and her first husband Leleiohoku I. Her vast estate passed to her cousin Bernice Pauahi Bishop, with much of these lands becoming the endowment for Kamehameha Schools. On these lands downtown Honolulu, Hickam Air Force Base, part of Honolulu International Airport, Moana Hotel, Princess Kaʻiulani Hotel, Royal Hawaiian Hotel, among others, were built.

A documentary film was made of her life in 2004. As a tribute to her traditionalism, a version of the film was produced in the Hawaiian language. In March 2017, &quot;Hawaiʻi Magazine&quot; ranked her among a list of the most influential women in Hawaiian history.

==Ancestry==
==Honours==
* Dame Grand Cross of the Royal Order of Kamehameha I.

==See also==
*Huliheʻe Palace – Kailua-Kona home of Princess Ruth
*Keōua Hale – Palace of Princess Ruth (downtown Honolulu)
*Princess Ruth Keʻelikōlani Middle School – former palace of Keʻelikōlani

==Notes==
==Citations==
==References==
*
*
* Includes letters by Sofia Cracroft, Jane Franklin and Queen Emma of Hawaii.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3447923" start="0" end="17" title="Keʻelikōlani" label="Ruth Ke‘elikōlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447923" start="43" end="60" title="Keʻelikōlani" label="Luka Ke‘elikōlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447923" start="76" end="114" title="Keʻelikōlani" label="Ruth Ke‘elikōlani Keanolani Kanāhoahoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447923" start="118" end="156" title="Keʻelikōlani" label="Ruth Keanolani Kanāhoahoa Ke‘elikōlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q601505" start="209" end="228" title="House of Kamehameha" label="House of Kamehameha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589784" start="243" end="276" title="Governors of Hawaii (island)" label="Governor of the Island of Hawaiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="343" end="359" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356550" start="781" end="809" title="Kamehameha Schools" label="Bernice Pauahi Bishop Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350606" start="969" end="982" title="Kalanipauahi" label="Kalani Pauahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385397" start="1084" end="1101" title="Kekūanaōʻa" label="Mataio Kekūanaōʻa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1140" end="1149" title="ʻIolani Palace#Pohukaina and the House of Kamehameha" label="Pohukaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q232871" start="1207" end="1217" title="Kaʻahumanu" label="Kaʻahumanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472429" start="1284" end="1293" title="Pauli Kaōleiokū" label="Kaōleiokū"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454278" start="1350" end="1361" title="Kānekapōlei" label="Kānekapōlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454637" start="1403" end="1411" title="Kīwalaʻō" label="Kīwalaʻō"/>
<link wikidata="Q214910" start="1428" end="1440" title="Kamehameha I" label="Kamehameha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195887" start="1530" end="1546" title="Keōua Kūʻahuʻula" label="Keōua Kūʻahuʻula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636462" start="2179" end="2190" title="Haae-a-Mahi" label="Haae-a-Mahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385386" start="2245" end="2260" title="Kekuʻiapoiwa II" label="Kekuʻiapoiwa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819807" start="2383" end="2407" title="Francisco de Paula Marín" label="Francisco de Paula Marín"/>
<link wikidata="Q56750717" start="2694" end="2710" title="Alexander Spoehr" label="Alexander Spoehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="2767" end="2797" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134859" start="3230" end="3244" title="whooping cough" label="whooping cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q887354" start="3522" end="3534" title="Kamehameha V" label="Kamehameha V"/>
<link wikidata="Q214910" start="3604" end="3616" title="Kamehameha I" label="Kamehameha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959805" start="3675" end="3698" title="Wahinepio" label="Kahakuhaʻakoi Wahinepio"/>
<link wikidata="Q380341" start="3765" end="3778" title="Kamehameha II" label="Kamehameha II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411894" start="3908" end="3935" title="Samuel Kamakau" label="Samuel Mānaiakalani Kamakau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445732" start="3955" end="3965" title="Kamehamalu" label="Kamehamalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581779" start="4568" end="4578" title="Kaumualiʻi" label="Kaumualiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201026" start="4626" end="4632" title="Kauaʻi" label="Kauaʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q497096" start="4659" end="4674" title="Hiram Bingham I" label="Hiram Bingham I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350598" start="5116" end="5126" title="Kalanimoku" label="Kalanimoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q455795" start="5403" end="5417" title="Kamehameha III" label="Kamehameha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012971" start="5464" end="5477" title="Lahaina, Maui" label="Lahaina, Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493478" start="5597" end="5611" title="Sheldon Dibble" label="Sheldon Dibble"/>
<link wikidata="Q104433262" start="6117" end="6132" title="Charles W. Kenn" label="Charles W. Kenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q470398" start="7425" end="7443" title="Kamehameha IV" label="King Kamehameha IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q887354" start="7448" end="7465" title="Kamehameha V" label="King Kamehameha V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395329" start="7470" end="7496" title="Victoria Kamāmalu" label="Princess Victoria Kamāmalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447891" start="7697" end="7707" title="Kekāuluohi" label="Kekāuluohi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071566" start="8056" end="8066" title="Nahienaena" label="Nahienaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q455795" start="8071" end="8085" title="Kamehameha III" label="Kamehameha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440968" start="8366" end="8373" title="Kuakini" label="Kuakini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874510" start="8378" end="8385" title="Hoapili" label="Hoapili"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346902" start="8543" end="8554" title="Kahekili II" label="Kahekili II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060949" start="9411" end="9427" title="Charles Kanaʻina" label="Charles Kanaʻina"/>
<link wikidata="Q10749897" start="10822" end="10836" title="ancient Hawaii" label="ancient Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="11163" end="11170" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="11203" end="11220" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q866636" start="11427" end="11431" title="hula" label="hula"/>
<link wikidata="Q159762" start="11547" end="11556" title="Mauna Loa" label="Mauna Loa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216258" start="11598" end="11602" title="Hilo, Hawaii" label="Hilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133063" start="11647" end="11659" title="Pele (deity)" label="goddess Pele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717018" start="13039" end="13054" title="Henry A. Peirce" label="Henry A. Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="13274" end="13288" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaiʻi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412349" start="13555" end="13565" title="Samuel Parker (Hawaii politician)" label="Sam Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377995" start="13570" end="13590" title="Rufus Anderson Lyman" label="Rufus Anderson Lyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q214228" start="13891" end="13906" title="Claus Spreckels" label="Claus Spreckels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057035" start="13925" end="13936" title="Ceded lands" label="Crown Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768149" start="14186" end="14199" title="Privy Council of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896145" start="14260" end="14275" title="Legislature of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="House of Nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589784" start="14323" end="14362" title="Governors of Hawaii (island)" label="Royal Governor of the Island of Hawaiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q887354" start="14429" end="14441" title="Kamehameha V" label="Kamehameha V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052499" start="14659" end="14669" title="Queen Emma of Hawaii" label="Queen Emma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060949" start="14678" end="14696" title="Charles Kanaʻina" label="king&amp;#x27;s father"/>
<link wikidata="Q499103" start="14707" end="14720" title="Lunalilo" label="King Lunalilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="14977" end="14989" title="Crown prince" label="Crown prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931943" start="15262" end="15296" title="Overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q627970" start="15336" end="15347" title="Kailua-Kona, Hawaii" label="Kailua Kona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574219" start="15540" end="15555" title="Royal Mausoleum (Mauna ʻAla)" label="Royal Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878199" start="15654" end="15675" title="Bernice Pauahi Bishop" label="Bernice Pauahi Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398621" start="15699" end="15709" title="Keōua Hale" label="Keōua Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520845" start="15955" end="15980" title="Leleiohoku I" label="William Pitt Leleiohoku I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071566" start="16033" end="16054" title="Nahienaena" label="Princess Nāhiʻenaʻena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350598" start="16078" end="16101" title="Kalanimoku" label="William Pitt Kalanimoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="16252" end="16259" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16361" end="16378" title="George Hueu Davis" label="George Hueu Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076220" start="16433" end="16444" title="Isaac Davis (advisor)" label="Isaac Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q467646" start="16547" end="16560" title="Jane Franklin" label="Lady Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016939" start="16752" end="16776" title="John William Pitt Kinau" label="John William Pitt Kīnaʻu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374793" start="16876" end="16888" title="Royal School (Hawaii)" label="Royal School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16930" end="16948" title="Keolaokalani Davis" label="Keolaokalani Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965051" start="17011" end="17016" title="hānai" label="hānai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878199" start="17078" end="17099" title="Bernice Pauahi Bishop" label="Bernice Pauahi Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520848" start="17182" end="17195" title="Leleiohoku II" label="Leleiohoku II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393017" start="17653" end="17664" title="Keohokālole" label="Keohokalole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277319" start="17688" end="17706" title="Kaʻiulani" label="Princess Kaʻiulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q254861" start="17764" end="17771" title="Waikiki" label="Waikīkī"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786513" start="17802" end="17820" title="Archibald Scott Cleghorn" label="Archibald Cleghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083961" start="17831" end="17839" title="ʻĀinahau" label="ʻĀinahau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060949" start="18518" end="18534" title="Charles Kanaʻina" label="Charles Kanaʻina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520845" start="18822" end="18834" title="Leleiohoku I" label="Leleiohoku I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878199" start="18873" end="18894" title="Bernice Pauahi Bishop" label="Bernice Pauahi Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356550" start="18948" end="18966" title="Kamehameha Schools" label="Kamehameha Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303462" start="18983" end="19000" title="downtown Honolulu" label="downtown Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617253" start="19002" end="19023" title="Hickam Air Force Base" label="Hickam Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q531178" start="19033" end="19063" title="Daniel K. Inouye International Airport" label="Honolulu International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976838" start="19065" end="19076" title="Moana Hotel" label="Moana Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083961" start="19078" end="19102" title="ʻĀinahau" label="Princess Kaʻiulani Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q437610" start="19104" end="19124" title="Royal Hawaiian Hotel" label="Royal Hawaiian Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759084" start="19470" end="19497" title="Royal Order of Kamehameha I" label="Royal Order of Kamehameha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333366" start="19514" end="19529" title="Huliheʻe Palace" label="Huliheʻe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398621" start="19567" end="19577" title="Keōua Hale" label="Keōua Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15208475" start="19625" end="19665" title="Princess Ruth Keʻelikōlani Middle School" label="Princess Ruth Keʻelikōlani Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q467646" start="19780" end="19793" title="Jane Franklin" label="Jane Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052499" start="19798" end="19818" title="Queen Emma of Hawaii" label="Queen Emma of Hawaii"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706340" wikidata="Q7137357" url="?curid=706340" title="Paris Themmen">
<text>Paris Themmen (born June 25, 1959) is an American actor who started his career as a child actor. He is best known for his role as Mike Teevee in &quot;Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory&quot;. After leaving acting, he worked in business as a real estate broker and casting director.

==Early life==
Themmen was born on June 25, 1959, in Boston, Massachusetts, to Ivana Marburger Themmen and Harold B. Themmen, both classical musicians. Themmen&#x27;s mother was a composer for orchestras in the late 20th century. A guitar concerto of hers was in final contention for the 1982 Kennedy Center Friedheim Award. Themmen&#x27;s father, a graduate of the New England Conservatory of Music, was a clarinetist and librarian for the American Ballet Theatre, and also played for the Boston Pops Orchestra.

==Career==

===Child actor===
Themmen appeared in radio and TV commercials, voice-overs and theater performing on Broadway in &quot;Mame&quot; with Ann Miller in 1967 and in &quot;The Rothschilds&quot; in 1970. In 1971, aged 11, he got his breakthrough role in &quot;Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory&quot; as Mike Teevee.

===Business careers===
Declaring a hiatus from acting at age 14 to &quot;just be a kid,&quot; Themmen went on to receive a B.F.A. in theatre from New York University. He founded Access International, a travel service that arranged Europe-bound charter flights for backpackers.

Following brief stints in real estate, film production, commercial casting, business representation at Walt Disney Imagineering, and a few other ventures, he now signs autographs at movie conventions, runs a photography business, and makes sporadic appearances in commercials, plays and TV shows.

===Film appearance===
Themmen&#x27;s adult acting appearances include &quot;Virtuoso&quot;, a 2000, sixth-season episode of the TV series &quot;Star Trek: Voyager&quot;, as a fawning fan. He was billed as a &quot;former child star&quot; in two 2008 episodes of the American game show &quot;Duel&quot;.

On May 4, 2011, Themmen appeared on the British television morning show &quot;Daybreak&quot;, alongside the other child actors from &quot;Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory&quot;: Peter Ostrum (Charlie Bucket), Julie Dawn Cole (Veruca Salt), Denise Nickerson (Violet Beauregarde) and Michael Böllner (Augustus Gloop). They made an additional 40th Anniversary reunion appearance on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Today Show&quot; eleven days later. He reunited with the partial &quot;Wonka&quot; cast again on the program in 2015.

On January 23, 2015, Themmen appeared on Ken Reid&#x27;s TV Guidance Counselor Podcast. The episode was recorded live in Wilmington, Massachusetts during North East ComicCon.

Themmen was a &quot;Jeopardy!&quot; contestant on March 13, 2018, finishing in second place. His wife, Nikki Grillos, previously appeared on the program in 2015, returning twice as a champion before being defeated on her third appearance.

==Personal life==
Themmen has been married to Nikki Grillos since 2014. Together, the couple currently resides in Los Angeles, California.

Themmen&#x27;s sister Allegra Themmen-Pigott (1967–2019) was a coloratura soprano opera singer and music therapist. His sister Tania Themmen is married to voice actress and voice director Susan Blu.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
===Film work===
===Theatre===
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7137357" start="0" end="13" title="Paris Themmen" label="Paris Themmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19238836" start="130" end="141" title="Mike Teevee" label="Mike Teevee"/>
<link wikidata="Q936327" start="151" end="190" title="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory" label="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="342" end="348" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="350" end="363" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q107719140" start="368" end="391" title="Ivana Marburger Themmen" label="Ivana Marburger Themmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389598" start="582" end="612" title="Kennedy Center Friedheim Award" label="Kennedy Center Friedheim Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347162" start="655" end="688" title="New England Conservatory of Music" label="New England Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q463443" start="730" end="753" title="American Ballet Theatre" label="American Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263983" start="779" end="800" title="Boston Pops Orchestra" label="Boston Pops Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061290" start="929" end="945" title="Mame (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Mame&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q241701" start="951" end="961" title="Ann Miller" label="Ann Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761593" start="983" end="998" title="The Rothschilds (musical)" label="The Rothschilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="1277" end="1296" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140930" start="1512" end="1536" title="Walt Disney Imagineering" label="Walt Disney Imagineering"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1783" end="1791" title="Virtuoso (Star Trek: Voyager)" label="Virtuoso"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1851" end="1869" title="Star Trek: Voyager" label="Star Trek: Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220168" start="1997" end="2001" title="Duel (American game show)" label="Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243094" start="2088" end="2096" title="Daybreak (2010 TV programme)" label="Daybreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q936327" start="2148" end="2187" title="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory" label="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q386564" start="2195" end="2207" title="Peter Ostrum" label="Peter Ostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189198" start="2226" end="2241" title="Julie Dawn Cole" label="Julie Dawn Cole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2243" end="2254" title="List of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory characters#Veruca Salt" label="Veruca Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023069" start="2257" end="2273" title="Denise Nickerson" label="Denise Nickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19238836" start="2275" end="2293" title="Violet Beauregarde" label="Violet Beauregarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q111443057" start="2299" end="2314" title="Michael Böllner" label="Michael Böllner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="2396" end="2399" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="2413" end="2423" title="Today (American TV program)" label="Today Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388348" start="2573" end="2581" title="Ken Reid (comedian)" label="Ken Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q951858" start="2653" end="2678" title="Wilmington, Massachusetts" label="Wilmington, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="2728" end="2737" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3062" end="3073" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3075" end="3085" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q58192" start="3151" end="3169" title="coloratura soprano" label="coloratura soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142726" start="3276" end="3285" title="Susan Blu" label="Susan Blu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706347" wikidata="Q974824" url="?curid=706347" title="Crystal Chappell">
<text>Crystal Elizabeth Chappell (born August 4, 1965) is an American actress who played Carly Manning on &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; from 1990 to 1993, Maggie Carpenter on &quot;One Life to Live&quot; from 1995 to 1997 and Olivia Spencer on &quot;Guiding Light&quot; from 1999 to 2009.

On October 2, 2009, she began reprising the role of Carly Manning. In May 2011, Chappell revealed that her contract was not renewed and her character ended its run in late summer. She has since appeared as Danielle Spencer on &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; in 2012 and 2013, as well as appearing in several online soap operas.

==Acting==
===Soap opera and serial roles===

Chappell&#x27;s first daytime appearance was as a day player on &quot;All My Children&quot; in 1989. In a July 2006 interview in industry magazine &quot;Soap Opera Digest&quot;, Chappell recalled actor Maurice Benard helping her through her first scenes. After a brief run on &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; in 1990, (she played a classmate of Eden&#x27;s who died of an ice overdose), Chappell was cast as Dr. Carly Manning Alamain (Katerina von Leuschner) on &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;. She portrayed the role from June 1990 to October 1993. Chappell and future husband Michael Sabatino met on &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;, where he played villain Lawrence Alamain.

Chappell was front-burner for most of her time on the show, first when her character Carly was featured in a romance with lead character Bo Brady (Peter Reckell, Robert Kelker-Kelly), and then in a complex, Byzantine storyline that featured her heretofore unknown secret identity as a European blueblood. The story culminated in a controversial plot that had Carly buried alive by Lawrence&#x27;s aunt Vivian (Louise Sorel). Chappell left after difficult contract negotiations and differences with head writer James E. Reilly.

Chappell&#x27;s next role was as Maggie Carpenter on &quot;One Life to Live&quot; from October 1995 through September 1997. The character of Maggie was created for Chappell, and she was again paired with a romantic lead on the show, Max Holden (James DePaiva). Her main storyline revolved around the tension between her burgeoning romantic relationship and her plans to profess vows as a nun. The character was eventually written out.

From July 2, 1999, to September 18, 2009, she played complex villainess/anti-heroine Olivia Spencer on &quot;Guiding Light&quot;. The role of Olivia was initially only intended to be a short-term role, but Chappell&#x27;s portrayal was so popular she was signed to a contract. She won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Daytime Drama for her work as Olivia in 2002 and was nominated again in the same category in 2005 and 2006. In 2007, she earned her first nomination in the Outstanding Lead Actress category.

In 2009, her character Olivia and Jessica Leccia&#x27;s character Natalia Rivera were involved in the hugely popular same sex pairing, &quot;Otalia&quot;, which saw two presumably heterosexual women move from sworn enemies to a close friendship, to eventually, after a long period of dramatic angst, admitting their feelings towards each other and becoming a couple. The coupling of Otalia was embraced by fans and critics alike, and named a &#x27;super-couple&#x27; by Nelson Branco, of &quot;TV Guide Canada&quot; and writes &quot;In an age of contrived and soulless couples, Olivia and Natalia’s burgeoning romance felt natural, innocent, and most importantly, real.&quot; The final episodes of &quot;Guiding Light&quot; saw Natalia and Olivia move in and start a family together.

Chappell returned to her role on &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; in September 2009 and begin airing in October.

In May 2011, her contract was not renewed and her character ended its run in late summer. Chappell joined the cast of &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; in 2012 as Danielle Spencer, who was featured in the show&#x27;s first gay storyline.

In 2009, Chappell co-created the soap opera web series &quot;&quot;. Chappell executive produces and stars in the series, which centers around the life of Gina (Chappell), a gay interior designer living in Venice Beach, California. Her &quot;Guiding Light&quot; former co-star Lecchia plays Gina&#x27;s ex-girlfriend, Ani. In 2011, Chappell won the first Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Class Short Format Daytime as a producer, and won again in 2014 for Outstanding New Approaches - Drama Series. Chappell also produced and starred opposite Lecchia in a pilot for a new soap web series called &quot;The Grove&quot; in 2013.

In 2014, Chappell executive produced the soap opera web series &quot;Beacon Hill&quot;, and co-starred as Claire Preston.

She was nominated for a 2015 Daytime Emmy for Outstanding New Approaches Drama Series as a producer, and was nominated for a 2015 Indie Series Award for Best Supporting Actress (Drama) for her role.

===Contract controversy===

In 2005, Chappell was ambivalent about re-signing to &quot;Guiding Light&quot;, as her storyline had ebbed considerably. Shortly after re-signing her contract, she was offered the front-burner role of Paige on &quot;One Life to Live&quot;. Since &quot;Guiding Light&quot; had recently cut a number of its actors from the cast roster, Chappell met with the producers to see if she could be released from her contract with &quot;Guiding Light&quot;. The show ultimately refused. In a July 2006 interview with &quot;Soap Opera Digest&quot;, Chappell indicated that, while there were no hard feelings, she wasn&#x27;t sure why the show was so eager to keep Olivia as a character, since the character had not been used much, particularly since the pairing of Olivia and Phillip ended. She has also made appearances in the prime time shows &quot;&quot;, &quot;Silk Stalkings&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;Burke&#x27;s Law&quot;.

==Personal life==
Chappell was born in Silver Spring, Maryland, and later moved to the Annapolis, Maryland area and attended Arundel High School. She subsequently attended the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. She was married to Scott Fanjoy from 1988 to 1991. She has been married to actor Michael Sabatino since January 6, 1997. They have two sons, Jacob Walker (born May 11, 2000) and Dylan Michael (born September 2, 2003). Chappell has described herself as attracted to both men and women, and has spoken in support of equal rights for members of the LGBT community.

==Filmography==


==Awards and nominations==
==See also==
*Olivia Spencer and Natalia Rivera Aitoro

==References==
==External links==
*CC and Friends - Crystal Chappell&#x27;s Website
*Crystal Chappell&#x27;s Twitter account page
*Crystal Chappell&#x27;s Facebook page
*Crystal Chappell en Lesbicanarias (Spanish)
*Venice the Series Facebook page
*Profile from SoapCentral 
*Crystal Chappell We Love Soaps page
*Venice the series website
*Crystal Chappell (official Periscope live channel)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974824" start="0" end="26" title="Crystal Chappell" label="Crystal Elizabeth Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q765358" start="83" end="96" title="Carly Manning" label="Carly Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="106" end="123" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11822378" start="149" end="165" title="Maggie Carpenter (One Life to Live)" label="Maggie Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="175" end="191" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881843" start="220" end="234" title="Olivia Spencer" label="Olivia Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="244" end="257" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q127163488" start="490" end="506" title="Danielle Spencer (fictional character)" label="Danielle Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="516" end="542" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q205474" start="736" end="751" title="All My Children" label="All My Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549799" start="819" end="836" title="Soap Opera Digest" label="Soap Opera Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792865" start="868" end="882" title="Maurice Benard" label="Maurice Benard"/>
<link wikidata="Q22272" start="948" end="961" title="Santa Barbara (TV series)" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q765358" start="1071" end="1084" title="Carly Manning" label="Carly Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="1127" end="1144" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371728" start="1235" end="1251" title="Michael Sabatino" label="Michael Sabatino"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="1265" end="1282" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351790" start="1314" end="1330" title="Lawrence Alamain" label="Lawrence Alamain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918374" start="1470" end="1478" title="Bo Brady" label="Bo Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q764720" start="1480" end="1493" title="Peter Reckell" label="Peter Reckell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346293" start="1495" end="1514" title="Robert Kelker-Kelly" label="Robert Kelker-Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2802996" start="1743" end="1755" title="Louise Sorel" label="Louise Sorel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874622" start="1843" end="1858" title="James E. Reilly" label="James E. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11822378" start="1894" end="1910" title="Maggie Carpenter (One Life to Live)" label="Maggie Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="1920" end="1936" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794871" start="2094" end="2104" title="Max Holden (One Life to Live)" label="Max Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132471" start="2106" end="2119" title="James DePaiva" label="James DePaiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881843" start="2382" end="2396" title="Olivia Spencer" label="Olivia Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="2406" end="2419" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="2584" end="2602" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260500" start="2869" end="2883" title="Jessica Leccia" label="Jessica Leccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088102" start="2976" end="2982" title="Otalia" label="Otalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="3855" end="3881" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q127163488" start="3899" end="3915" title="Danielle Spencer (character)" label="Danielle Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q526877" start="4019" end="4029" title="web series" label="web series"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="4149" end="4152" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21159998" start="4681" end="4692" title="Beacon Hill (web series)" label="Beacon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867167" start="4781" end="4820" title="42nd Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Awards" label="Outstanding New Approaches Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024501" start="4865" end="4883" title="Indie Series Award" label="Indie Series Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19263718" start="4888" end="4919" title="6th Indie Series Awards" label="Best Supporting Actress (Drama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="5022" end="5035" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="5179" end="5195" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549799" start="5476" end="5493" title="Soap Opera Digest" label="Soap Opera Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546341" start="5817" end="5831" title="Silk Stalkings" label="Silk Stalkings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822755" start="5863" end="5879" title="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law (1994 TV series)" label="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="5927" end="5950" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="5975" end="5994" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802235" start="6013" end="6032" title="Arundel High School" label="Arundel High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q735049" start="6064" end="6104" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore County" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371728" start="6187" end="6203" title="Michael Sabatino" label="Michael Sabatino"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="6452" end="6466" title="LGBT community" label="LGBT community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088102" start="6528" end="6568" title="Olivia Spencer and Natalia Rivera Aitoro" label="Olivia Spencer and Natalia Rivera Aitoro"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706350" wikidata="Q238810" url="?curid=706350" title="Antoaneta Stefanova">
<text>Antoaneta Stefanova (; born 19 April 1979) is a Bulgarian chess grandmaster and Women&#x27;s World Champion from 2004 to 2006. She has represented Bulgaria in the Chess Olympiad in 2000 and the Women&#x27;s Chess Olympiad since 1992.

== Early life and career ==
Stefanova was born in Sofia, the capital of Bulgaria. When she was four years old, she received chess lessons from her father, Andon Stefanov, a designing artist.

In 1989, Stefanova won the Girls U10 section at the World Youth Chess Festival in Aguadilla, Puerto Rico. In 1992, she played, at the age of 13, in her first Chess Olympiad in Manila, Philippines. In the same year she became European under-14 girls&#x27; champion at the European Youth Chess Championship in Rimavská Sobota. Stefanova won the Bulgarian women&#x27;s championship in 1995.

She tied for fourth place in the 4th Hawaii International Chess Tournament in 1997 scoring 7 points out of 10 games. Thanks to this result Stefanova achieved her first norm for the title Grandmaster. 
In January 1998, her FIDE rating broke into the top ten of women worldwide.
She played in the open section at the 2000 Chess Olympiad. 
In 2001, Stefanova tied for first place (finishing second on countback) in the 19th Andorra Open.

In June 2002, she won the 3rd European Individual Women&#x27;s Championship in Varna.
Stefanova was awarded the title of Grandmaster at the FIDE Presidential Board meeting in Doha in July 2002 as the ninth woman to ever have reached that rank.
At the end of July 2002, she won the Wismilak International Chess Tournament, a category 8 (average rating 2446) round-robin tournament in Surabaya, Indonesia, scoring 9½/11 points with a performance rating of 2750.

She participated in the 2004 Corus B tournament in Wijk aan Zee, the Netherlands: she scored 6/13 points with a rating performance of 2537, placing ninth out of fourteen participants. Stefanova became the tenth Women&#x27;s World Chess Champion in June 2004 by winning a 64-player knockout tournament held in Elista, Kalmykia, under the auspices of FIDE.

In 2008, she won the North Urals Cup in Krasnoturinsk, Russia, and the women&#x27;s individual rapid tournament of the 2008 World Mind Sports Games in Beijing. In 2012, Stefanova won the Women&#x27;s World Rapid Chess Championship.
She was the runner-up in the Women&#x27;s World Chess Championship 2012, losing to Anna Ushenina in the final on the tie-break. In 2017, Stefanova won two gold medals at the IMSA Elite Mind Games in Huai&#x27;an, China, in the women&#x27;s rapid chess event and the women&#x27;s blitz chess event.

In November 2023 the Bulgarian Women&#x27;s chess team with Stefanova as captain won the European championship.

== Notable game ==

Stefanova vs. GM P. Nikolic, Wijk aan Zee 2005. In a Catalan Opening, Stefanova castles queenside and gets a kingside attack. Nikolic resigns on Move 24.

== Political career ==
In 2021 she became a Member of Parliament for There Is Such A People and was nominated as the party&#x27;s candidate for the prime minister position.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Antoaneta Stefanova chess games and profile at Chess-DB.com
* Interview with GM Antoaneta Stefanova </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q238810" start="0" end="19" title="Antoaneta Stefanova" label="Antoaneta Stefanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="48" end="56" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="58" end="63" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q105269" start="64" end="75" title="Grandmaster (chess)" label="grandmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138456" start="80" end="107" title="Women&amp;#x27;s World Chess Championship" label="Women&amp;#x27;s World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q428303" start="163" end="177" title="Chess Olympiad" label="Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748940" start="194" end="221" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Chess Olympiad" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="285" end="290" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96141340" start="479" end="505" title="World Youth Chess Championship" label="World Youth Chess Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q397826" start="509" end="518" title="Aguadilla" label="Aguadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="520" end="531" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="603" end="609" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="611" end="622" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508305" start="698" end="731" title="European Youth Chess Championship" label="European Youth Chess Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q829812" start="735" end="750" title="Rimavská Sobota" label="Rimavská Sobota"/>
<link wikidata="Q402526" start="770" end="805" title="Bulgarian Chess Championship" label="Bulgarian women&amp;#x27;s championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="853" end="859" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829313" start="984" end="988" title="Norm (chess)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="1038" end="1042" title="FIDE" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q105955" start="1043" end="1049" title="Elo rating system" label="rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536380" start="1131" end="1150" title="34th Chess Olympiad" label="2000 Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="1237" end="1244" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812995" start="1282" end="1327" title="European Individual Chess Championship" label="European Individual Women&amp;#x27;s Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="1331" end="1336" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="1392" end="1396" title="FIDE" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="1427" end="1431" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1576" end="1586" title="Chess tournament#Tournament categories" label="category 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="1609" end="1631" title="round-robin tournament" label="round-robin tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11462" start="1635" end="1643" title="Surabaya" label="Surabaya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1684" end="1702" title="Glossary of chess#P" label="performance rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q161981" start="1742" end="1747" title="Tata Steel Chess Tournament" label="Corus"/>
<link wikidata="Q913649" start="1764" end="1776" title="Wijk aan Zee" label="Wijk aan Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031116" start="1984" end="2013" title="Women&amp;#x27;s World Chess Championship 2004" label="64-player knockout tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977" start="2022" end="2028" title="Elista" label="Elista"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953" start="2030" end="2038" title="Kalmykia" label="Kalmykia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="2062" end="2066" title="FIDE" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q155767" start="2109" end="2122" title="Krasnoturinsk" label="Krasnoturinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142411" start="2164" end="2169" title="Fast chess" label="rapid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657974" start="2188" end="2216" title="2008 World Mind Sports Games" label="2008 World Mind Sports Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="2220" end="2227" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2256" end="2299" title="Fast chess#World Championships since 2012" label="Women&amp;#x27;s World Rapid Chess Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209494" start="2330" end="2372" title="Women&amp;#x27;s World Chess Championship 2012" label="Women&amp;#x27;s World Chess Championship 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q82655" start="2384" end="2397" title="Anna Ushenina" label="Anna Ushenina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346616" start="2475" end="2496" title="World Mind Sports Games" label="IMSA Elite Mind Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q57818" start="2500" end="2512" title="Huai&amp;#x27;an" label="Huai&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142411" start="2580" end="2591" title="blitz chess" label="blitz chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q98098908" start="2957" end="2979" title="There Is Such A People" label="There Is Such A People"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706351" wikidata="Q1848615" url="?curid=706351" title="The Jamie Foxx Show">
<text>The Jamie Foxx Show is an American television sitcom created by Jamie Foxx and Bentley Kyle Evans for The WB. It premiered on August 28, 1996, and ended on January 14, 2001, with a total of 100 episodes over the course of five seasons.

Although the show was not a major success with the ratings due to The WB being a relatively new network, the show did help launch Foxx&#x27;s acting career while also relaunching Garrett Morris&#x27; career after his 1994 shooting. It also served as a launch pad for Beauvais, who later starred in ABC&#x27;s &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;.

==Synopsis==
Jamie King (Jamie Foxx) is an aspiring musician from Terrell, Texas, who has come to Los Angeles to pursue a career in entertainment. To support himself, he worked at his family&#x27;s hotel, the financially strapped King&#x27;s Tower, which is owned by his aunt and uncle, Aunt Helen and Uncle Junior King (Ellia English and Garrett Morris).

Among his co-workers during the series&#x27; run were the beautiful and intelligent front desk clerk Francesca &quot;Fancy&quot; Monroe (Garcelle Beauvais) and Jamie&#x27;s high-strung, stuffed-shirt, &quot;bourgeois&quot; nemesis/frenemy Braxton P. Hartnabrig (Christopher B. Duncan), who works as an accountant for the King&#x27;s Tower.

Jamie&#x27;s romantic overtures toward Fancy were mostly unrequited until the final two seasons, when the two began to tentatively date and eventually became engaged and finally married. Braxton, who generally served as the brunt of Jamie&#x27;s insults, was known to get in a few digs of his own as the series progressed, eventually becoming Jamie&#x27;s best friend and, at one point, roommate.

==Cast==

===Main===
* Jamie Foxx as Jamie Percy King
* Garcelle Beauvais as Francesca Danielle &quot;Fancy&quot; Monroe
* Christopher B. Duncan as Braxton P. Hartnabrig
* Ellia English as Aunt Helen King
* Garrett Morris as Uncle Junior King
* Andy Berman as Dennis, the bellboy (season 1, episodes 1–12)

===Recurring===
* Orlando Brown as Nelson (seasons 1–3)
* Suli McCullough as Mouse (seasons 4–5)
* Alex Thomas as Phil (seasons 4–5)
* Gladys Knight (season 1, episode 22, and season 5, episode 12) and Jo Marie Payton (season 3, episode 7) as Janice King, Jamie&#x27;s mother 
* Sherri Shepherd as Sheila Yarborough (seasons 4–5)
* Chris Spencer as Curtis (season 4)
* Susan Wood as Cameron (season 3)
* Alan F. Smith as Silas (season 3)
* Blake Clark as Bob Nelson (season 4)
* Kellita Smith as Cherise (seasons 2–3)
* Rhona Bennett as Nicole Evans (season 4)
* Karen Maruyama as Gloria (seasons 4–5)
* Billy Davis Jr. and Marilyn McCoo as William and Joan Monroe, Fancy&#x27;s parents (season 5)
* Scott Atkinson as Hawkins (season 4, episodes 4, 14, 18, and 22)
* Gerald LeVert as Charles Young, Jamie&#x27;s stepfather (season 3, episode 7, and season 5, episode 12)

==Episodes==

==Reruns and syndication==
The series aired in broadcast syndication distributed by Telepictures Distribution and Warner Bros. Domestic Television Distribution which reruns on CBS, Fox, UPN, and The WB or independent affiliates from 2000 to 2003. The series had reran weeknights at 7:00pm EST on New York City&#x27;s local UPN&#x27;s affiliation WWOR-TV replacing &quot;In the House&quot; until Fall 2003, when it was replaced with reruns of &quot;The King of Queens&quot;. Reruns of the series also aired on BET from 2005 to 2008 and started airing once again September 2009 to 2016, and as part of The CW Television Network&#x27;s The CW Daytime (along with reruns of &quot;The Wayans Bros.&quot;) block from September 2008 to September 2009. As of the 2010s, reruns also air on Centric, VH1 and MTV2 (until 2020, but as of 2020/2021 only MTV2 shows reruns of the series late nights), Reruns of the series also airs on Dabl. In Jamaica, the series aired on both major stations Television Jamaica and CVM Television. In Canada, the series aired on The Comedy Network, a Canadian specialty channel, and then, Much.

Several episodes of &quot;The Jamie Foxx Show&quot; were also available on AOL&#x27;s In2TV, which allowed Internet users to watch streamed or download high resolution episodes of various favorite classics. Since Time Warner&#x27;s June 2009 announcement that it would split from America Online, the episodes have been moved over to AOL Video.

On November 1, 2021, all episodes of &quot;The Jamie Foxx Show&quot; were made available for streaming on HBO Max.

==Home media==
Warner Home Video released season one of &quot;The Jamie Foxx Show&quot; on DVD in Region 1 on February 8, 2005.

Warner Archive has subsequently released seasons 2–4 on DVD. These are Manufacture-on-Demand (MOD) releases, available from Warner&#x27;s online store and Amazon. The fifth season has not been released on DVD.

== In popular culture ==
American producer Pi&#x27;erre Bourne used a clip from an early episode in the show as a producer tag, &quot;Yo Pi&#x27;erre, you wanna come out here?&quot; Most notably featured in the 2017 hit song Magnolia by American rapper Playboi Carti.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="46" end="52" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="64" end="74" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279281" start="79" end="97" title="Bentley Kyle Evans" label="Bentley Kyle Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="102" end="108" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q38006544" start="190" end="202" title="List of The Jamie Foxx Show episodes" label="100 episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916869" start="416" end="430" title="Garrett Morris" label="Garrett Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="535" end="538" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q609274" start="552" end="561" title="NYPD Blue" label="NYPD Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="595" end="605" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="622" end="630" title="musician" label="musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q979784" start="636" end="650" title="Terrell, Texas" label="Terrell, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="668" end="679" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365288" start="891" end="904" title="Ellia English" label="Ellia English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916869" start="909" end="923" title="Garrett Morris" label="Garrett Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q450219" start="1064" end="1081" title="Garcelle Beauvais" label="Garcelle Beauvais"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="1134" end="1143" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111887" start="1189" end="1210" title="Christopher B. Duncan" label="Christopher B. Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="1689" end="1699" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q450219" start="1722" end="1739" title="Garcelle Beauvais" label="Garcelle Beauvais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111887" start="1789" end="1810" title="Christopher B. Duncan" label="Christopher B. Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365288" start="1838" end="1851" title="Ellia English" label="Ellia English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916869" start="1873" end="1887" title="Garrett Morris" label="Garrett Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849062" start="1911" end="1922" title="Andy Berman" label="Andy Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043489" start="1938" end="1945" title="bellboy" label="bellboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q518206" start="1991" end="2004" title="Orlando Brown (actor)" label="Orlando Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636246" start="2031" end="2046" title="Suli McCullough" label="Suli McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q235952" start="2108" end="2121" title="Gladys Knight" label="Gladys Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q181422" start="2175" end="2190" title="Jo Marie Payton" label="Jo Marie Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q268549" start="2252" end="2267" title="Sherri Shepherd" label="Sherri Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108127" start="2305" end="2318" title="Chris Spencer (actor)" label="Chris Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q296537" start="2413" end="2424" title="Blake Clark" label="Blake Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385818" start="2452" end="2465" title="Kellita Smith" label="Kellita Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746776" start="2493" end="2506" title="Rhona Bennett" label="Rhona Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193117" start="2536" end="2550" title="Karen Maruyama" label="Karen Maruyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912436" start="2577" end="2592" title="Billy Davis Jr." label="Billy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6763597" start="2597" end="2610" title="Marilyn McCoo" label="Marilyn McCoo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2673" end="2687" title="Scott Atkinson" label="Scott Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383872" start="2740" end="2753" title="Gerald LeVert" label="Gerald LeVert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696754" start="2943" end="2968" title="Telepictures" label="Telepictures Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156642" start="2973" end="3018" title="Warner Bros. Television" label="Warner Bros. Domestic Television Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3035" end="3038" title="Columbia Broadcasting System" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="3040" end="3043" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="3045" end="3048" title="United Paramount Network" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="3054" end="3060" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="3182" end="3185" title="United Paramount Network" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044253" start="3205" end="3212" title="WWOR-TV" label="WWOR-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305660" start="3229" end="3241" title="In the House (TV series)" label="In the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q826594" start="3307" end="3325" title="The King of Queens" label="The King of Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="3368" end="3371" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="3459" end="3484" title="The CW Television Network" label="The CW Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720873" start="3492" end="3506" title="The CW Daytime" label="The CW Daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700828" start="3535" end="3551" title="The Wayans Bros." label="The Wayans Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q2876998" start="3640" end="3647" title="BET Her" label="Centric"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="3649" end="3652" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241928" start="3657" end="3661" title="MTV2" label="MTV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q85755491" start="3780" end="3784" title="Dabl" label="Dabl"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="3789" end="3796" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696961" start="3838" end="3856" title="Television Jamaica" label="Television Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q56289884" start="3861" end="3875" title="CVM Television" label="CVM Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520351" start="3908" end="3926" title="The Comedy Network" label="The Comedy Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="3968" end="3972" title="Much (TV channel)" label="Much"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660571" start="4061" end="4066" title="In2TV" label="In2TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="4255" end="4269" title="America Online" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="4426" end="4433" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="4451" end="4468" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969697" start="4565" end="4579" title="Warner Archive Collection" label="Warner Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365115" start="4819" end="4838" title="Pi&amp;#x27;erre Bourne" label="Pi&amp;#x27;erre Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442978" start="4890" end="4902" title="producer tag" label="producer tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611689" start="5001" end="5009" title="Magnolia (Playboi Carti song)" label="Magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27671080" start="5029" end="5042" title="Playboi Carti" label="Playboi Carti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706357" wikidata="Q625132" url="?curid=706357" title="Seikosha">
<text>was a branch of the Japanese company Seiko that produced clocks, watches, shutters, computer printers and other devices. It was the root of the manufacturing companies of the Seiko Group.

==History==

*1881 — Kintarō Hattori opens the watch and jewelry shop &quot;K. Hattori&quot; (&quot;Hattori Tokeiten&quot; in Japanese; currently named Seiko Holdings Corporation) in the Ginza area of Tokyo, Japan.
*1892 — is established in Tokyo as the clock manufacturing arm of K. Hattori.
*1917 — K. Hattori becomes a company (K. Hattori &amp; Co., Ltd.).
*1937 — The watch production division of Seikosha is split off as .
*1942 — Daiwa Kogyo, Ltd. is founded in Suwa, Nagano by Hisao Yamazaki.
*1943 — Daini Seikosha establishes a factory in Suwa for manufacturing watches with Daiwa Kogyo.
*1959 — Daiwa Kogyo and the Suwa Plant of Daini Seikosha merge to form 
*1961 — Shinshu Seiki Co., Ltd. is established as a subsidiary of Suwa Seikosha.
*1970 — Seikosha is split off from K. Hattori &amp; Co., Ltd., and Seikosha Co., Ltd. is incorporated.
*1982 — K. Hattori &amp; Co., Ltd. is renamed Hattori Seiko Co., Ltd.
*1982 — Shinshu Seiki is renamed Epson Corporation.
*1983 — Daini Seikosha is renamed Seiko Instruments &amp; Electronics Ltd.
*1985 — Suwa Seikosha and Epson merge to form Seiko Epson Corporation.
*1990 — Hattori Seiko Co., Ltd. is renamed Seiko Corporation.
*1996 — Seikosha Co., Ltd. is divided into Seiko Precision Inc. and Seiko Clock Inc.
*1997 — Seiko Instruments &amp; Electronics is renamed Seiko Instruments Inc.
*2007 — Seiko Corporation is renamed Seiko Holdings Corporation.
*2009 — Seiko Instruments becomes a wholly owned subsidiary of Seiko Holdings.
*2020 — Seiko Precision transfers its business operations to Seiko Time Systems Inc. and Seiko Solutions Inc. and dissolves. 
*2020 — Seiko Instruments transfers its watch business (development and manufacturing of the Seiko timepieces) to Seiko Watch Corporation.
*2021 — Seiko Clock is merged with Seiko Time Systems to form Seiko Time Creation Inc.
*2022 — Seiko Holdings Corporation is renamed Seiko Group Corporation.

==References==
==External links==
*Seiko Group Corporation 
*Seiko Time Creaton Inc. 
*Seiko Instruments Inc. 
*Seiko Epson Corporation </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q322601" start="37" end="42" title="Seiko" label="Seiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="57" end="63" title="clocks" label="clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="65" end="72" title="watches" label="watches"/>
<link wikidata="Q691823" start="74" end="81" title="shutter (photography)" label="shutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="84" end="100" title="computer printer" label="computer printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247512" start="175" end="186" title="Seiko Group" label="Seiko Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q322601" start="265" end="275" title="K. Hattori" label="K. Hattori"/>
<link wikidata="Q322601" start="341" end="367" title="Seiko" label="Seiko Holdings Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q746052" start="376" end="381" title="Ginza" label="Ginza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="390" end="395" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="397" end="402" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q846338" start="657" end="669" title="Suwa, Nagano" label="Suwa, Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q159614" start="1285" end="1308" title="Seiko Epson" label="Seiko Epson Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q378215" start="1512" end="1534" title="Seiko Instruments" label="Seiko Instruments Inc."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706359" wikidata="Q8518976" url="?curid=706359" title="Mount GEC">
<text>Mount GEC is a mountain located in the Sunwapta River Valley of Jasper National Park. Gec lies northwest of Diadem Peak. The mountain was named in 1961 after the first names of the three climbers who made the first ascent — George, Ellen, and Chuck.

== See also ==
* List of mountains in the Canadian Rockies

==References==

;Notes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8518976" start="0" end="9" title="Mount GEC" label="Mount GEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="15" end="23" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q986137" start="39" end="53" title="Sunwapta River" label="Sunwapta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q503429" start="64" end="84" title="Jasper National Park" label="Jasper National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270269" start="108" end="119" title="Diadem Peak" label="Diadem Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479603" start="268" end="309" title="List of mountains in the Canadian Rockies" label="List of mountains in the Canadian Rockies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706361" wikidata="Q1118020" url="?curid=706361" title="Caleb (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)">
<text>Caleb is a fictional character played by Nathan Fillion in the television series &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; created by Joss Whedon. The character is a sadistic sociopath with a pathological hatred of women.

According to Whedon, the character was introduced because the mutable, non-corporeal nature of the First Evil &quot;meant that we didn&#x27;t have anything to push against. We needed... a sidekick. Somebody physical that we can see from episode to episode.&quot; Whedon describes him as &quot;the creepiest priest&quot;, adding, &quot;he is the most bald-faced misogynist we&#x27;ve had since, well, since last year, with Warren.&quot;

==Character biography==
As revealed through his conversations with the First Evil, Caleb was a defrocked priest and serial killer responsible for the deaths of at least two girls, whom he lured with his sermons and charms. By the time of his appearance in the show, he is acting as a lieutenant to the First. 

Despite not appearing until the last five episodes of the series, the character is revealed to be one of the prime movers for the events of the seventh season. In an effort to eliminate all threats to the First Evil&#x27;s resurgence, he directed hordes of Bringers to systematically kill Potential Slayers around the world. He also ordered the bombing of the Watchers&#x27; Council Headquarters in London, causing the deaths of Quentin Travers and all current Watchers and Council Operatives present, and arranged for a prisoner to attack Faith in a Los Angeles prison.

In the episode &quot;Dirty Girls,&quot; Caleb attacks the Scooby Gang in person. He murders two potential Slayers, Molly and Dianne. He also breaks the arm of another (Rona), and effortlessly defeats Buffy, Faith, and Spike. Before the Gang retreats, he also violently blinds Xander in one eye by forcing his thumb into his left eye socket. 

The character later dies in the last two episodes of the series. In &quot;End of Days&quot; and &quot;Chosen.&quot;

==Powers and abilities==
The character Caleb provided a villain with a physical threat (in contrast to the non-corporeal First Evil), and a recognizable counterweight to Buffy and her allies. 

The character&#x27;s body serves as a vessel for the superhuman power of the non-corporeal First Evil. The First makes him the commander of its campaign of carnage and mayhem. Caleb likes to re-enact his killings by asking The First to take on the form of the girls he&#x27;s killed so he may &quot;kill them again.&quot; With the exception of Glory, Caleb&#x27;s strength dwarfs Buffy&#x27;s previous adversaries. When channeling the power of the First Evil, he possesses immense physical strength and durability, greatly exceeding that of most vampires, demons, and Slayers. He effortlessly defeats the combined might of Buffy, Faith, and Spike in their first encounter. In order to maintain this power, Caleb must merge with The First to recharge after extended periods. Power transfusions from The First also allow Caleb the ability to return from death, as long as his body is still intact.

==Beliefs==
The character periodically delivers quasi-biblical quotes, even frequently making allusions to his belief that the First Evil is actually God, or even superior to God. When The First, in the guise of Buffy, asks him if he thinks it is God, Caleb replies he believes The First is beyond such definition. He states plainly in his debut episode, &quot;I don&#x27;t truck with Satan, that was just me havin&#x27; fun. Satan is a little man.&quot; Caleb also comments further on his admiration of The First, when it (under the guise of Buffy) vocalizes its envy of humans&#x27; ability to feel lust and engage in primal sexual acts. At the same time, several members of the Scooby Gang engage in such activity elsewhere. He dismisses them all as &quot;sinners,&quot; commenting enthusiastically that The First is miles beyond that, for it is &quot;sin&quot; itself. The character quotes the Old Testament more often than the New Testament. For example, the character&#x27;s misogynistic views are expressed through the story of Adam, Eve, and the forbidden fruit. When asked about the character&#x27;s religious connections, Whedon said, &quot;I&#x27;m not coming down against priests. This guy clearly is not one.&quot;

==Writing and acting==
* Caleb was referred to by Buffy writers as &quot;The Second,&quot; a reference to his boss&#x27; nickname, &quot;The First.&quot;

==Appearances==
Caleb appears in:

;&quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;:
Caleb appeared as a guest in 5 episodes:
*Season 7 – &quot;Dirty Girls,&quot; &quot;Empty Places,&quot; &quot;Touched,&quot; &quot;End of Days,&quot; &quot;Chosen&quot;

;&quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight&quot;:
Caleb appeared in a dream in the e-comic &quot;Always Darkest.&quot;

==See also==
* List of Buffyverse villains and supernatural beings

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1118020" start="0" end="5" title="Caleb (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Caleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q342549" start="41" end="55" title="Nathan Fillion" label="Nathan Fillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="87" end="111" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q298025" start="129" end="140" title="Joss Whedon" label="Joss Whedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="170" end="179" title="Aspd" label="sociopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="187" end="199" title="pathological" label="pathological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519364" start="317" end="327" title="First Evil" label="First Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="525" end="531" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="579" end="589" title="misogyny" label="misogynist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403686" start="640" end="646" title="Warren Mears" label="Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519364" start="726" end="736" title="First Evil" label="First Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800765" start="750" end="759" title="Defrocking" label="defrocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="771" end="784" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519364" start="1223" end="1230" title="Bringers of the First Evil" label="Bringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1365" end="1371" title="London, England" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014357" start="1395" end="1410" title="Quentin Travers" label="Quentin Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138651" start="1427" end="1435" title="Watcher (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Watchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026343" start="1559" end="1570" title="Dirty Girls" label="Dirty Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799459" start="1738" end="1743" title="Buffy Summers" label="Buffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419636" start="1745" end="1750" title="Faith (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276742" start="1756" end="1761" title="Spike (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Spike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422582" start="1807" end="1813" title="Eye-gouging" label="blinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340324" start="1814" end="1820" title="Xander Harris" label="Xander"/>
<link wikidata="Q934759" start="1955" end="1966" title="End of Days (Buffy episode)" label="End of Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378871" start="1983" end="1989" title="Chosen (Buffy episode)" label="Chosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q376961" start="2536" end="2541" title="Glorificus" label="Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785966" start="2673" end="2690" title="physical strength" label="physical strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="3032" end="3049" title="Resurrection" label="return from death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="3143" end="3151" title="Bible" label="biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="3239" end="3242" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="3474" end="3479" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="3944" end="3947" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="3987" end="4000" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="4021" end="4034" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="4124" end="4128" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q830183" start="4130" end="4133" title="Eve" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="4515" end="4539" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026343" start="4606" end="4617" title="Dirty Girls" label="Dirty Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209253" start="4631" end="4643" title="Empty Places" label="Empty Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995865" start="4657" end="4664" title="Touched (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Touched"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511895" start="4678" end="4689" title="End of Days (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="End of Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378871" start="4703" end="4709" title="Chosen (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="Chosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660793" start="4724" end="4761" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565187" start="4854" end="4905" title="List of Buffyverse villains and supernatural beings" label="List of Buffyverse villains and supernatural beings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706368" wikidata="Q5581692" url="?curid=706368" title="Gong Peak">
<text>Gong Peak is a mountain located in the Sunwapta River Valley of Jasper National Park in Alberta, Canada. The peak lies three km southeast of Mount Weiss. The mountain was named in 1919 by the Interprovincial Boundary Survey after nearby Gong Lake.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5581692" start="0" end="9" title="Gong Peak" label="Gong Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="15" end="23" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q986137" start="39" end="53" title="Sunwapta River" label="Sunwapta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q503429" start="64" end="84" title="Jasper National Park" label="Jasper National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605022" start="141" end="152" title="Mount Weiss" label="Mount Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="192" end="223" title="Interprovincial Boundary Survey" label="Interprovincial Boundary Survey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="237" end="246" title="Gong Lake (Alberta)" label="Gong Lake"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706370" wikidata="Q1880307" url="?curid=706370" title="The Truth About Cats &amp; Dogs">
<text>The Truth About Cats &amp; Dogs is a 1996 American romantic comedy film directed by Michael Lehmann and written by Audrey Wells. It stars Janeane Garofalo, Uma Thurman, Ben Chaplin and Jamie Foxx. The story is a modern reinterpretation of the 1897 &quot;Cyrano de Bergerac&quot; story and follows Abby, a veterinarian and radio talk show host who asks her model friend Noelle to impersonate her when a handsome man shows interest in her. The original music score was composed by Howard Shore. Upon its release, the film garnered positive reviews and was met with considerable box office success.

==Plot==

Abby Barnes is a veterinarian and host of a radio show called &quot;The Truth About Cats and Dogs&quot;. Photographer Brian calls into her show for advice, and unexpectedly sends her a gift and calls her at work to ask her out; she agrees to meet. Her insecurity about her appearance leads her to lie to him over the phone and describe herself with the physical features of her neighbor Noelle. She stands him up. After intervening in an argument between Noelle and her abusive boyfriend Roy, the two women become friends. Brian shows up unexpectedly at Abby&#x27;s work at the same time as Noelle, and Abby convinces her to pretend she is Abby.

Abby adopts the persona of Donna, friend to Noelle (posing as Abby) and the two begin spending time with Brian together. They invent a story that Abby uses a different voice on the radio than in real life. He is physically attracted to Noelle, but notices that &quot;Abby&quot; has a distinctly different (and decidedly less intellectual) personality in person than on the radio and phone. When he calls the real Abby to ask her out again, he asks her to use her &quot;radio voice&quot; and the two spend nearly seven hours on the phone getting to know one another.

The two women decide to tell Brian the truth by way of Noelle showing up at his home while Abby is live on the radio, but when Noelle arrives, she is entranced by the many kind things he says about her personality and intelligence (even though he is actually talking about Abby). She fails to tell him the truth, which nearly causes a rift between the women, but ultimately Noelle realizes that flattery about someone else may feel good in the moment but is not authentic. She takes a two-week modeling gig out of town in order to put space between herself and Brian.

Noelle returns and tells Brian to make a list of the things he loves about Abby, and to meet at Abby&#x27;s apartment that night. He does, and reads the list to &quot;Donna&quot;. The first few things on the list are about Noelle&#x27;s appearance, but then the list evolves into more important things about Abby that Brian has truly fallen in love with. He professes his love through the bathroom door thinking &quot;Abby&quot; is bathing inside, but gets no response. He then notices flyers for a charity event Abby is attending, complete with her photo, and realizes the truth.

Abby later approaches Brian at his bar, apologizing for her deceit and explains what really happened. Although initially dismissive, he eventually meets with Abby again and admits he has fallen for her and was only attracted to Noelle because of their deception. He suggests they start again, and Abby happily agrees.

==Cast==
== Themes==
Screenwriter Audrey Wells said she was inspired by the 1897 play &quot;Cyrano de Bergerac&quot; by Edmond Rostand and wanted to modernize it by flipping the genders of the original characters. In this version, Abby is the talented but &quot;ugly&quot; Cyrano, Noelle is Christian, and Brian is Roxane.

Commenting on the ugly-versus-beautiful theme, Uma Thurman said, &quot;We probably keep going back to that idea because there&#x27;s a whole industry that needs to sell a lot of products that wants us to think that the outside is the important part. There&#x27;s a war going on. The inside&#x27;s not as commercial as the outside. People are so affected by how they&#x27;re received in the world, and some or all of our first experiences are based on how we&#x27;re externally judged. The conflict between the inner and the outer is a constant battle everybody experiences on lots of levels.&quot;

In a retrospective essay for &quot;Den of Geek&quot;, Aliya Whiteley wrote one of the film&#x27;s distinguishing factors from other variations of the Cyrano story is that it gives as much importance to the friendship between the two main female characters as it does to the romantic plotline.

==Reception==
The film received positive reviews from critics. It has an 85% &quot;fresh&quot; rating at Rotten Tomatoes from 47 reviews. The site&#x27;s consensus states: &quot;Sharp, witty, and charming, &quot;The Truth About Cats &amp; Dogs&quot; features a standout performance from Janeane Garofalo.&quot;

Writing for &quot;The Baltimore Sun&quot;, Stephen Hunter said, &quot;The movie, which takes as its subject the difficulty of cats and dogs living together, or at least getting together, is as good a romantic comedy as has come this way in a long time.&quot; The &quot;Hartford Courant&quot; said, &quot;Garofalo shows comic flair, deft timing, surprising depth.&quot;

Roger Ebert noted the film &quot;is not simply another version of the old [Cyrano] story, since it includes a lot of humor that is generated by its specific situation.&quot; Of Garofalo, Ebert wrote in comparison to her roles in &quot;Bye Bye Love&quot; and &quot;Reality Bites&quot;, &quot;Here we see an entire other side to her personality; a smartness, a penetrating wit, that takes this old story and adds a wry spin to its combination of romance, sweetness and hope.&quot; Of Uma Thurman, Ebert wrote, &quot;She does not simply become a pawn, a false front for Abby. There is a poignance in her situation, because she loves Brian, too, in her way, and handles a difficult situation with unexpected sweetness.&quot;

Many reviewers criticized the idea that Garofalo&#x27;s character was expected to be viewed as unattractive, finding it unrealistic due to the actress&#x27;s natural beauty.

Although the film was a decent commercial success, in later years, Garofalo expressed dissatisfaction with the film: 

Several years after the film&#x27;s release, Garofalo became an actual radio talk show host when she cohosted &quot;The Majority Report&quot; on Air America Radio from 2004 to 2006.

===Box office===
The film opened to $6.77 million in its opening weekend, nearly tying the Jean-Claude Van Damme film &quot;The Quest&quot; which took in $7.03 million. The film was in the number 2 spot at the United States box office for three consecutive weeks. It grossed $34.9 million in the United States and Canada and $24 million overseas for a worldwide total of $59 million.

==Soundtrack==
The Truth About Cats &amp; Dogs is the soundtrack from the 1996 film &quot;The Truth About Cats &amp; Dogs&quot;, released by A&amp;M Records in 1996. The album features a variety of music such as rock, R&amp;B, and pop.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;The &#x27;Truth&#x27; About Stardom&quot;, a 1996 &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; article about Garofalo, Thurman, and the making of &quot;The Truth About Cats &amp; Dogs&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="51" end="66" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q717498" start="84" end="99" title="Michael Lehmann" label="Michael Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q455862" start="115" end="127" title="Audrey Wells" label="Audrey Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q40143" start="138" end="154" title="Janeane Garofalo" label="Janeane Garofalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125017" start="156" end="167" title="Uma Thurman" label="Uma Thurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q447397" start="169" end="180" title="Ben Chaplin" label="Ben Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="185" end="195" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048916" start="254" end="272" title="Cyrano de Bergerac (play)" label="Cyrano de Bergerac"/>
<link wikidata="Q207773" start="479" end="491" title="Howard Shore" label="Howard Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q202883" start="624" end="636" title="veterinarian" label="veterinarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048916" start="3383" end="3401" title="Cyrano de Bergerac (play)" label="Cyrano de Bergerac"/>
<link wikidata="Q202749" start="3411" end="3425" title="Edmond Rostand" label="Edmond Rostand"/>
<link wikidata="Q31890052" start="3456" end="3476" title="Gender flip" label="flipping the genders"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073063" start="4249" end="4260" title="Den of Geek" label="Den of Geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="4613" end="4628" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="4838" end="4855" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="The Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q983243" start="4863" end="4877" title="Stephen Hunter" label="Stephen Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587159" start="5089" end="5105" title="Hartford Courant" label="Hartford Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="5190" end="5201" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018481" start="5425" end="5437" title="Bye Bye Love (film)" label="Bye Bye Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423849" start="5454" end="5467" title="Reality Bites" label="Reality Bites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749686" start="6322" end="6341" title="The Majority Report" label="The Majority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828179" start="6351" end="6368" title="Air America Radio" label="Air America Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q308840" start="6480" end="6501" title="Jean-Claude Van Damme" label="Jean-Claude Van Damme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469524" start="6513" end="6522" title="The Quest (1996 film)" label="The Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="6828" end="6838" title="film soundtrack" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q277626" start="6915" end="6930" title="A&amp;amp;M Records" label="A&amp;amp;M Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="6986" end="6990" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="6992" end="6999" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="7005" end="7008" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="7112" end="7132" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706371" wikidata="Q2599869" url="?curid=706371" title="Åland Islands dispute">
<text>The Åland Islands dispute () was one of the issues put up for arbitration by the League of Nations on its formation. Åland&#x27;s population&#x27;s demand for self-determination was not met and sovereignty over the islands was retained by Finland, but international guarantees were given to allow the population to pursue its own culture, relieving the threat of forced assimilation by Finnish culture as perceived by the islanders.

==Background==
Prior to 1809, Åland was located within the boundaries of the Swedish realm. However, in the Treaty of Fredrikshamn on September 17, 1809, Sweden had to give up control of the islands, along with Finland, to Imperial Russia. The Grand Duchy of Finland became an autonomous entity, including the Åland Islands, within the Russian Empire. After the Åland War, by the Treaty of Paris of April 18, 1856, which ended the Crimean War, the United Kingdom required Russia to withhold the construction of any new fortifications on the islands. This stipulation was obeyed, despite unsuccessful attempts to change the status of the demilitarised islands in 1908. However, in 1914, at the start of the First World War, the Russian government turned the islands into a submarine base for the use of British and Russian submarines during the war.

==Military crisis==

In December 1917, fearing the effects of the Russian October Revolution, the Finnish parliament proclaimed that Finland was now a sovereign state, calling on the principles of national self-determination. The very same autumn, Ålanders had organized for their own self-determination, fearing what they saw as excessive expressions of pro-Finnishness and anti-Swedishness in Finland. By this time, well above 90% of the islands&#x27; inhabitants (stationed military personnel excluded) considered themselves Swedish, in contrast to Mainland Finland, where less than 15% were Swedish-speaking. Unlike in Åland, in the previous twenty years, social tensions had also worsened considerably in Finland. The Ålanders&#x27; answer was a wish for secession from the Grand Duchy of Finland and the Russian Empire, to which they felt little affiliation, and a request for annexation by Sweden.

Sweden&#x27;s power elite was preoccupied with Sweden&#x27;s democratization that was recently commenced by a conservative cabinet in order to quench the revolutionary currents among Swedish workers. To that effect, Sweden got a new liberal prime minister, and for the first time socialists in the cabinet. Although activist circles close to the royal court were enthusiastic towards the Ålanders&#x27; plea for Swedish support, the activists had lost their political influence in 1916, and ultimately also the ear of King Gustav V. Representatives for the Ålanders were fed sympathetic words and empty phrases.

The Finnish Civil War starting in January 1918, initially did not change this situation. Sweden&#x27;s Social Democrats had the year before purged the revolutionaries from the party, and were sympathetic but unsupportive of the socialist republic in Finland. Their coalition partners in the cabinet, the Liberals, were rather inclined to sympathize with the White government in Finland, but they were traditionally neutralist and additionally rather suspicious of their Finnish counterparts.

Exaggerated reports of civilian apprehension concerning the approaching combatants of the civil war resulted in the dispatch of a minor Swedish naval expedition, tasked with evacuating civilians who wished to leave. It turned out that no civilians wished evacuation, but the naval commander proudly brokered an end to hostilities and remained on Fasta Åland as a peace-keeping force. It is evident that the chain of command was considerably more inclined towards activism than the Socialist Minister of Defence, who in turn was persuaded to be considerably more supportive of intervention than his cabinet colleagues. It is less clear to what degree other cabinet members were briefed in between cabinet meetings, or even whether they had a say. Stockholm did not perceive anything of moment, and anything that happened was unintended by the government and well-intentioned by the naval officer in charge.

The White government in Vaasa saw it differently. They were well-informed about activist desires to re-acquire the Åland Islands, since many of the Swedish military officers who volunteered to come to White Finland&#x27;s support were close to the leading activists. The White government was alarmed by the arrival of Swedish troops on Finnish soil, and suspicious of Sweden&#x27;s Socialist Minister of Defence. A German naval force was urgently asked to remove the Swedish troops from Åland.

==Political crisis==
The leading Swedish Social Democrat, Hjalmar Branting, opted for dealing with the issue purely from the standpoint of international law. The cabinet of Finland viewed this position as a purely tactical one, and a dispute over whether the islands rightfully belonged to Sweden or Finland ensued. In 1921, again despite the fact that 90 percent of the islands&#x27; population was Swedish — and that they expressed an almost unanimous desire of being incorporated into Sweden — the League of Nations determined that the Åland Islands should remain under Finnish sovereignty, which is often attributed to the skill of its Minister to Paris, Carl Enckell, who also was envoy to the League of Nations as well as in charge of Finland&#x27;s presentation of the Åland question. 

The additional, perhaps decisive, merit is attributed to Finland&#x27;s Envoy to Japan, professor G.J. Ramstedt, who was an important foreign influencer in Japan, managed to point out to the Japanese delegation in the League of Nations that the Åland Islands are in fact a continuous archipelago that joins it with Finland, and furthermore, that deep sea waters separate them from Sweden. Japan&#x27;s own interests in controlling Pacific islands would be aided by such a precedent, and it consequently gave important support to Finland. Also, one of the important proponents of a diplomatic solution to the case was Nitobe Inazō, who was one of the Under-Secretaries General of the League and the director of the International Bureaux Section, in charge of the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation.

==Aftermath==
The interrelated difficulties in the relations between Sweden and Finland were resolved by the mid-1930s, when the weakened authority of the League of Nations signalled a much harsher international mood. The fear of the Åland Islands&#x27; falling under the control of Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union was very real, and that is why Sweden&#x27;s Foreign Minister Sandler proposed retaining the status of the islands despite Sweden&#x27;s longstanding policy of neutrality. Detailed defensive plans were put forward; however, in the end, Sweden opted not to participate in the defence of the islands.

==Autonomy of Åland Islands==
In 1920, Finland granted wide-reaching cultural and political autonomy to the Åland Islands. The League of Nations considered these measures as satisfying demands to protect the islands&#x27; Swedish language and culture.

During the course of the 20th century, Finnish sovereignty had been perceived as benevolent, and even beneficial, by increasing numbers of islanders. Together with disappointment over insufficient support from Sweden in the League of Nations, Swedish disrespect for Åland&#x27;s demilitarized status in the 1930s, and to some degree a feeling of shared destiny with Finland during and after World War II, this has resulted in a changed perception of Åland&#x27;s relation to Finland: from &quot;a Swedish province in Finnish possession&quot; to &quot;an autonomous part of Finland&quot;.

==See also==

* Åland&#x27;s Autonomy Day
* Finland–Sweden relations
* International crisis
* Swedish neutrality

==References==
==Further reading==
* Walters, F. P. &quot;A History of the League of Nations&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1952). online

==External links==
* Decision of the Council of The League of Nations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2599869" start="4" end="25" title="Åland Islands dispute" label="Åland Islands dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="81" end="98" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="117" end="122" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="159" end="177" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="194" end="205" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="239" end="246" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="370" end="382" title="Assimilation (sociology)" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="464" end="469" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130792" start="542" end="564" title="Treaty of Fredrikshamn" label="Treaty of Fredrikshamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="657" end="672" title="Imperial Russia" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="678" end="700" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885643" start="796" end="805" title="Åland War" label="Åland War"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="814" end="829" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="865" end="876" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="953" end="966" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q41691" start="1071" end="1084" title="demilitarised" label="demilitarised"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1140" end="1155" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q331367" start="1206" end="1220" title="submarine base" label="submarine base"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1236" end="1243" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="1358" end="1376" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q643412" start="1382" end="1400" title="Finnish parliament" label="Finnish parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994771" start="1417" end="1450" title="Finnish Declaration of Independence" label="Finland was now a sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="1481" end="1508" title="self-determination" label="national self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799569" start="1639" end="1654" title="Fennoman" label="pro-Finnishness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083368" start="1836" end="1852" title="Mainland Finland" label="Mainland Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="1879" end="1886" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="2063" end="2085" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2094" end="2108" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="2251" end="2266" title="democratization" label="democratization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="2300" end="2312" title="conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="2344" end="2357" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="2423" end="2430" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="2470" end="2479" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q52890" start="2713" end="2721" title="Gustav V of Sweden" label="Gustav V"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="2807" end="2824" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112" start="2906" end="2922" title="Swedish Social Democratic Party" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811029" start="3031" end="3049" title="Finnish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Republic" label="socialist republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115002" start="3161" end="3177" title="Whites (Finland)" label="White government"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="3218" end="3228" title="neutralist" label="neutralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23038" start="3642" end="3653" title="Fasta Åland" label="Fasta Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="3659" end="3672" title="peace-keeping" label="peace-keeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="3703" end="3719" title="chain of command" label="chain of command"/>
<link wikidata="Q920108" start="3787" end="3806" title="Minister for Defence (Sweden)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q125080" start="4227" end="4232" title="Vaasa" label="Vaasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4618" end="4624" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q53620" start="4756" end="4772" title="Hjalmar Branting" label="Hjalmar Branting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="4837" end="4854" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q969261" start="5357" end="5369" title="Carl Enckell" label="Carl Enckell"/>
<link wikidata="Q162051" start="5590" end="5603" title="Gustaf John Ramstedt" label="G.J. Ramstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12696" start="6109" end="6121" title="Nitobe Inazō" label="Nitobe Inazō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761462" start="6254" end="6305" title="International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation" label="International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6591" end="6603" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6611" end="6623" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574652" start="6747" end="6794" title="Swedish neutrality" label="Sweden&amp;#x27;s longstanding policy of neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q10726425" start="7782" end="7807" title="Åland&amp;#x27;s Autonomy Day" label="Åland&amp;#x27;s Autonomy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q526840" start="7810" end="7834" title="Finland–Sweden relations" label="Finland–Sweden relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791104" start="7837" end="7857" title="International crisis" label="International crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574652" start="7860" end="7878" title="Swedish neutrality" label="Swedish neutrality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706372" wikidata="Q6184400" url="?curid=706372" title="Jerry Neil Schneider">
<text>Jerry Neil Schneider (born circa 1951) is a social engineer and security consultant. While still in high school in 1968, Schneider started a company called &quot;Creative Systems Enterprises&quot; (CSE) and began selling his own invented electronic communication devices. Schneider obtained parts by information diving from Pacific Telephone and Telegraph&#x27;s dumpsters. During this scavenging, he built up a collection of PTT documents including invoices and training manuals. After a few years, he reportedly knew more about PTT&#x27;s procedures than its own employees.

1970–1971: Schneider expanded his telephone wholesale business while majoring in Electrical Engineering in college.

June, 1971: Schneider started a plan to acquire new telephone equipment from PTT, market it as &quot;refurbished,&quot; and sell it through CSE, his own company. The exact details of his scam are currently not available, but did have a van with Pacific Bell logo he kept in his mom&#x27;s garage. He also acquired equipment from Western Electric Company in a similar manner. He sold equipment back to Pacific and to others.

January, 1972: A former employee of CSE (refused a raise from $11/hour to $13/hour) tips off law enforcement. Police raid CSE&#x27;s offices and warehouse. The District Attorney estimates the found equipment is worth $8,000. At this time, they learn that Schneider had made off with $125,000 worth of gear. Schneider later admits to nearly $900,000.

He was arrested on February 8, 1972. Contemporary sources rate his caper as one of the most famous computer crimes in history.

After plea bargaining, Schneider eventually pleaded guilty on May 15, 1972 to one count of grand theft of $5,000 worth of equipment. In July 1972, he was sentenced to two months in a minimum security facility. He only served forty days and paid a $500 fine.

1972: Schneider, at 21, formed a security consultancy that targeted companies wishing to protect themselves from computer criminals.

November 26, 1974: Date of final judgement of civil suit from PTT. Suit stated that Schneider had stolen equipment valued at $214,649.63, and that equipment valued at $73,452.81 had been returned.

1977: Schneider left the security consulting firm.

== References ==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6184400" start="0" end="20" title="Jerry Neil Schneider" label="Jerry Neil Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q376934" start="44" end="59" title="Social engineering (computer security)" label="social engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="64" end="72" title="computer security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="100" end="111" title="high school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997746" start="300" end="318" title="information diving" label="information diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122309" start="324" end="355" title="Pacific Bell" label="Pacific Telephone and Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="658" end="680" title="Electrical Engineering" label="Electrical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="1279" end="1296" title="District Attorney" label="District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="1604" end="1619" title="plea bargaining" label="plea bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="2037" end="2047" title="civil suit" label="civil suit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706374" wikidata="Q575857" url="?curid=706374" title="Antihomomorphism">
<text>In mathematics, an antihomomorphism is a type of function defined on sets with multiplication that reverses the order of multiplication. An antiautomorphism is an invertible antihomomorphism, i.e. an antiisomorphism, from a set to itself. From bijectivity it follows that antiautomorphisms have inverses, and that the inverse of an antiautomorphism is also an antiautomorphism.

==Definition==
Informally, an antihomomorphism is a map that switches the order of multiplication. Formally, an antihomomorphism between structures formula_1 and formula_2 is a homomorphism formula_3, where formula_4 equals formula_2 as a set, but has its multiplication reversed to that defined on formula_2. Denoting the (generally non-commutative) multiplication on formula_2 by formula_8, the multiplication on formula_4, denoted by formula_10, is defined by formula_11. The object formula_4 is called the opposite object to formula_2 (respectively, opposite group, opposite algebra, opposite category etc.).

This definition is equivalent to that of a homomorphism formula_14 (reversing the operation before or after applying the map is equivalent). Formally, sending formula_1 to formula_16 and acting as the identity on maps is a functor (indeed, an involution).

==Examples==
In group theory, an antihomomorphism is a map between two groups that reverses the order of multiplication. So if is a group antihomomorphism, 
:&quot;φ&quot;(&quot;xy&quot;) = &quot;φ&quot;(&quot;y&quot;)&quot;φ&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)
for all &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; in &quot;X&quot;.

The map that sends &quot;x&quot; to &quot;x&quot;−1 is an example of a group antiautomorphism. Another important example is the transpose operation in linear algebra, which takes row vectors to column vectors. Any vector-matrix equation may be transposed to an equivalent equation where the order of the factors is reversed.

With matrices, an example of an antiautomorphism is given by the transpose map. Since inversion and transposing both give antiautomorphisms, their composition is an automorphism. This involution is often called the contragredient map, and it provides an example of an outer automorphism of the general linear group , where &quot;F&quot; is a field, except when and , or and (i.e., for the groups , , and ).

In ring theory, an antihomomorphism is a map between two rings that preserves addition, but reverses the order of multiplication. So is a ring antihomomorphism if and only if:
:&quot;φ&quot;(1) = 1
:&quot;φ&quot;(&quot;x&quot; + &quot;y&quot;) = &quot;φ&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) + &quot;φ&quot;(&quot;y&quot;)
:&quot;φ&quot;(&quot;xy&quot;) = &quot;φ&quot;(&quot;y&quot;)&quot;φ&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)
for all &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; in &quot;X&quot;.

For algebras over a field &quot;K&quot;, &quot;φ&quot; must be a &quot;K&quot;-linear map of the underlying vector space. If the underlying field has an involution, one can instead ask &quot;φ&quot; to be conjugate-linear, as in conjugate transpose, below.

===Involutions===
It is frequently the case that antiautomorphisms are involutions, i.e. the square of the antiautomorphism is the identity map; these are also called s. For example, in any group the map that sends &quot;x&quot; to its inverse &quot;x&quot;−1 is an involutive antiautomorphism.

A ring with an involutive antiautomorphism is called a *-ring, and these form an important class of examples.

==Properties==
If the source &quot;X&quot; or the target &quot;Y&quot; is commutative, then an antihomomorphism is the same thing as a homomorphism.

The composition of two antihomomorphisms is always a homomorphism, since reversing the order twice preserves order. The composition of an antihomomorphism with a homomorphism gives another antihomomorphism.

==See also==
* Semigroup with involution

==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q575857" start="19" end="35" title="Antihomomorphism" label="antihomomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="49" end="57" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="112" end="135" title="Noncommutative" label="order of multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q575857" start="140" end="156" title="Antihomomorphism" label="antiautomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191884" start="163" end="173" title="Inverse function" label="invertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774870" start="200" end="215" title="antiisomorphism" label="antiisomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="717" end="728" title="commutative" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117899" start="933" end="947" title="opposite group" label="opposite group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940482" start="949" end="965" title="opposite algebra" label="opposite algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098616" start="967" end="984" title="opposite category" label="opposite category"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="1216" end="1223" title="functor" label="functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="1236" end="1246" title="Involution (mathematics)" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="1266" end="1278" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="1681" end="1690" title="transpose" label="transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q82571" start="1704" end="1718" title="linear algebra" label="linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="1732" end="1742" title="row vector" label="row vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="1747" end="1760" title="column vector" label="column vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q524607" start="2173" end="2193" title="general linear group" label="general linear group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208658" start="2290" end="2301" title="ring theory" label="ring theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="2743" end="2764" title="algebra over a field" label="algebras over a field"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="2818" end="2828" title="linear map" label="linear map"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="2847" end="2859" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719767" start="2944" end="2960" title="conjugate-linear" label="conjugate-linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="3068" end="3078" title="involution (mathematics)" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="3128" end="3140" title="identity function" label="identity map"/>
<link wikidata="Q338057" start="3233" end="3240" title="inverse element" label="inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836000" start="3348" end="3354" title="*-ring" label="*-ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3360" end="3401" title="*-algebra#Examples" label="these form an important class of examples"/>
<link wikidata="Q215111" start="3539" end="3551" title="homomorphism" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="3558" end="3569" title="function composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449422" start="3777" end="3802" title="Semigroup with involution" label="Semigroup with involution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706378" wikidata="Q2478977" url="?curid=706378" title="Blue in the Face">
<text>Blue in the Face is a 1995 American comedy film directed by Wayne Wang and Paul Auster. It stars Harvey Keitel leading an ensemble cast, including Giancarlo Esposito, Roseanne Barr, Michael J. Fox, Lily Tomlin, Victor Argo, Mira Sorvino, Lou Reed, Keith David, Jim Jarmusch, Jared Harris, RuPaul, and Madonna.

&quot;Blue in the Face&quot; was filmed over a five-day period as a follow-up to Wang&#x27;s 1995 film &quot;Smoke&quot;. During production of &quot;Smoke&quot;, Keitel and the others ad-libbed scenes in-character between takes and a sequel was made using this improvised material.

Lily Tomlin was nominated for an American Comedy Award as &quot;Funniest Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture&quot; for her performance in this picture.

&quot;Blue in the Face&quot; features songs by singer Selena. Her bilingual duet with David Byrne, &quot;God&#x27;s Child (Baila Conmigo)&quot;, appears on the film&#x27;s soundtrack.

==Plot==
The film once again centers on the Brooklyn Cigar Store and manager Auggie (Harvey Keitel), although most of the other characters are different. The store owner&#x27;s frustrated wife Dot (Roseanne Barr) is one of them, and one of the plotlines follows her attempts to seduce Auggie. Madonna, Michael J. Fox, Lily Tomlin and Lou Reed as himself also put in appearances.

==Cast==
* Harvey Keitel as Augustus &quot;Auggie&quot; Wren
* Victor Argo as Vinnie
* Keith David as Jackie Robinson
* Giancarlo Esposito as Tommy Finelli
* Michael J. Fox as Pete Maloney
* Mel Gorham as Violet
* Jared Harris as Jimmy Rose
* Jim Jarmusch as Bob
* Madonna as Singing Telegram Girl
* Lou Reed as Man With Strange Glasses
* Michael Badalucco as Statistician
* Roseanne Barr as Dot
* Mira Sorvino as Young Lady
* Lily Tomlin as Waffle Eater
* Malik Yoba as Watch Man
* Rupaul as Dance Leader

==Reception==

The film received mixed reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 43% based on reviews from 23 critics, with an average rating of 5.7/10.

Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun Times&quot; gave the film 2.5 out of 4 stars, remarking that the movie &quot;was shot in six days, and sometimes feels like it…Some of the bits work and others don&#x27;t, but no one seems to be keeping score, and that&#x27;s part of the movie&#x27;s charm. Ebert also notes that &quot;&quot;Smoke&quot; is, of course, a much better film, and if you haven&#x27;t seen it, then you should start there and not here. &quot;Blue in the Face&quot; is more of a footnote.&quot;

== References ==
==External links==
* 
* FilmCritic.com review</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="36" end="47" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q728360" start="60" end="70" title="Wayne Wang" label="Wayne Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q214642" start="75" end="86" title="Paul Auster" label="Paul Auster"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="97" end="110" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q726142" start="147" end="165" title="Giancarlo Esposito" label="Giancarlo Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q232301" start="167" end="180" title="Roseanne Barr" label="Roseanne Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="182" end="196" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q229271" start="198" end="209" title="Lily Tomlin" label="Lily Tomlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q973065" start="211" end="222" title="Victor Argo" label="Victor Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212026" start="224" end="236" title="Mira Sorvino" label="Mira Sorvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="238" end="246" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q370918" start="248" end="259" title="Keith David" label="Keith David"/>
<link wikidata="Q191755" start="261" end="273" title="Jim Jarmusch" label="Jim Jarmusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q362500" start="275" end="287" title="Jared Harris" label="Jared Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q705715" start="289" end="295" title="RuPaul" label="RuPaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="301" end="308" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q653447" start="420" end="425" title="Smoke (film)" label="Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q310735" start="495" end="501" title="ad-lib" label="ad-lib"/>
<link wikidata="Q463757" start="627" end="648" title="American Comedy Award" label="American Comedy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q23543" start="804" end="810" title="Selena" label="Selena"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="836" end="847" title="David Byrne" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q115374" start="855" end="887" title="God&amp;#x27;s Child (Baila Conmigo)" label="God&amp;#x27;s Child (Baila Conmigo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="1020" end="1033" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q232301" start="1133" end="1146" title="Roseanne Barr" label="Roseanne Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="1228" end="1235" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="1237" end="1251" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q229271" start="1253" end="1264" title="Lily Tomlin" label="Lily Tomlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="1269" end="1277" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="1326" end="1339" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q973065" start="1378" end="1389" title="Victor Argo" label="Victor Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q370918" start="1402" end="1413" title="Keith David" label="Keith David"/>
<link wikidata="Q726142" start="1435" end="1453" title="Giancarlo Esposito" label="Giancarlo Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="1473" end="1487" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810703" start="1506" end="1516" title="Mel Gorham" label="Mel Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q362500" start="1529" end="1541" title="Jared Harris" label="Jared Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q191755" start="1558" end="1570" title="Jim Jarmusch" label="Jim Jarmusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="1580" end="1587" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="1615" end="1623" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q714675" start="1654" end="1671" title="Michael Badalucco" label="Michael Badalucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q232301" start="1690" end="1703" title="Roseanne Barr" label="Roseanne Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q212026" start="1713" end="1725" title="Mira Sorvino" label="Mira Sorvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q229271" start="1742" end="1753" title="Lily Tomlin" label="Lily Tomlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233091" start="1772" end="1782" title="Malik Yoba" label="Malik Yoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q705715" start="1798" end="1804" title="RuPaul" label="Rupaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="1873" end="1888" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="1988" end="1999" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="2013" end="2030" title="Chicago Sun Times" label="Chicago Sun Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706379" wikidata="Q678555" url="?curid=706379" title="Surfin' Safari">
<text>Surfin&#x27; Safari is the debut studio album by the American rock band the Beach Boys, released October 1, 1962 on Capitol Records. The official production credit went to Nick Venet, though it was Brian Wilson with his father Murry who contributed substantially to the album&#x27;s production; Brian also wrote or co-wrote nine of its 12 tracks. The album reached number 32 in the US during a chart stay of 37 weeks.

The album was preceded by two singles: &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Surfin&#x27; Safari&quot;, which charted at numbers 75 and 14, respectively. The success of &quot;Surfin&#x27; Safari&quot; helped secure a full album for the group while an additional single, &quot;Ten Little Indians&quot;, was issued, charting at number 49.

==Background==
==Production==
Recording sessions for &quot;Surfin&#x27; Safari&quot; took place in Capitol&#x27;s basement studios in the famous tower building in August. During the sessions, Brian Wilson fought for, and won, the right to helm the production – though this fact was not acknowledged with an album liner notes production credit. David Marks remembered, &quot;Brian did everything. Played, did the arrangements, screwed up the lead sheets himself. He didn&#x27;t need any help to do that. You listen to those first albums and they sound campy and corny but Brian was dead serious.&quot;

==Songs==
===Side one===
&quot;County Fair&quot; was inspired by Gary Usher and Brian Wilson visiting a county fair in San Bernardino. The song was written in about ten minutes. &quot;Ten Little Indians&quot; saw the group trying to emulate the style of the song &quot;Running Bear&quot;. &quot;Little Miss America&quot; features a doo-wop style, and according to biographer David Leaf, is about &quot;the ideal southern California &quot;.

In &quot;Chug-a-Lug&quot;, written by Brian and Usher, the lyrics refer to Usher, Marks, Carl, and Dennis, as well as a Larry. The latter was possibly Larry Lennear, a saxophonist who played and recorded with Brian at the time. &quot;409&quot; was written about Usher&#x27;s obsession over hot-rods. The car sound effects were recorded by Usher driving his car past the home of the Wilsons, who had set up a tape recorder outside using a 100-foot extension cord.

===Side two===
Brian stated that the song &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot; was composed after Dennis told him &quot;surfing’s getting really big. You guys ought to write a song about it.&quot; &quot;Heads You Win, Tails I Lose&quot; was written because of Usher and Brian Wilson&#x27;s frequent use of coin flipping to decide things. The group wanted to make contemporary expressions into songs.

The instrumental &quot;Moon Dawg&quot;, originally performed by the Gamblers, was considered the first surf record. The Beach Boys became the first group to cover the song, exposing it to a much wider audience. &quot;The Shift&quot; was presented as a &quot;fashion statement&quot; from Brian and Love.

==Release and reception==

The album was released through Capitol on October 1, 1962, and peaked at No. 32. Lead single, &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot;, was later credited with creating the genre of California Sound, a music aesthetic primarily revolving around surfing, hot rod culture, and youthful innocence. &quot;409&quot; was similarly credited with starting the hot rod music craze of the 1960s, According to Usher, Capitol chose &quot;Ten Little Indians&quot; as the second single due to thinking that surf music was a fad.

Richie Unterberger, in a retrospective review for AllMusic, felt that most of the songs on &quot;Surfin&#x27; Safari&quot; are substandard, but that as the album was recorded by the Beach Boys themselves rather than session musicians, it offered an opportunity to hear what the band sounded like in the studio.

==Track listing==
All lead vocals by Mike Love, except where noted.

Notes
* Mike Love was not originally credited for &quot;Chug-A-Lug&quot; and &quot;409&quot;. His credits were awarded after a 1994 court case.
* Some reissue pressings omit &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Cuckoo Clock&quot;, and move &quot;Chug-A-Lug&quot; to the beginning of side two.

==Personnel==

Partial credits compiled from the original album liner notes plus additional information from David Leaf, Jon Stebbins, and James Murphy.

The Beach Boys
*Brian Wilson – vocals, electric bass (except &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot;), organ on “Cuckoo Clock”, snare drum tapped with pencil on &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot;, additional production (uncredited)
*Mike Love – vocals; saxophone on &quot;Ten Little Indians&quot;
*Al Jardine – vocals, double bass on &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot;
*Carl Wilson – vocals, electric lead guitar (except &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot;), acoustic guitar on &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot;
*Dennis Wilson – vocals; drums (except &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot;)
*David Marks – vocals, rhythm guitar (except &quot;Surfin&#x27;&quot;)
;Additional musicians and production staff
*Gary Usher – car sound effects on &quot;409&quot;
*Nick Venet – producer
*Murry Wilson – additional production (uncredited)

==Charts==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="62" end="66" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="72" end="86" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="116" end="131" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985567" start="172" end="182" title="Nick Venet" label="Nick Venet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313013" start="198" end="210" title="Brian Wilson" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q629216" start="227" end="232" title="Murry Wilson" label="Murry"/>
<link wikidata="Q897636" start="464" end="476" title="Surfin&amp;#x27;" label="Surfin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q581937" start="493" end="512" title="Surfin&amp;#x27; Safari (song)" label="Surfin&amp;#x27; Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699226" start="692" end="710" title="Ten Little Indians (Beach Boys song)" label="Ten Little Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818623" start="853" end="884" title="Capitol Studios" label="Capitol&amp;#x27;s basement studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937482" start="892" end="913" title="Capitol Records Building" label="famous tower building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918368" start="1460" end="1471" title="Agricultural show" label="county fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="1475" end="1489" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630775" start="1625" end="1637" title="Running Bear" label="Running Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q546359" start="1688" end="1695" title="doo-wop" label="doo-wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236398" start="1731" end="1741" title="David Leaf" label="David Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="2087" end="2095" title="hot rod" label="hot-rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q897636" start="2309" end="2321" title="Surfin&amp;#x27;" label="Surfin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q825367" start="2555" end="2568" title="coin flipping" label="coin flipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070494" start="2714" end="2726" title="The Gamblers (surf band)" label="the Gamblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q220830" start="2753" end="2757" title="Surf music" label="surf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="2908" end="2915" title="fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q897636" start="3081" end="3093" title="Surfin&amp;#x27;" label="Surfin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17747244" start="3147" end="3163" title="California Sound" label="California Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q220830" start="3317" end="3330" title="hot rod music" label="hot rod music"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427002" start="3475" end="3478" title="fad" label="fad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115947" start="3918" end="3928" title="Chug-A-Lug (The Beach Boys song)" label="Chug-A-Lug"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637373" start="3945" end="3948" title="409 (song)" label="409"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261931" start="3989" end="4004" title="Love v. Wilson" label="1994 court case"/>
<link wikidata="Q313013" start="4324" end="4336" title="Brian Wilson" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="4347" end="4360" title="electric bass" label="electric bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="4421" end="4431" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q453330" start="4516" end="4525" title="Mike Love" label="Mike Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="4536" end="4545" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q453314" start="4581" end="4591" title="Al Jardine" label="Al Jardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="4602" end="4613" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q504920" start="4643" end="4654" title="Carl Wilson" label="Carl Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q453611" start="4766" end="4779" title="Dennis Wilson" label="Dennis Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q935475" start="4831" end="4842" title="David Marks" label="David Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526080" start="4945" end="4955" title="Gary Usher" label="Gary Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985567" start="4996" end="5006" title="Nick Venet" label="Nick Venet"/>
<link wikidata="Q629216" start="5019" end="5031" title="Murry Wilson" label="Murry Wilson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706382" wikidata="Q172425" url="?curid=706382" title="Mykola Lysenko">
<text>Mykola Vitaliiovych Lysenko (; 22 March 1842 – 6 November 1912) was a Ukrainian composer, pianist, conductor and ethnomusicologist of the late Romantic period. In his time he was the central figure of Ukrainian music, with an &quot;oeuvre&quot; that includes operas, art songs, choral works, orchestral and chamber pieces, and a wide variety of solo piano music. He is often credited with founding a national music tradition during the Ukrainian national revival, in the vein of contemporaries such as Grieg in Norway, The Five in Russia as well as Smetana and Dvořák in what is now the Czech Republic. 

By studying and drawing from Ukrainian folk music, promoting the use of the Ukrainian language, and separating himself from Russian culture, his compositions form what many consider the quintessential essence of Ukrainian music. This is demonstrated best in his epic opera &quot;Taras Bulba&quot; from the novella of the same name by Nikolai Gogol, in which the grandeur, complexity and Ukrainian-language libretto prevented its staging during Lysenko&#x27;s lifetime.

To promote and cultivate Ukrainian culture, Lysenko set works by many Ukrainian poets to music, especially Taras Shevchenko, to whom he was particularly devoted. His musical setting of a patriotic poem by Oleksandr Konysky, known as the &quot;Prayer for Ukraine&quot;, has become Ukraine&#x27;s spiritual anthem. Lysenko had a profound influence on later Ukrainian composers, including Stanyslav Lyudkevych, Alexander Koshetz, Kyrylo Stetsenko, Yakiv Stepovy, and most importantly, Mykola Leontovych. 

He is the namesake of the Mykola Lysenko International Music Competition and the Lysenko music school, which is now the Kyiv National I. K. Karpenko-Kary Theatre, Cinema and Television University. Despite his immense renown in Ukraine, Lysenko remains relatively unknown outside of his home country.

== Life and career ==
===Early life===
Mykola Vitaliyovych Lysenko (transliterated in Russian as Nikolay Vitalyevich Lysenko), was born in Hrynky, near Kremenchugsky Uyezd of the Poltava Governorate (now Kremenchuk, Poltava Oblast, Ukraine) on 22 March 1842. His hometown was a small village near the Dnieper river, and between the major cities of Kyiv and Dnipropetrovsk. At the time, Ukraine was split between the Russian Empire and Austro-Hungarian Empire. The Lysenko family was wealthy and educated; they were an old aristocratic family stemming back to Cossacks of the 17th-century. Among their descendants were the colonel () who had commanded the Chernihiv Regiment and fought in both the Chyhyrin Campaigns and Azov campaigns; Ivan Lysenko&#x27;s son, () had served as a yesaul and . Mykola Lysenko&#x27;s father was , the great grandson of Fedir and a colonel himself. The composer had two younger siblings, a sister, and a brother, .

Lysenko studied music at an early age, first receiving piano instruction from his mother. At the age of nine, he was brought to Kyiv to continue musical study in boarding schools. He studied piano under and music theory. His early compositions from this time survive, including a Polka () and Nocturne (1859–1860) for piano, as well as a piece for string orchestra, &quot;Moldavskaya, Russian Pizzicato&quot; (1859–1860). In 1860, Lysenko attended the Gymnasium of Kharkiv, and studied natural sciences at the city&#x27;s university, and later at the Kyiv University. At the latter he continued his music studies with Dmitriyev, Wilczyk and Wolner, and graduated in 1865 with a degree in the natural sciences. Lysenko then completed two years of civil service in Tarashcha county as a for disputes involving former serfs and their land-ownership claims. He pursued further music studies at the Leipzig Conservatory, Germany, from 1867 to 1869, where his primary teachers included Carl Reinecke for piano as well as Ernst Richter for composition and theory.

===Emerging composer===

From his youth, Lysenko had developed an intense enthusiasm for Ukrainian music and culture, particularly from the influence of his grandparents, and his enjoyment of peasant songs. In the early 1860s he began to collect and publish Ukrainian folk songs, often with the minstrel Ostap Veresai&#x27;s help. He would later publish seven volumes of arrangements and transcriptions of these between 1868 and 1911. The philosophers Vissarion Belinsky, Nikolay Chernyshevsky and Alexander Herzen influenced him. 

His early works included musical settings of Ukrainian poets, particularly Taras Shevchenko, an important figure of early Ukrainian literature, whose text he set in the choral work &quot;Zapovit&quot; (&#x27;The Testament&#x27;). Two other factors were important to his nationalistic fervor: close relationships with his cousin, Mykhailo Starytsky, the historian Volodymyr Antonovych and the scholar Tadei Rylsky; and also his association with the hromada in Kyiv, the . Lysenko concluded that music was the best way he could express his patriotism, and aimed to create an independent school of Ukrainian music, rather than duplicate existing styles of Western classical music. In 1869 Lysenko returned to Kyiv, and in the words of music historian Richard Taruskin, &quot;he returned home a committed musical nationalist&quot;.

On his return to Kyiv he continued to arrange and study Ukrainian folk melodies. He split his time between numerous activities: giving piano lessons, working at the Russian Musical Society (RMS) chapter in Kyiv, and composing. During this period Lysenko wrote his first opera &quot;Chernomortsy&quot; (the &#x27;Black Sea Sailors&#x27;) between 1872 and 1873. Also during these years he wrote an orchestral fantasia, entitled &quot;Ukraïns′kyy kazak-shumka&quot; (Ukrainian Cossack Song) and a chamber piece for flute, violin and piano, the Fantasy on Ukrainian Themes. Lysenko went to Saint Petersburg from 1874 to 1876 to study orchestration with Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. Besides Rimsky-Korsakov, he met with other members of The Five, particularly Modest Mussorgsky, who was working on an opera set in Ukraine, &quot;The Fair at Sorochyntsi&quot;. During this short stay in Saint Petersburg Lysenko conducted a choir and wrote many piano compositions, writing more than 10 works in a variety of genres.

===Settling in Kyiv===

Lysenko led another choir when he returned to Kyiv 1876. Many of the choristers under Lysenko&#x27;s instruction would become composers, including Levko Revutsky, Porfyrii Demutsky, Kyrylo Stetsenko and his son . Other acitives included organizing concerts for Veresai and giving music lessons, often at the . 

By the late 1870s, Lysenko was recognized as a leading figure in Ukrainian music. As a Ukrainian composer living in a Russian-controlled state he endured continued difficulties from the government. His relationship with the RMS gradually deteriorated, until he was completely ignored. Unlike his Russian colleagues, Lysenko received no state support, and sometimes active resistance from Russian officials. He was repeatedly monitored by the government and often attacked in the local press, because his activities in support of Ukrainian culture made him suspicious to the political officials – in particular his frequent meetings with other Ukrainian patriots, and later, his support of the 1905 revolution and heading of the Ukrainian Club. He was jailed for his stance on the revolution in 1907.

The Ems Ukaz decree of 1876 that banned use of the Ukrainian language in print was one of the obstacles for Lysenko; he had to publish some of his scores abroad, while performances of his music had to be authorized by the imperial censor. For his opera libretti Lysenko insisted on using only Ukrainian. He was so intent on promoting and elevating the Ukrainian culture that he didn&#x27;t allow his opera &quot;Taras Bulba&quot; to be translated – he maintained that it was too ambitious to be staged in Ukrainian opera houses. Tchaikovsky was impressed by the opera and wanted to stage the work in Moscow. Lysenko&#x27;s insistence on it being performed in Ukrainian, not Russian, prevented the performance from taking place in Moscow.

===Later career===
In his later years, Lysenko raised funds to open a Ukrainian School of Music, known as the Lysenko music school. Lysenko&#x27;s daughter Mariana followed in her father&#x27;s footsteps as a pianist, and his son Ostap also taught music in Kyiv.

==Music==
A composer, pianist, conductor and ethnomusicologist, Lysenko was the central figure of Ukrainian music in his time. He was a prolific composer, writing many piano pieces, over a hundred art songs, operas, as well as orchestral, chamber and choral music.

===Operas===

Lysenko wrote a number of operatic works, including the classical Ukrainian opera &quot;Natalka Poltavka&quot;, &quot;Utoplena&quot; (&quot;The Drowned Maiden&quot;, after Gogol&#x27;s &quot;May Night&quot;) and &quot;Taras Bulba&quot;, &quot;Nocturne&quot;, and two operas for children—&quot;Koza-dereza&quot; and &quot;Mr. Kotsky&quot;.

===Art songs===
Of his Ukrainian colleagues, Lysenko was the composer most committed to art songs (). His works in this genre number 133, and &quot;relate a wonderfully descriptive and passionate story of 19th- and early 20th-century European life&quot;. These songs are usually through-composed and attentive to the details of the text. His approach blends characteristics from traditional Ukrainian music and Western classical music. From the former are the frequent use of ornamentation, unusual meters, and folk melody-like affects, while from classical music there is a Romantic use of intense chromaticism and rapid shifts between tonal centers, typical of 20th-century classical music. His songs cover a wide variety of topics, described by the musicologist Dagmara Turchyn as an &quot;astoundingly wide [range]—passionate dramatic monologues and meditative elegies, profound philosophical statements and colourful folk scenes, lyrical serenades and ecstatic love songs, a melancholy waltz and a heroic duma, an extensive romantic ballad and a tone poem&quot;.

Lysenko set music to many poets, particularly the Ukrainian modernists, which he found the best way to express his patriotic and political beliefs. These included Ivan Franko, Yevhen Hrebinka, Oleksandr Oles, , Shchegolev, Staryts′ky and Lesya Ukrainka, but also others such as Heinrich Heine, Adam Mickiewicz and Semyon Nadson. He was particularly devoted to Taras Shevchenko, and set 82 texts from the poet&#x27;s &quot;Kobzar&quot; collection. In Ukraine, comparisons are often drawn between Lysenko and Shevchenko, both of whom form what many Ukrainians consider the essence of their culture and identity.

===Other vocal music===
Aside from art songs, Lysenko&#x27;s vocal work includes three cantatas for choir and orchestra, all to Taras Shevchenko&#x27;s texts: &quot;Raduisia nyvo nepolytaia&quot; (Rejoice, Unwatered Field), &quot;Biut’ porohy&quot; (The Rapids Roar), &quot;&quot; (To the Eternal Memory of Kotliarevsky). He also arranged approximately 500 folk songs for voice and piano, choir and piano, or choir a cappella. He wrote two works for anniversaries of Shevchenko&#x27;s death, a Funeral March (1888) on words by Ukrainka for the 27th, and a Cantata (1911) for the 50th.

His 1885 choral setting of a patriotic poem by Oleksandr Konysky, originally intended for a children&#x27;s choir, became known internationally as &quot;Prayer for Ukraine&quot;, a spiritual hymn for the country.

===Piano music===
Lysenko&#x27;s larger works for piano include the &quot;Ukrainian Suite in Form of Ancient Dances&quot;, two rhapsodies (the second, &quot;Dumka-shumka&quot; is one of his most-known works), &quot;Heroic scherzo&quot; and Sonata in A minor. He also wrote dozens of smaller works such as nocturnes, polonaises, songs without words, and program pieces. Some of his piano works show the influence of Frédéric Chopin&#x27;s style. 

===Chamber music===
Lysenko&#x27;s chamber music includes a string quartet, a trio for two violins and viola, and a number of works for violin and piano.

==Ethnomusicological work==
===Overview===
Lysenko made the first musical-ethnographic studies of the blind kobzar Ostap Veresai which he published in 1873 and 1874; they are still exemplary. Lysenko continued to research and transcribe the repertoire of other kobzars from other regions such as Opanas Slastion from Poltava and Pavlo Bratytsia from Chernihiv. He also made a thorough study of other Ukrainian folk instruments such as the torban. His collection of essays about Ukrainian folk instruments makes him the founder of Ukrainian organology and one of the first organologists in the Russian Empire.

===Writings===
Source:
* 
* 

==Legacy and influence==
The influence of his music and nationalistic style was immense for subsequent Ukrainian composers. Composers such as Stanyslav Lyudkevych, Alexander Koshetz, Kyrylo Stetsenko, Yakiv Stepovy, and mostly importantly, Mykola Leontovych, have acknowledged his influence. Despite his high renown in Ukraine, Lysenko is not particularly well known outside of the country.

From 1950 to 1959, Lysenko&#x27;s complete works were published in Kyiv in 22 volumes.

A group of Ukrainian composers and musicians, including , Ariadna Lysenko (the composer&#x27;s granddaughter), Yevhen Rzhanov, Andriy Shtoharenko, Myroslav Skoryk and Yevhen Stankovych founded the Mykola Lysenko International Music Competition in 1962 in honor of Lysenko. Lysenko&#x27;s home in Kyiv where he resided from 1894 to 1912 was converted into the Mykola Lysenko House-Museum in 1987, one the city&#x27;s many museums for important cultural figures.

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* (Old) Ukrainian Art Song Project Website
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172425" start="0" end="27" title="Mykola Lysenko" label="Mykola Vitaliiovych Lysenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863010" start="70" end="88" title="List of Ukrainian composers" label="Ukrainian composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q486748" start="90" end="97" title="pianist" label="pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="113" end="130" title="ethnomusicologist" label="ethnomusicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="143" end="158" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q155858" start="201" end="216" title="Music of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797274" start="267" end="275" title="art song" label="art song"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="400" end="424" title="Musical nationalism#Ukraine" label="national music tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470657" start="436" end="462" title="Ukrainian national revival" label="Ukrainian national revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="502" end="507" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q190390" start="519" end="527" title="The Five (composers)" label="The Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="549" end="556" title="Bedřich Smetana" label="Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="561" end="567" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q66364245" start="634" end="654" title="Ukrainian folk music" label="Ukrainian folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="681" end="699" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685521" start="884" end="895" title="Taras Bulba (opera)" label="Taras Bulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250822" start="911" end="935" title="Taras Bulba" label="novella of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q43718" start="939" end="952" title="Nikolai Gogol" label="Nikolai Gogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q134958" start="1182" end="1198" title="Taras Shevchenko" label="Taras Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044024" start="1280" end="1297" title="Oleksandr Konysky" label="Oleksandr Konysky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239019" start="1318" end="1336" title="Prayer for Ukraine" label="Prayer for Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863010" start="1430" end="1449" title="List of Ukrainian composers" label="Ukrainian composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q960358" start="1461" end="1481" title="Stanyslav Lyudkevych" label="Stanyslav Lyudkevych"/>
<link wikidata="Q928525" start="1483" end="1500" title="Alexander Koshetz" label="Alexander Koshetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090016" start="1502" end="1518" title="Kyrylo Stetsenko" label="Kyrylo Stetsenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047116" start="1520" end="1533" title="Yakiv Stepovy" label="Yakiv Stepovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467914" start="1557" end="1574" title="Mykola Leontovych" label="Mykola Leontovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q551144" start="1604" end="1650" title="Mykola Lysenko International Music Competition" label="Mykola Lysenko International Music Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220226" start="1659" end="1679" title="Lysenko music school" label="Lysenko music school"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220226" start="1698" end="1773" title="Kyiv National I. K. Karpenko-Kary Theatre, Cinema and Television University" label="Kyiv National I. K. Karpenko-Kary Theatre, Cinema and Television University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149698" start="2018" end="2024" title="Hrynky, Poltava Oblast" label="Hrynky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4240128" start="2031" end="2050" title="Kremenchugsky Uyezd" label="Kremenchugsky Uyezd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271216" start="2058" end="2077" title="Poltava Governorate" label="Poltava Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156724" start="2083" end="2093" title="Kremenchuk" label="Kremenchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q169501" start="2095" end="2109" title="Poltava Oblast" label="Poltava Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="2180" end="2187" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="2227" end="2231" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q48256" start="2236" end="2250" title="Dnipropetrovsk" label="Dnipropetrovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2295" end="2309" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="2314" end="2337" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879036" start="2343" end="2350" title="Lysenko" label="Lysenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="2401" end="2413" title="aristocratic" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="2438" end="2446" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="2501" end="2508" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544519" start="2534" end="2552" title="Chernigov Regiment" label="Chernihiv Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q660004" start="2576" end="2594" title="Chyhyrin Campaigns" label="Chyhyrin Campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763834" start="2599" end="2613" title="Azov campaigns (1695–1696)" label="Azov campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249899" start="2659" end="2665" title="yesaul" label="yesaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="2987" end="3002" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="3032" end="3044" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090674" start="3173" end="3189" title="string orchestra" label="string orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="3277" end="3286" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="3290" end="3297" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="3311" end="3326" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458695" start="3335" end="3357" title="National University of Kharkiv" label="city&amp;#x27;s university"/>
<link wikidata="Q84151" start="3376" end="3391" title="Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv" label="Kyiv University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="3571" end="3584" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q65380" start="3588" end="3597" title="Tarashcha" label="Tarashcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="3640" end="3644" title="serf" label="serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q312578" start="3719" end="3739" title="Leipzig Conservatory" label="Leipzig Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q159569" start="3805" end="3818" title="Carl Reinecke" label="Carl Reinecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q64426" start="3840" end="3853" title="Ernst Richter" label="Ernst Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q66364245" start="4141" end="4161" title="Ukrainian folk music" label="Ukrainian folk songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293380" start="4187" end="4200" title="Ostap Veresai" label="Ostap Veresai"/>
<link wikidata="Q192885" start="4335" end="4353" title="Vissarion Belinsky" label="Vissarion Belinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q192331" start="4355" end="4376" title="Nikolay Chernyshevsky" label="Nikolay Chernyshevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q201221" start="4381" end="4397" title="Alexander Herzen" label="Alexander Herzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q134958" start="4491" end="4507" title="Taras Shevchenko" label="Taras Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439957" start="4745" end="4763" title="Mykhailo Starytsky" label="Mykhailo Starytsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474266" start="4779" end="4799" title="Volodymyr Antonovych" label="Volodymyr Antonovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150150" start="4864" end="4871" title="Hromada (secret society)" label="hromada"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="5069" end="5092" title="Western classical music" label="Western classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173665" start="5164" end="5180" title="Richard Taruskin" label="Richard Taruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275357" start="5410" end="5433" title="Russian Musical Society" label="Russian Musical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q836571" start="5652" end="5660" title="Fantasia (music)" label="fantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5831" end="5847" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="5875" end="5888" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q93227" start="5894" end="5917" title="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov" label="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q190390" start="5973" end="5981" title="The Five (composers)" label="The Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="5996" end="6013" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q471725" start="6065" end="6088" title="The Fair at Sorochyntsi" label="The Fair at Sorochyntsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q596947" start="6423" end="6437" title="Levko Revutsky" label="Levko Revutsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090016" start="6458" end="6474" title="Kyrylo Stetsenko" label="Kyrylo Stetsenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="7281" end="7296" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="1905 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470585" start="7316" end="7330" title="Ukrainian Club" label="Ukrainian Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339735" start="7393" end="7401" title="Ems Ukaz" label="Ems Ukaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="7636" end="7641" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="7642" end="7650" title="libretto" label="libretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685521" start="7801" end="7812" title="Taras Bulba (opera)" label="Taras Bulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="7918" end="7929" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="7989" end="7995" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220226" start="8238" end="8258" title="Lysenko music school" label="Lysenko music school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968328" start="8760" end="8776" title="Natalka Poltavka (opera)" label="Natalka Poltavka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8790" end="8798" title="Utoplena" label="Utoplena"/>
<link wikidata="Q43718" start="8844" end="8849" title="Gogol" label="Gogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275074" start="8863" end="8872" title="May Night, or the Drowned Maiden" label="May Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685521" start="8890" end="8901" title="Taras Bulba (opera)" label="Taras Bulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16219199" start="8915" end="8923" title="Nocturne (Lysenko)" label="Nocturne"/>
<link wikidata="Q46972989" start="8965" end="8976" title="Koza-dereza" label="Koza-dereza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16710889" start="8993" end="9003" title="Mr. Kotsky" label="Mr. Kotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797274" start="9100" end="9108" title="art song" label="art song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267056" start="9291" end="9307" title="Through-composed music" label="through-composed"/>
<link wikidata="Q739589" start="9488" end="9501" title="ornamentation (music)" label="ornamentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="9511" end="9516" title="Metre (music)" label="meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="9587" end="9595" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458157" start="9611" end="9623" title="chromaticism" label="chromaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210411" start="9649" end="9661" title="tonal center" label="tonal center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338153" start="9675" end="9703" title="20th-century classical music" label="20th-century classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="10141" end="10150" title="modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q332462" start="10244" end="10255" title="Ivan Franko" label="Ivan Franko"/>
<link wikidata="Q645491" start="10257" end="10272" title="Yevhen Hrebinka" label="Yevhen Hrebinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380215" start="10274" end="10288" title="Oleksandr Oles" label="Oleksandr Oles"/>
<link wikidata="Q298033" start="10319" end="10333" title="Lesya Ukrainka" label="Lesya Ukrainka"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="10359" end="10373" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79822" start="10375" end="10390" title="Adam Mickiewicz" label="Adam Mickiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047757" start="10395" end="10408" title="Semyon Nadson" label="Semyon Nadson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658157" start="10503" end="10509" title="Kobzar (poetry collection)" label="Kobzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134958" start="10820" end="10836" title="Taras Shevchenko" label="Taras Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044024" start="11325" end="11342" title="Oleksandr Konysky" label="Oleksandr Konysky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239019" start="11431" end="11449" title="Prayer for Ukraine" label="Prayer for Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="11907" end="11922" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330480" start="12202" end="12208" title="kobzar" label="kobzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095582" start="12390" end="12405" title="Opanas Slastion" label="Opanas Slastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q156747" start="12411" end="12418" title="Poltava" label="Poltava"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12423" end="12438" title="Pavlo Bratytsia" label="Pavlo Bratytsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157053" start="12444" end="12453" title="Chernihiv" label="Chernihiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651987" start="12533" end="12539" title="torban" label="torban"/>
<link wikidata="Q13135638" start="12582" end="12598" title="folk instruments" label="folk instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q899293" start="12634" end="12644" title="organology" label="organology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863010" start="12837" end="12856" title="List of Ukrainian composers" label="Ukrainian composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q960358" start="12876" end="12896" title="Stanyslav Lyudkevych" label="Stanyslav Lyudkevych"/>
<link wikidata="Q928525" start="12898" end="12915" title="Alexander Koshetz" label="Alexander Koshetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090016" start="12917" end="12933" title="Kyrylo Stetsenko" label="Kyrylo Stetsenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047116" start="12935" end="12948" title="Yakiv Stepovy" label="Yakiv Stepovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467914" start="12974" end="12991" title="Mykola Leontovych" label="Mykola Leontovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526895" start="13341" end="13359" title="Andriy Shtoharenko" label="Andriy Shtoharenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q278813" start="13361" end="13376" title="Myroslav Skoryk" label="Myroslav Skoryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200892" start="13381" end="13398" title="Yevhen Stankovych" label="Yevhen Stankovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q551144" start="13411" end="13457" title="Mykola Lysenko International Music Competition" label="Mykola Lysenko International Music Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398995" start="13573" end="13600" title="Mykola Lysenko House-Museum" label="Mykola Lysenko House-Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706384" wikidata="Q4858746" url="?curid=706384" title="Barbara Berjer">
<text>Barbara Berjer (June 12, 1920 – October 20, 2002) was an American actress.

==Early life==
Berjer was born Barbara Elinor Berger on June 12, 1920 in Seattle, Washington, the daughter of Knute Eystein Berger (1890-1949), a mechanical engineer originally from Norway, and Thomasina Sutherland (1892-1970), who came from Scotland. She had one older brother, Knute Eystein Berger Jr.

==Career==
Berjer was well-known to television audiences for her roles in daytime soap operas. Her first was role was that of alcoholic actress Lynn Franklin on &quot;From These Roots&quot;, which she played from 1959 until the show&#x27;s end in 1961. (One of her co-stars was actor Henderson Forsythe, who would go on to co-star with Berjer on &quot;As the World Turns&quot; as Dr. David Stewart, her on-screen son-in-law). This followed with an appearance on the 1962 episode of Armstrong Circle Theatre, &quot;Patterns of Hope&quot; (the episode also featured her future &quot;Another World&quot; co-star Douglass Watson. She had a small role as a wife in a 1963 episode of &quot;The Doctors&quot; before joining &quot;The Edge of Night&quot; in the role of Irene Eagon Wheeler, which she played from 1964 till the following year.

Following her departure from that show, she joined the cast of &quot;As the World Turns&quot; as the fifth Claire English. During her time on the show, Claire dealt with widowhood, remarrying, the fallout of her husband having an affair with a younger woman and alcoholism. She played the role until 1971, when the character was killed off. Years later, Berjer&#x27;s co-star Eileen Fulton, who portrayed Claire&#x27;s love rival Lisa) revealed in an interview that Berjer&#x27;s exit came as the result of producers realizing that the character of Claire had become a great-grandmother (her on-screen grandson Dan Stewart had been rapidly aged to adulthood and had just had a child of his own). Producers did not like the idea of her character being a great-grandmother and Claire was killed off as a result. This incident led to Fulton having the now-infamous &quot;granny clause&quot; placed in her contract to protect herself (the clause stated that the writers would not be able to make the character of Lisa a grandmother).

Immediately after leaving, Berjer was cast in the role of Barbara Norris Thorpe on &quot;Guiding Light&quot; (taking over the role from Augusta Dabney). She played the role from 1971 to 1981, with a brief reprisal for a few episodes in 1989, and then on a recurring basis from 1995 to 1996. In 1983, she had a one-day appearance on &quot;All My Children&quot; as the secretary Erica Kane talks to in vain in an effort to reach Adam Chandler. In 1985, Berjer started playing Scottish nanny Bridget Connell on &quot;Another World&quot;, a role she continued to play until 1996, when the character was killed off. Berjer continued to make guest appearances as Bridget&#x27;s ghost until 1998. Berjer is notable for being one of the few actresses to be featured on two daytime soap operas at the same time (&quot;Guiding Light&quot; and &quot;Another World&quot;). In 1997, Berjer guest-starred on &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot; as Mrs. Gannett in the episode &quot;Passion&quot;.

Early in her career, her surname was often mispronounced as &quot;burger&quot;, so she changed it to &quot;Berjer&quot;.

==Personal life==
Berjer married Lee Foley in 1942. The two met while Berjer was attending Cornish College of the Arts to study ballet; Foley was her choreographer. They had one son, Thomas Michael Foley.

==Death==
Berjer died of pneumonia in New York City on October 20, 2002. At the time of her death, she was survived by her son Thomas Michael Foley of Manhattan; her sister-in-law, Margi Berger of Bainbridge Island, Washington;, and several nieces, nephews and cousins.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4858746" start="0" end="14" title="Barbara Berjer" label="Barbara Berjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="149" end="168" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505529" start="548" end="564" title="From These Roots" label="From These Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981481" start="665" end="683" title="Henderson Forsythe" label="Henderson Forsythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302194" start="990" end="1005" title="Douglass Watson" label="Douglass Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638819" start="1065" end="1076" title="The Doctors (1963 TV series)" label="The Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247581" start="1104" end="1121" title="The Edge of Night" label="The Edge of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="1286" end="1304" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1324" end="1338" title="List_of_As_the_World_Turns_characters#E" label="Claire English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349369" start="1593" end="1606" title="Eileen Fulton" label="Eileen Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="2337" end="2350" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820917" start="2384" end="2398" title="Augusta Dabney" label="Augusta Dabney"/>
<link wikidata="Q205474" start="2586" end="2601" title="All My Children" label="All My Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387892" start="2625" end="2635" title="Erica Kane" label="Erica Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678841" start="2675" end="2688" title="Adam Chandler" label="Adam Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="2762" end="2775" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="3148" end="3163" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134192" start="3436" end="3463" title="Cornish College of the Arts" label="Cornish College of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3589" end="3602" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q803903" start="3748" end="3777" title="Bainbridge Island, Washington" label="Bainbridge Island, Washington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706385" wikidata="Q7293849" url="?curid=706385" title="Rapallo and Peschiera conferences">
<text>The Rapallo conference (5 November 1917) and the Peschiera conference (8 November 1917) were meetings of the prime ministers of Italy, France and Britain—Vittorio Orlando, Paul Painlevé and David Lloyd George—during World War I in Rapallo and Peschiera in Italy following the Italians&#x27; defeat at the Battle of Caporetto.

The conferences were held in Italy to reassure the Italians of the Allied commitment to them and of their status as equals. At Rapallo, the French and British premiers refused to entrust their troops in Italy to the command of General Luigi Cadorna and demanded his dismissal. Although he later presented this as a great humiliation, Orlando had made the sacking of Cadorna a condition of his accepting the premiership of Italy from the king. Cadorna was replaced by Armando Diaz. The conference also agreed to the formation of a Supreme War Council at Versailles to co-ordinate allied plans and actions.

At Peschiera, the prime ministers were joined by King Victor Emmanuel III, Sidney Sonnino, Leonida Bissolati, Henry Franklin-Bouillon and Jan Smuts. The king defended Italy&#x27;s decision to defend the Piave rather than the Mincio, but the Italians were forced to accept British and French freedom of action in Italy.

==Citations==
==Sources==
* Lloyd George, David, &quot;War Memoirs of David Lloyd George&quot;, Vol IV, Boston: Little, Brown, 1934
* Edmonds, Sir James E, &quot;History of the Great War, Vol VIII, Military Operations, the March Offensive, 1918&quot;, London: MacMillan, 1935 

==External links==
* The Rapallo Conference</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7293849" start="4" end="22" title="Rapallo and Peschiera conferences" label="Rapallo conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293849" start="49" end="69" title="Rapallo and Peschiera conferences" label="Peschiera conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q297793" start="154" end="170" title="Vittorio Orlando" label="Vittorio Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q315434" start="172" end="185" title="Paul Painlevé" label="Paul Painlevé"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="190" end="208" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="216" end="227" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q210098" start="231" end="238" title="Rapallo" label="Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47649" start="243" end="252" title="Peschiera del Garda" label="Peschiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="305" end="324" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="Battle of Caporetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q333809" start="562" end="575" title="Luigi Cadorna" label="Luigi Cadorna"/>
<link wikidata="Q333778" start="794" end="806" title="Armando Diaz" label="Armando Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458024" start="857" end="876" title="Supreme War Council" label="Supreme War Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="880" end="890" title="Versailles (city)" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="987" end="1006" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q320922" start="1008" end="1022" title="Sidney Sonnino" label="Sidney Sonnino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726211" start="1024" end="1041" title="Leonida Bissolati" label="Leonida Bissolati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132784" start="1043" end="1066" title="Henry Franklin-Bouillon" label="Henry Franklin-Bouillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214321" start="1071" end="1080" title="Jan Smuts" label="Jan Smuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q213462" start="1136" end="1141" title="Piave (river)" label="Piave"/>
<link wikidata="Q936688" start="1158" end="1164" title="Mincio" label="Mincio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706389" wikidata="Q6721470" url="?curid=706389" title="Mabel Lee">
<text>Mabel Lee is a translator of the works of Nobel Prize-winning author Gao Xingjian. She has taught Asian studies at the University of Sydney and is one of Australia&#x27;s leading authorities on Chinese cultural affairs. Lee was a professor of South-East Asian Studies at Sydney University and had already begun translation of the poems of Chinese writer, Yang Lian when she met Gao Xingjian, in Paris in 1991. After that meeting, Lee offered to translate &quot;Soul Mountain&quot;, a project which took seven years, and an additional two to find a publisher for the book in Australia. Following publication, Gao Xingjian became the first Chinese to win a Nobel Prize in Literature.

Lee&#x27;s translation won the 2001 NSW &quot;Premier&#x27;s Translation Prize&quot; despite criticism about the book, and her translation&#x27;s quality. After her retirement from teaching, she translated another of Gao&#x27;s novels, &quot;One Man&#x27;s Bible&quot;, as well as a short-story collection and a book of his essays.

In 2012 Lee&#x27;s translation of &quot;Gao Xingjian: Aesthetics and Creation&quot; was published by Cambria Press. The book is part of the Cambria Sinophone World Series headed by Victor H. Mair.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6721470" start="0" end="9" title="Mabel Lee" label="Mabel Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="15" end="25" title="translator" label="translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="42" end="53" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18143" start="69" end="81" title="Gao Xingjian" label="Gao Xingjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="119" end="139" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="154" end="163" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="194" end="218" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese cultural affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="243" end="259" title="South-east Asia" label="South-East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="330" end="335" title="poems" label="poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546253" start="355" end="364" title="Yang Lian (poet)" label="Yang Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18143" start="378" end="390" title="Gao Xingjian" label="Gao Xingjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760054" start="461" end="474" title="Soul Mountain" label="Soul Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="655" end="666" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="719" end="722" title="New South Wales" label="NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q390176" start="925" end="945" title="One Man&amp;#x27;s Bible" label="One Man&amp;#x27;s Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025265" start="1117" end="1130" title="Cambria Press" label="Cambria Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524932" start="1164" end="1173" title="Sinophone" label="Sinophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925964" start="1197" end="1211" title="Victor H. Mair" label="Victor H. Mair"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706391" wikidata="Q2306443" url="?curid=706391" title="Kirby &amp; the Amazing Mirror">
<text>Kirby &amp; The Amazing Mirror is a 2004 action-platform game developed by HAL Laboratory, Flagship and Dimps and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance. The seventh mainline &quot;Kirby&quot; entry, the game is notable for its unique Metroidvania playstyle and being the first in the genre to support cooperative multiplayer, and follows Kirby as he goes on a journey through the Mirror Dimension to reassemble a mirror after Dark Meta Knight traps Meta Knight inside it.

==Gameplay==
Unlike the other &quot;Kirby&quot; games, &quot;Kirby &amp; The Amazing Mirror&quot; features a maze layout, and is traversed in a Metroidvania style. The Mirror World is divided into nine different-themed areas. The player begins in the first area, a loop that connects to a few other areas. From there the game map branches out in several directions and, providing Kirby has the proper power at his disposal, he is able to go anywhere in almost any order, excluding the final sequence. 

The player explores the Mirror World, solving puzzles, defeating enemies, and collecting items. Occasionally, a sub-boss will be encountered, at which point the screen will lock into place until the boss is defeated. Swallowing a sub-boss after defeat usually grants a rare or exclusive copy ability. Apart from the first, each area of the game houses a major boss who possesses a shard from the broken Dimension Mirror that sits in the center of the hub world. The player must defeat these bosses and reclaim all eight shards to re-assemble the Dimension Mirror, which leads to the final boss.

The player can collect various items to improve in-game performance, such as extra health points and lives, food to replenish health, and batteries for the Cellphone. The game also features two other collectibles: music sheets, which act as a sound test mode once the music player item is found, and spray paint, which can be used to recolor the player&#x27;s Kirby. There are also three minigames accessible from the menu, which support single player and multiplayer:

* Speed Eaters – A game in which the four Kirbys are seated around a covered platter. Once the lid is whisked away at a random time, the fastest person to press the A button and suck in the food on the platter is filled up more (measured by a gauge above each Kirby). 
* Crackity Hack – A game in which the four Kirbys are challenged to break a rock as much as they can, in a similar style to a microgame from &quot;Kirby Super Star&quot;. 
* Kirby&#x27;s Wave Ride – A game in which the Kirbys, atop Warp Stars, race over a water track that varies in length and complexity depending on the difficulty setting, similar to the GameCube racing game &quot;Kirby Air Ride&quot;.

The game also features multiplayer, and the player can call other players or CPU-controlled Kirbys to the location with an in-game cell phone. There are several new powers in &quot;The Amazing Mirror&quot;, such as Cupid (called Angel in the Japanese version), which allows Kirby to fly around with wings and a halo and fire arrows; Missile, which turns Kirby into a missile that can be guided in any direction and will explode on contact with a wall or an enemy or when the B button is hit; and Smash, which gives Kirby the abilities he had in &quot;Super Smash Bros. Melee&quot;.

==Plot==
There is a Mirror World that exists in the skies of Dream Land where any wish reflected in the mirror will come true. However, it copies the mind of a mysterious figure one day and creates a reflected world of evil. Meta Knight notices this and flies up to investigate whether this world will cause any harm to Dream Land.

Meanwhile, Kirby is taking a walk when Dark Meta Knight appears. Before Kirby can react, Dark Meta Knight slices Kirby into four different colored Kirbys. They chase after Dark Meta Knight on a Warp Star simultaneously and enter the Mirror World.

It is revealed that the two Meta Knights fought each other until the real Meta Knight was defeated. He was then knocked into the Dimension Mirror, which was in turn cut into eight fragments by Dark Meta Knight and scattered across the Mirror World, prompting the Kirbys to save Meta Knight and the Mirror World. After collecting all eight mirror fragments, Kirby enters the Dimension Mirror and battles Dark Meta Knight. After defeating him, Kirby is armed with the real Meta Knight&#x27;s Master Sword and taken to fight Dark Mind, the true mastermind behind the Mirror World&#x27;s corruption, multiple times. Upon defeat, the Mirror World is saved, and Shadow Kirby (the Mirror World counterpart of Kirby who was believed to be an enemy, but is now an ally) waves his goodbyes to the four Kirbys as they all exit the Mirror World one by one. Meta Knight also drops his Master Sword before leaving the Mirror World, marking it as a symbol for the Mirror World&#x27;s protection.

==Development==
The game is a collaboration between HAL Laboratory, Flagship, and Dimps. Capcom&#x27;s subsidiary Flagship was responsible for the main planning. Dimps was in charge of programming, design, and sound, while HAL Laboratory provided artwork and debugging services. The game features soundtrack by Hironobu Inagaki and Atsuyoshi Isemura, but some tracks were reserved from &quot;&quot;.

==Release==
&quot;Kirby &amp; The Amazing Mirror&quot; was released for the Game Boy Advance in the region of Japan on April 15, 2004, followed by the region of Europe on July 2, 2004, North America on October 18, 2004, and Australia on December 23, 2004.

===Re-releases===
On August 1, 2011, Nintendo announced that &quot;Kirby &amp; The Amazing Mirror&quot; would be available to limited Nintendo 3DS owners via Virtual Console, along with nine other Game Boy Advance games that were announced; it was released on December 16, 2011, to join the upcoming Nintendo 3DS price-cut and the Ambassador program starting August 11, 2011. This offer is available in all territories and only to those who became eligible in the Ambassador program (by accessing the Nintendo eShop before the date of the price-cut). Nintendo did not release this game, or any other Game Boy Advance games, to the general public in paid form on the 3DS.

The game was also released on the Wii U&#x27;s Virtual Console on April 3, 2014, in Japan and April 10, 2014, in North America, Europe, and Australia, and on the Nintendo Switch Online + Expansion Pack service on September 29, 2023 and brought online multiplayer to the game.

==Reception==
===Critical response===
&quot;The Amazing Mirror&quot; received &quot;generally favorable&quot; reviews according to the review aggregation website Metacritic. In Japan, four critics from &quot;Famitsu&quot; gave the game a total score of 36 out of 40. It received a runner-up position in &quot;GameSpot&quot;″s 2004 &quot;Best Game Boy Advance Game&quot; and &quot;Best Platformer&quot; award categories, losing to &quot;Astro Boy: Omega Factor&quot; and &quot;Ratchet &amp; Clank: Up Your Arsenal&quot;, respectively.

&quot;IGN&quot; commented on the level design, stating that discovering the hidden pathways is the real challenge.&quot; &quot;GameSpot&quot; called the layout &quot;daunting,&quot; but commented on the map feature. The graphics and sound were referred to as cute, though not amazing.

===Sales===
In the United States, &quot;Kirby &amp; The Amazing Mirror&quot; sold 620,000 copies and earned $19 million by August 2006. During the period between January 2000 and August 2006, it was the 43rd highest-selling game launched for the Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, or PlayStation Portable in that country. The game ended up selling 1.47 million copies worldwide, making it the 26th-best-selling game for the Game Boy Advance.
==Notes==
==References==
===Booklets===

==External links==
* Official U.S. Kirby website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270948" start="41" end="47" title="action game" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="48" end="61" title="platformer" label="platform game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068734" start="75" end="89" title="HAL Laboratory" label="HAL Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073236" start="91" end="99" title="Flagship (company)" label="Flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q742390" start="104" end="109" title="Dimps" label="Dimps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="127" end="135" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="144" end="160" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569953" start="183" end="200" title="Kirby (series)" label="&amp;quot;Kirby&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643088" start="243" end="255" title="Metroidvania" label="Metroidvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643088" start="626" end="638" title="Metroidvania" label="Metroidvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q860310" start="1436" end="1445" title="hub world" label="hub world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871848" start="2467" end="2483" title="Kirby Super Star" label="Kirby Super Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181182" start="2704" end="2718" title="Kirby Air Ride" label="Kirby Air Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052131" start="3278" end="3301" title="Super Smash Bros. Melee" label="Super Smash Bros. Melee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328424" start="3535" end="3546" title="Meta Knight" label="Meta Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q613241" start="3654" end="3659" title="Kirby (character)" label="Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068734" start="4925" end="4939" title="HAL Laboratory" label="HAL Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073236" start="4941" end="4949" title="Flagship (company)" label="Flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q742390" start="4955" end="4960" title="Dimps" label="Dimps"/>
<link wikidata="Q14428" start="4962" end="4968" title="Capcom" label="Capcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753830" start="5058" end="5069" title="Game programming" label="programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12336660" start="5071" end="5077" title="Video game design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937950" start="5083" end="5088" title="Sound design" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="5132" end="5141" title="debugging" label="debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="5350" end="5366" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="5665" end="5677" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="5689" end="5704" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q56942" start="6237" end="6242" title="Wii U" label="Wii U"/>
<link wikidata="Q30943865" start="6365" end="6404" title="Nintendo Switch Online" label="Nintendo Switch Online + Expansion Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="6447" end="6465" title="online multiplayer" label="online multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="6615" end="6633" title="Review aggregator" label="review aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="6642" end="6652" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="6688" end="6695" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6916" end="6939" title="Astro Boy: Omega Factor" label="Astro Boy: Omega Factor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6956" end="6992" title="Ratchet &amp;amp; Clank: Up Your Arsenal" label="Ratchet &amp;amp; Clank: Up Your Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="7021" end="7024" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="7142" end="7150" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="7547" end="7563" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="7565" end="7576" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="7581" end="7601" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607452" start="7690" end="7737" title="List of best-selling Game Boy Advance video games" label="26th-best-selling game for the Game Boy Advance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706395" wikidata="Q265887" url="?curid=706395" title="Eileen Davidson">
<text>Eileen Marie Davidson (born June 15, 1959) is an American actress, author, television personality and former model. Davidson is best known for her roles in soap operas as Kristen DiMera and Susan Banks on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; and Ashley Abbott on CBS&#x27;s &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; and &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot;.

In 2014, Davidson was awarded a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for her role in &quot;Days of Our Lives.&quot; She was the second actress to win a Daytime Emmy Award in the category of &quot;Lead Actress&quot; for the soap; and in 2018, she won the award again for her role on &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;.
Davidson also starred in the film &quot;The House on Sorority Row&quot; (1983), had a leading role in the short-lived CBS crime series &quot;Broken Badges&quot; (1990–91), and wrote a number of mystery novels in the 2000s. In 2014, Davidson joined the cast of Bravo reality television series &quot;The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills&quot;, appearing full-time on the program until 2017.

==Early life==
Davidson, the youngest of seven children, was born in Artesia, California, to Charlotte ( Burkhard) Davidson, a homemaker, and Richard Davidson, an airplane parts manufacturer. She was raised Roman Catholic. She attended Corona Del Mar High School in Newport Beach, California and Orange Coast College in Costa Mesa.

==Career==
===Early work===
Davidson originated the role of Ashley Abbott on &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; in March 1982, beating out more than 100 candidates. The character of Ashley became a front-burner character, and Davidson became an integral part of the show. She quit the show in December 1988 and the producers took her recommendation of hiring a look-alike actress named Brenda Epperson, whom Davidson had discovered waiting tables at a charity function. Davidson also appeared in several films during the 1980s, including a main role in the slasher film &quot;The House on Sorority Row&quot; (1983) and &quot;Easy Wheels&quot; (1989), opposite Ted Raimi.

Davidson then appeared in primetime television, but her show, &quot;Broken Badges&quot; (1990–1991), was canceled. She returned to daytime when she assumed the role of Kelly Capwell on &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; from November 1991 until the soap&#x27;s cancelation in January 1993. She next appeared as Kristen Blake on &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; beginning in May 1993. As originally conceived, Kristen was a heroine, who had an Achilles&#x27; heel in that the show&#x27;s supervillain, Stefano, had raised her after the death of her parents. James E. Reilly, who assumed head writing reins in 1993, began to make Kristen more of a villainess. Reilly eventually developed an outrageous second role for Davidson, having her play Susan Banks, a Kristen look-alike. Reilly eventually penned three more roles for Davidson (Sister Mary Moira, Thomas, and Penelope). Her character, Kristen, intended to keep her other character, Susan, prisoner on an island, but Susan ultimately prevailed and Kristen remained on the island until she returned to Salem in 2012. All other related characters were last seen in May 1998. Davidson&#x27;s five roles earned her a Daytime Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in 1998.

After a year-long vacation from acting, she returned to her role on &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; in March 1999. After a successful return as Ashley Abbott, which included Davidson&#x27;s second Daytime Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress, Davidson was fired from the show. In December 2006, Davidson told &quot;TV Guide&quot; that she was fired from &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; due to lack of storyline. Her last airdate as Ashley was January 11, 2007. According to co-star Melody Thomas Scott, the firing was protested behind the scenes of &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; and was seen as unfair. Scott said: &quot;That was so heartbreaking. We&#x27;re still upset about that. That was a blow. Terrible. Eileen Davidson was such a part of the core of the show and such a brilliant actress; beautiful and always prepared. It was crazy. I&#x27;m not the only one who feels that way.&quot; In a surprise move a few months later, Davidson signed a three-year contract with &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; sister soap &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; to once again play her &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; character Ashley Abbott at the request of &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; executive producer Bradley Bell. She first aired on March 9, 2007. Ken Corday called Davidson about a week before she was fired from &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; to get permission to use a picture of her on &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;. The picture, which featured Davidson as Susan, was shown in December 2006.
After she was fired from &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; but before being cast in &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot;, her niece Devon Martt, a fashion designer, approached her about designing clothes together.

===Writing and acting===
Davidson co-wrote her first novel with the author Robert J. Randisi, a mystery set in the soap opera world titled &quot;Death in Daytime&quot;, released in October 2008. She followed it up with three sequels: &quot;Dial Emmy for Murder&quot; (2009), &quot;Diva Las Vegas&quot; (2010), and &quot;Swinging in the Rain&quot; (2011).

In July 2008, Eileen was downgraded to recurring status at &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot;. She returned to &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; full-time as Ashley on September 26, 2008. In 2012, Nelson Branco announced that Sony Pictures Entertainment wanted Davidson on both &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; and &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;, but that &quot;Y&amp;R&quot; would not share the actress, leading Sony to terminate her contract with them. Thus, it was announced that Davidson would reprise her role as Kristen Blake DiMera on &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;.Davidson made a brief appearance on &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; in February 2013 for the soap&#x27;s 40th anniversary. In July 2013, it was announced that Davidson made the decision to leave &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; after a year as Kristen. Davidson exited the role on-screen on November 13, 2013. In late November, it was confirmed that Davidson would return for an episode scheduled to air on December 3, 2013.

On January 28, 2014, it was announced that Davidson would return to the role of Kristen in the summer of 2014. On May 1, 2014, it was formally announced that Davidson was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award in the category of Outstanding Lead Actress In A Drama Series for &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;. It was her third Daytime Emmy Award nomination, her second for &quot;Days&quot;. She won the award on June 22, 2014.

On June 17, 2014, it was announced that Davidson had signed a contract to return to &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;. Subsequently, Davidson revealed that her Y&amp;R contract was for two years and that it included a stipulation that she could continue doing &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; in the future, as well as having the option of taking a break if work became too hectic. Davidson also joined the cast of the fifth season of Bravo reality television series, &quot;The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills&quot;. On November 17, 2014, it was announced that Davidson was back on-set of &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;, with a stint set to air in spring 2015. She appeared from April 15–30, 2015. On June 12, 2017, it was announced that Davidson would return to &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;. Davidson returned from November 2–21 as Susan. Davidson also briefly reprised the roles of Kristen and Sister Mary Moira on November 21 of that year. Davidson stated in 2019 that she had been offered a role on &quot;All My Children&quot; earlier on in her career, but had turned it down as she could not afford to move to New York with her five dogs. 

Davidson starred in the 2019 comedy film &quot;7 Days to Vegas&quot; directed by Eric Balfour released by Gravitas Ventures. The following year, she starred in the Christmas film &quot;Middleton Christmas&quot; (2020) as Alana D&#x27;Angelo, the dean of a prestigious high school. From 2021 to 2022, she starred in the Peacock limited series, &quot;Days of Our Lives: Beyond Salem&quot;. She also starred in the Christmas film &quot;Days of Our Lives: A Very Salem Christmas&quot; for the streaming service in 2021. Also in 2021, Davidson starred in the thriller film &quot;Symphoria&quot; written and directed by Catherine Dao. In 2023, she starred in the Netflix romantic Christmas drama film &quot;Holiday in the Vineyards&quot;.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
==Bibliography==
Davidson collaborated with Robert J. Randisi on the following novels. 
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
*Eileen Davidson&#x27;s official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q265887" start="0" end="21" title="Eileen Davidson" label="Eileen Marie Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437753" start="171" end="185" title="Kristen DiMera" label="Kristen DiMera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856138" start="190" end="201" title="Susan Banks" label="Susan Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="205" end="208" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="222" end="239" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866541" start="250" end="263" title="Ashley Abbott" label="Ashley Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="267" end="270" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="284" end="310" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="327" end="353" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019357" start="394" end="459" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series" label="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609757" start="753" end="778" title="The House on Sorority Row" label="The House on Sorority Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973315" start="854" end="867" title="Broken Badges" label="Broken Badges"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="973" end="978" title="Bravo (U.S. TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759591" start="1011" end="1047" title="The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" label="The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q526814" start="1172" end="1191" title="Artesia, California" label="Artesia, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172136" start="1339" end="1365" title="Corona Del Mar High School" label="Corona Del Mar High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="1369" end="1394" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099536" start="1399" end="1419" title="Orange Coast College" label="Orange Coast College"/>
<link wikidata="Q499196" start="1423" end="1433" title="Costa Mesa" label="Costa Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866541" start="1496" end="1509" title="Ashley Abbott" label="Ashley Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="1519" end="1545" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960675" start="1826" end="1841" title="Brenda Epperson" label="Brenda Epperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="1997" end="2009" title="slasher film" label="slasher film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609757" start="2016" end="2041" title="The House on Sorority Row" label="The House on Sorority Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273036" start="2065" end="2076" title="Easy Wheels" label="Easy Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q447713" start="2100" end="2109" title="Ted Raimi" label="Ted Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973315" start="2180" end="2193" title="Broken Badges" label="Broken Badges"/>
<link wikidata="Q51844146" start="2280" end="2293" title="Kelly Capwell" label="Kelly Capwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q22272" start="2303" end="2316" title="Santa Barbara (TV series)" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437753" start="2414" end="2427" title="Kristen Blake" label="Kristen Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="2437" end="2454" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q33785" start="2543" end="2562" title="Achilles&amp;#x27; heel" label="Achilles&amp;#x27; heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606432" start="2601" end="2608" title="Stefano DiMera" label="Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874622" start="2657" end="2672" title="James E. Reilly" label="James E. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856138" start="2842" end="2853" title="Susan Banks" label="Susan Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="3404" end="3430" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="3660" end="3668" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q457751" start="3834" end="3853" title="Melody Thomas Scott" label="Melody Thomas Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="4393" end="4419" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954882" start="4588" end="4600" title="Bradley Bell" label="Bradley Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453707" start="4636" end="4646" title="Ken Corday" label="Ken Corday"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="4923" end="4949" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="4987" end="5013" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345959" start="5189" end="5206" title="Robert J. Randisi" label="Robert J. Randisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="5705" end="5732" title="Sony Pictures Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="7344" end="7349" title="Bravo (U.S. TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759591" start="7383" end="7419" title="The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" label="The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q205474" start="7919" end="7934" title="All My Children" label="All My Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8025" end="8033" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q73536234" start="8103" end="8118" title="7 Days to Vegas" label="7 Days to Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q451894" start="8137" end="8149" title="Eric Balfour" label="Eric Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597985" start="8162" end="8179" title="Gravitas Ventures" label="Gravitas Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148365" start="8220" end="8234" title="Christmas by medium" label="Christmas film"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="8375" end="8382" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8405" end="8436" title="Days of Our Lives: Beyond Salem" label="Days of Our Lives: Beyond Salem"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8489" end="8530" title="Days of Our Lives: A Very Salem Christmas" label="Days of Our Lives: A Very Salem Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124364811" start="8757" end="8781" title="Holiday in the Vineyards" label="Holiday in the Vineyards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706397" wikidata="Q397325" url="?curid=706397" title="Boleslaus I">
<text>Boleslaus I (also Boleslav I, Boleslaw I, Bolesław I) may refer to:

* Boleslav I of Bohemia (or Boleslaus I of Bohemia, Boleslav the Cruel) (died in 967 or 972)
* Boleslaus I of Poland (Boleslaw the Brave, Bolesław Chrobry), (967–1025)
* Bolesław I the Tall (1127–1201)
* Boleslaus I, Duke of Cieszyn (ca. 1363 – 1431)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q360112" start="71" end="92" title="Boleslav I of Bohemia" label="Boleslav I of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="164" end="185" title="Boleslaus I of Poland" label="Boleslaus I of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q280053" start="239" end="258" title="Bolesław I the Tall" label="Bolesław I the Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q571128" start="273" end="301" title="Boleslaus I, Duke of Cieszyn" label="Boleslaus I, Duke of Cieszyn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706399" wikidata="Q3885125" url="?curid=706399" title="Path-ordering">
<text>In theoretical physics, path-ordering is the procedure (or a meta-operator formula_1) that orders a product of operators according to the value of a chosen parameter:

:formula_2

Here &quot;p&quot; is a permutation that orders the parameters by value:

:formula_3
:formula_4

For example:

:formula_5

In many fields of physics, the most common type of path-ordering is time-ordering, which is discussed in detail below.

== Examples ==

If an operator is not simply expressed as a product, but as a function of another operator, we must first perform a Taylor expansion of this function. This is the case of the Wilson loop, which is defined as a path-ordered exponential to guarantee that the Wilson loop encodes the holonomy of the gauge connection. The parameter &quot;σ&quot; that determines the ordering is a parameter describing the contour, and because the contour is closed, the Wilson loop must be defined as a trace in order to be gauge-invariant.

== Time ordering ==

In quantum field theory it is useful to take the time-ordered product of operators. This operation is denoted by formula_6. (Although formula_6 is often called the &quot;time-ordering operator&quot;, strictly speaking it is neither an operator on states nor a superoperator on operators.)

For two operators &quot;A&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) and &quot;B&quot;(&quot;y&quot;) that depend on spacetime locations x and y we define:

:formula_8
Here formula_9 and formula_10 denote the &quot;invariant&quot; scalar time-coordinates of the points x and y.

Explicitly we have
:formula_11
where formula_12 denotes the Heaviside step function and the formula_13 depends on if the operators are bosonic or fermionic in nature. If bosonic, then the + sign is always chosen, if fermionic then the sign will depend on the number of operator interchanges necessary to achieve the proper time ordering. Note that the statistical factors do not enter here.

Since the operators depend on their location in spacetime (i.e. not just time) this time-ordering operation is only coordinate independent if operators at spacelike separated points commute. This is why it is necessary to use formula_14 rather than formula_15, since formula_15 usually indicates the coordinate dependent time-like index of the spacetime point. Note that the time-ordering is usually written with the time argument increasing from right to left.

In general, for the product of &quot;n&quot; field operators the time-ordered product of operators are defined as follows:

:formula_17

where the sum runs all over &quot;p&quot;&#x27;s and over the symmetric group of &quot;n&quot; degree permutations and
: formula_18

The S-matrix in quantum field theory is an example of a time-ordered product. The S-matrix, transforming the state at to a state at , can also be thought of as a kind of &quot;holonomy&quot;, analogous to the Wilson loop. We obtain a time-ordered expression because of the following reason:

We start with this simple formula for the exponential

:formula_19

Now consider the discretized evolution operator

:formula_20

where formula_21 is the evolution operator over an infinitesimal time interval formula_22. The higher order terms can be neglected in the limit formula_23. The operator formula_24 is defined by

:formula_25

Note that the evolution operators over the &quot;past&quot; time intervals appears on the right side of the product. We see that the formula is analogous to the identity above satisfied by the exponential, and we may write

:formula_26

The only subtlety we had to include was the time-ordering operator formula_6 because the factors in the product defining &quot;S&quot; above were time-ordered, too (and operators do not commute in general) and the operator formula_6 ensures that this ordering will be preserved.

==See also==
* Ordered exponential (essentially the same concept)
* Dyson series
* Gauge theory
* S-matrix

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="3" end="22" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885125" start="24" end="37" title="Path-ordering" label="path-ordering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822258" start="61" end="74" title="meta-operator" label="meta-operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="156" end="165" title="parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="204" end="215" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885125" start="371" end="384" title="Path-ordering" label="time-ordering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597952" start="445" end="453" title="operator (physics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="555" end="571" title="Taylor expansion" label="Taylor expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q206552" start="614" end="625" title="Wilson loop" label="Wilson loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100707" start="649" end="673" title="path-ordered exponential" label="path-ordered exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q907926" start="720" end="728" title="holonomy" label="holonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="736" end="752" title="gauge connection" label="gauge connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q856103" start="841" end="848" title="contour integration" label="contour"/>
<link wikidata="Q321102" start="922" end="927" title="trace (linear algebra)" label="trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="943" end="958" title="gauge-invariant" label="gauge-invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="985" end="1005" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="1217" end="1225" title="linear operator" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446297" start="1242" end="1255" title="superoperator" label="superoperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q322339" start="1589" end="1612" title="Heaviside step function" label="Heaviside step function"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="1664" end="1669" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="1675" end="1682" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364925" start="2076" end="2085" title="spacelike" label="spacelike"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="2103" end="2110" title="Commutativity" label="commute"/>
<link wikidata="Q849512" start="2583" end="2598" title="symmetric group" label="symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q581505" start="2658" end="2666" title="S-matrix" label="S-matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="2670" end="2690" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q907926" start="2830" end="2838" title="holonomy" label="holonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206552" start="2863" end="2874" title="Wilson loop" label="Wilson loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156744" start="3043" end="3061" title="evolution operator" label="evolution operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100707" start="3816" end="3835" title="Ordered exponential" label="Ordered exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957888" start="3869" end="3881" title="Dyson series" label="Dyson series"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="3884" end="3896" title="Gauge theory" label="Gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q581505" start="3899" end="3907" title="S-matrix" label="S-matrix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706401" wikidata="Q2606233" url="?curid=706401" title="Tornedalians">
<text>Tornedalians (; ; ) are an ethnic minority native to the Torne Valley (Meänmaa) region in northern Sweden and Finland. Tornedalians are since year 2000 a recognized national minority in Sweden. Tornedalians generally divide themselves into three distinct groups: Tornedalians, Kvens, and Lantalaiset.

== Language ==

Meänkieli, or Tornedalian, is the language or dialect spoken by Tornedalians. While Meänkieli is recognised in Sweden as one of the country&#x27;s five minority languages, its status as an independent language is sometimes disputed due to its high mutual intelligibility with Finnish. It belongs to the Uralic language family.

== History ==
Tornedalians are descended from Tavastians and Karelians who migrated to the region, as can be seen in local toponymy. This can be seen from some names such as Tornio and Kemi which follow Tavastian characteristics, while names such as Seittenkari follows Karelian characteristics.

Tornedalians are generally thought to be descended from the ancient Kvens, first mentioned by Ohthere of Hålogaland in 890, though recountings of Tornedalian history often begin with the birkarls who are first mentioned in 1328 in a legal hearing by the Swedish Drots Knut Jonsson over disputes with the Hälsings who the birkarls claimed were encroaching on their lands. The birkarls were through the 14th to the 17th century slowly incorporated into and replaced by the Swedish state, with the establishing of Christianity beginning in the 1400s though some pagan burials continued until the early 1600s. Finnic settlement in the Bothnian Bay likely extended as far as the Pite and Lule Rivers by the 11- and 1200s, though Swedish colonisation beginning in the 1300s largely displaced and assimilated these populations.

Following the Treaty of Fredrikshamn between Sweden and Russia in 1809, all Swedish lands east of the Torne, Muonio and Könkämä rivers were ceded to Russia as the Grand Duchy of Finland. As a result, the Finnish-speaking communities on the western side were now officially separated from those on the eastern side of the border, which later also led to divergence of dialect and the language known as Meänkieli. Though the now split region continued to be culturally homogenous and the border had little impact on people&#x27;s everyday life for some time after.

Tornedalians were the targets of extensive so-called &quot;racial biology&quot; and swedification policies. During the 1800s many Tornedalian and Sámi graves were plundered, with the priesthood often playing a large role. Lars Levi Læstadius himself participated in the process of plundering graves. In 1888 Swedish was made the sole language to be used and taught in schools. After the 1902 Norrbotten famine so called &#x27;work cabins&#x27; (Swedish: &quot;arbetsstugor&quot;) were established in Norrbotten as a sort of boarding school where the children from the sparsely populated region could be provided with food, lodging and education, however they worked to forcefully assimilate Tornedalian children and abuse was rampant. In the early- to mid-1900s, Herman Lundborg and others from the State Institute for Racial Biology performed skull measurements on Tornedalians, with Lundborg performing the first measurements in 1913. Bodily measurements in the name of scientific racism were being carried out as late as the 1950s. The ban on speaking Meänkieli in school was revoked by the Riksdag in 1957. No equivalent ban was ever instituted in Finland, however what is now called Meänkieli was heavily looked down upon and de facto forbidden in school.

In 2000, a new law went into effect recognising the Tornedalians as an official national minority and Meänkieli as an official minority language. A truth and reconciliation commission on historical discrimination against the population was appointed in 2020, and made its final report on 15 May 2023. In both 2020 and 2023, STR-T, the National Association of Swedish Tornedalians have demanded the Swedish government to investigate their status as an indigenous people in accordance with ILO 169 though both times the Swedish government has denied to do so.

==Groups and Terms==
Tornedalians generally divide themselves into three different groups: Tornedalians, Lantalaiset and Kvens. The term Tornedalian (&quot;Tornionlaaksolainen&quot;, pl. &quot;Tornionlaaksolaiset&quot;) originally refers specifically to someone living along the lower course of the Torne river, beginning roughly in Pajala municipality, though the term has also come to be widely used to denote all &#x27;Tornedalians&#x27;. Lantalaiset (sl. &quot;Lantalainen&quot;; lit. &quot;fertiliser/settled people&quot;) typically live further inland in an area known as &quot;Lannanmaa&quot;, roughly corresponding to the area known in Swedish as Malmfälten. The term Kven is also used and is connected to both the ancient Kvens and the Norwegian Kvens. The term is especially used in the Karesuando (&quot;Karesuanto&quot;) area. These different terms/groups are not necessarily exclusive, and some may identify with multiple.

Terms such as meänmaalaiset (lit. &quot;people of our land&quot;), meikäläiset (lit. &quot;people like us&quot;) and also Kven (kvääni/kveeni) have been and are used natively to refer to Tornedalians as a whole, though there is no consensus on the use of any one term.

Historically the term &quot;Finn&quot; has been used to denote all Tornedalians. While some Tornedalians will sometimes use the term Finn and Finnish, especially in contexts where them being Tornedalians is implied, the term is otherwise somewhat deprecated and can be seen as offensive to some. In a historical context the terms Finn/Finnish may sometimes still be used. The Swedish terms &quot;byfinne&quot; (pl. byfinnar, lit. &#x27;village Finns&#x27;) and &quot;lappfinne&quot; (pl. lappfinnar, lit. &#x27;Sámi Finns&#x27;) have historically been used to describe the Meänkieli-speaking population in the Gällivare area. While the term &quot;lappfinne&quot; has fallen out of use, the term byfinne remains prevalent.

==Religion and beliefs==

Christianity first gained a proper foothold in the region in the 1400s and by the 1600s had come to be the dominant religion, largely displacing earlier pagan beliefs. However many pagan beliefs still lived on long after. Jopmel/Jobmel was a key figure in Tornedalian beliefs, along with figures such as Hiisi, Perhana, Veen neiti, Jatuni, and others. According to traditional beliefs, a &quot;saivo&quot; is a special kind of holy &quot;double-bottomed&quot; lake which can act as a portal to the land of the dead. The &quot;jänkkäsilmä&quot; (lit. &#x27;eye of the bog&#x27;) was a similarly holy feature in nature, which could likewise transport a person to the other life or through time.

A significant religious shift would come to Meänmaa in the mid-1800s when the Swedish priest Lars Levi Læstadius began preaching his beliefs in the area. Læstadius, while largely Swedish, had during his childhood learned Sámi (primarily Lulesámi as is spoken in Kvikkjokk) however had no knowledge of Meänkieli when he first came to the area in the 1820s. While he first attempted to communicate via the Finnish he had learnt from a book, though he soon found that the local speech was rather different from &quot;proper Finnish&quot; and thus resolved to learn the language first-hand, travelling between different homes and villages and inviting people to talk to him about theological matters and correct him when he made errors in his speech. Lars Levi Læstadius gained great popularity in Meänmaa, though especially in his earlier years his devout belief in temperance caused trouble. When Lars Levi Læstadius died in 1861, preacher took up the mantle as spiritual leader of the movement. After his death in 1899 the movement splintered, though Læstadianism remains an important part of much of Tornedalian society.

During the 1930s, the Korpela Movement gripped Meänmaa, promising that God would soon make a crystal bridge to Palestine where a utopia would be established. The Korpela movement, while originally branching from Læstadianism was much more lenient with the consumption of alcohol, and extramarital sexual relations could be described as accepted, if not outright encouraged. The movement was especially popular among lantalaiset. While the movement&#x27;s heyday came to an end in 1939/1940 when the last of its preachers were jailed the movement and its beliefs have had a lasting impact in Meänmaa.

&quot;Liikutuksia/liikutukset&quot; is an important practice of Tornedalian/Kven Læstadianism. The word roughly translates as &#x27;movements&#x27; or &#x27;ecstasy&#x27; and involves moving about within the church in a state of religious ecstasy often involving hopping, clapping, dancing, shouting praise, singing and similar activities.
==Population==
Sweden does not distinguish minority groups in population censuses, but the number of people who identify themselves as &quot;Tornedalians&quot; is usually estimated to be between 30,000 and 150,000. Estimates are complicated by the fact that the remote and sparsely-populated &quot;Tornedalen&quot; area has been particularly struck by the 20th-century urbanisation and unemployment. In 2006, a large radio survey about Finnish/Meänkieli speakers was conducted in Sweden. The result was that 469,000 individuals in Sweden claimed to understand or speak Finnish and/or Meänkieli. Those who can speak or understand Meänkieli are estimated to be 150,000–175,000.

==Literature and Cinema==
The oldest works of native Tornedalian literature known today are two runic songs by Antti Keksi (1622-1705, known in Swedish as Anders Kexi). The first and most famous concerns the ice discharge of 1677, which brought massive carnage to Torne valley at the time. It was first written down roughly 100 years after its composition and at the time accredited to his grandson Josef. A second runic song by Keksi, about the priest Nicolaus, also survives.

Bengt Pohjanen is a Tornedalian author who has written the first novel in Meänkieli, the language of the Meänmaa. He has written dramas, screenplays, songs and opera. He is trilingual in his writing.

The novel &quot;Popular Music from Vittula&quot; (2000) by the Tornedalian author Mikael Niemi became very popular both in Sweden and in Finland. It is composed of colourful stories of everyday life in the Tornedalian town of Pajala. The novel has been adapted for several stage productions, and as a film in 2004.

The first feature length movie in Meänkieli is set to premier in 2025. Titled &quot;Liikheitä&quot; in Meänkieli (; ), it follows the rise and fall of the Korpela movement. It is directed by and based on Bengt Pohjanen&#x27;s book &quot;Dagning; Röd!&quot;.

== Flag ==
The flag is a horizontal tricolour of yellow, white and blue, in reference to something a Tornedalian woman supposedly said when the border was being drawn: &quot;&quot;The summer-blue sky, you cannot cut in two; Nor the white winter field can you part; And neither can you divide the clear yellow sun! That which you cannot cut in twain shall forever remain.&quot; or alternatively &quot;You may gladly draw a line in the earth, but the air, sun and land - that you can never cut in two.&quot; The Nordic cross is not present on the flag as &quot;No crusaders have we ever been&quot;&quot;.

The Meänmaa Flag Day is celebrated on July 15.

==See also==
*Kven people
*Tornio, Finland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2606233" start="0" end="12" title="Tornedalians" label="Tornedalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="27" end="33" title="Ethnicity" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="34" end="42" title="Minority group" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q18691137" start="71" end="78" title="Meänmaa" label="Meänmaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="99" end="105" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="110" end="117" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="165" end="182" title="national minority" label="national minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869253" start="450" end="488" title="Official minority languages of Sweden" label="country&amp;#x27;s five minority languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="621" end="643" title="Uralic language family" label="Uralic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864082" start="692" end="702" title="Tavastians" label="Tavastians"/>
<link wikidata="Q213470" start="707" end="716" title="Karelians" label="Karelians"/>
<link wikidata="Q214021" start="820" end="826" title="Tornio" label="Tornio"/>
<link wikidata="Q203619" start="831" end="835" title="Kemi" label="Kemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q977858" start="896" end="907" title="Seskarö" label="Seittenkari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666970" start="1003" end="1016" title="Kvens (historical)" label="ancient Kvens"/>
<link wikidata="Q366509" start="1037" end="1058" title="Ohthere of Hålogaland" label="Ohthere of Hålogaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066049" start="1130" end="1138" title="birkarls" label="birkarls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260609" start="1205" end="1210" title="Drots" label="Drots"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1211" end="1223" title="Knut Jonsson" label="Knut Jonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206564" start="1247" end="1255" title="Hälsingland" label="Hälsings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1454" end="1466" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13234218" start="1574" end="1586" title="Bothnian Bay" label="Bothnian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330818" start="1617" end="1621" title="Pite River" label="Pite"/>
<link wikidata="Q857676" start="1626" end="1637" title="Lule River" label="Lule Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130792" start="1779" end="1801" title="Treaty of Fredrikshamn" label="Treaty of Fredrikshamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="1810" end="1816" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1821" end="1827" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q121538" start="1867" end="1872" title="Torne (Finnish and Swedish river)" label="Torne"/>
<link wikidata="Q837208" start="1874" end="1880" title="Muonio (river)" label="Muonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633982" start="1885" end="1892" title="Könkämäeno" label="Könkämä"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="1928" end="1950" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="1969" end="1976" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13357" start="2166" end="2175" title="Meänkieli" label="Meänkieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="2388" end="2402" title="Scientific racism" label="racial biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501625" start="2413" end="2426" title="swedification" label="swedification"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="2475" end="2479" title="Sámi peoples" label="Sámi"/>
<link wikidata="Q434939" start="2551" end="2570" title="Lars Levi Laestadius" label="Lars Levi Læstadius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2716" end="2738" title="1902 Norrbotten famine" label="1902 Norrbotten famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="2853" end="2868" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371354" start="2998" end="3019" title="Forced assimilation" label="forcefully assimilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q503589" start="3092" end="3107" title="Herman Bernhard Lundborg" label="Herman Lundborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140579" start="3128" end="3162" title="State Institute for Racial Biology" label="State Institute for Racial Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="3173" end="3191" title="Phrenology" label="skull measurements"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="3423" end="3430" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869253" start="3709" end="3735" title="Official minority languages of Sweden" label="official minority language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501336" start="3739" end="3774" title="Truth commission" label="truth and reconciliation commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="4042" end="4059" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q331590" start="4079" end="4086" title="ILO 169" label="ILO 169"/>
<link wikidata="Q121538" start="4449" end="4460" title="Torne (Finnish and Swedish river)" label="Torne river"/>
<link wikidata="Q186230" start="4483" end="4502" title="Pajala Municipality" label="Pajala municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568229" start="4805" end="4815" title="Malmfälten" label="Malmfälten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666970" start="4873" end="4886" title="Kvenland" label="ancient Kvens"/>
<link wikidata="Q610315" start="4895" end="4910" title="Kven people" label="Norwegian Kvens"/>
<link wikidata="Q137860" start="4947" end="4957" title="Karesuando" label="Karesuando"/>
<link wikidata="Q493815" start="5967" end="5976" title="Gällivare Municipality" label="Gällivare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="6106" end="6118" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="6259" end="6272" title="Paganism" label="pagan beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q434939" start="6893" end="6912" title="Lars Levi Laestadius" label="Lars Levi Læstadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q56322" start="7037" end="7045" title="Lule Sámi" label="Lulesámi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794845" start="7062" end="7071" title="Kvikkjokk" label="Kvikkjokk"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="7663" end="7673" title="Temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q730475" start="7850" end="7862" title="Laestadianism" label="Læstadianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607543" start="7944" end="7960" title="Korpela movement" label="Korpela Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="7993" end="7996" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="8033" end="8042" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096310" start="8752" end="8769" title="religious ecstasy" label="religious ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="8925" end="8944" title="census" label="population censuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="9232" end="9244" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="9249" end="9261" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q13357" start="9307" end="9316" title="Meänkieli dialects" label="Meänkieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400125" start="9636" end="9647" title="Runic song" label="runic songs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9651" end="9662" title="Antti Keksi" label="Antti Keksi"/>
<link wikidata="Q792882" start="10019" end="10033" title="Bengt Pohjanen" label="Bengt Pohjanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18691137" start="10124" end="10131" title="Meänmaa" label="Meänmaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q491835" start="10236" end="10262" title="Popular Music from Vittula" label="Popular Music from Vittula"/>
<link wikidata="Q969020" start="10302" end="10314" title="Mikael Niemi" label="Mikael Niemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q977248" start="10446" end="10452" title="Pajala" label="Pajala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104319" start="10519" end="10525" title="Popular Music (film)" label="a film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="10546" end="10560" title="feature length" label="feature length"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919464" start="10831" end="10840" title="Triband (flag)" label="tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q208324" start="11305" end="11317" title="Nordic cross flag" label="Nordic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q124498859" start="11403" end="11419" title="Meänmaa Flag Day" label="Meänmaa Flag Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q610315" start="11461" end="11472" title="Kven people" label="Kven people"/>
<link wikidata="Q214021" start="11474" end="11489" title="Tornio" label="Tornio, Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706407" wikidata="Q3833364" url="?curid=706407" title="Lisa Peluso">
<text>Lisa Peluso (born July 29, 1964) is an American soap opera actress.

==Life and career==
Peluso was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the daughter of Mary Peluso. Her first big break came at the age of nine, when she starred in the Broadway production of &quot;&quot; with Angela Lansbury. In 1977, at age thirteen, she played Linda, the younger sister of John Travolta&#x27;s Tony, in the classic film &quot;Saturday Night Fever.&quot;

Later in 1977, Peluso debuted on daytime television as Wendy Wilkins on &quot;Search for Tomorrow&quot;, a role she played until December 1985, one year before the series ended. Peluso replaced Andrea McArdle who vacated the role to star in the Broadway musical &quot;Annie&quot;. While playing &quot;Wendy&quot;, a sixteen-year-old Peluso received her first on-screen kiss from Kevin Bacon.

Other important soap credentials include her portrayal of &quot;Ava Rescott Masters&quot; on &quot;Loving&quot; (1988–1995), as well as her portrayal of Lila Hart Roberts Cory Winthrop on &quot;Another World&quot; (1997–1999) and continued the character on &quot;As the World Turns&quot; (1999). She has also appeared twice on the ABC soap opera &quot;One Life to Live&quot;, first as &quot;Billie Giordano&quot; from 1987 to 1988, then as &quot;Gina Russo&quot; in 2001.

She also made a guest star appearance on &quot;Designing Women&quot;, playing &quot;Shannon&quot;, who irritates Julia Sugarbaker (Dixie Carter) while working as an assistant lawyer to Julia&#x27;s beau, Reese Watson (Hal Holbrook).

Peluso was featured on a 2002 episode of the TLC Network series &quot;A Baby Story&quot;, chronicling her pregnancy and the birth of her second child, Parker Nathaniel Guice. She and her husband, photographer Brad Guice, also have a daughter, Phoebe Ann Guice, who shares the same birthday (July 29) as Lisa.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3833364" start="0" end="11" title="Lisa Peluso" label="Lisa Peluso"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="48" end="58" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="108" end="134" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q206856" start="275" end="290" title="Angela Lansbury" label="Angela Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="358" end="371" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654" start="411" end="431" title="Saturday Night Fever" label="Saturday Night Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q588602" start="495" end="508" title="Wendy McNeil Carter" label="Wendy Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q588602" start="518" end="537" title="Search for Tomorrow" label="Search for Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q692833" start="634" end="648" title="Andrea McArdle" label="Andrea McArdle"/>
<link wikidata="Q566892" start="708" end="713" title="Annie (musical)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="819" end="830" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q607295" start="932" end="938" title="Loving (TV series)" label="Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="1027" end="1040" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="1096" end="1114" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1164" end="1167" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="1168" end="1178" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="1185" end="1201" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q739122" start="1353" end="1368" title="Designing Women" label="Designing Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q739122" start="1419" end="1435" title="Julia Sugarbaker" label="Julia Sugarbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q240360" start="1437" end="1449" title="Dixie Carter" label="Dixie Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q314801" start="1524" end="1536" title="Hal Holbrook" label="Hal Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q130866" start="1585" end="1596" title="TLC Network" label="TLC Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655320" start="1610" end="1622" title="A Baby Story" label="A Baby Story"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706412" wikidata="Q5161687" url="?curid=706412" title="Connection form">
<text>In mathematics, and specifically differential geometry, a connection form is a manner of organizing the data of a connection using the language of moving frames and differential forms.

Historically, connection forms were introduced by Élie Cartan in the first half of the 20th century as part of, and one of the principal motivations for, his method of moving frames. The connection form generally depends on a choice of a coordinate frame, and so is not a tensorial object. Various generalizations and reinterpretations of the connection form were formulated subsequent to Cartan&#x27;s initial work. In particular, on a principal bundle, a principal connection is a natural reinterpretation of the connection form as a tensorial object. On the other hand, the connection form has the advantage that it is a differential form defined on the differentiable manifold, rather than on an abstract principal bundle over it. Hence, despite their lack of tensoriality, connection forms continue to be used because of the relative ease of performing calculations with them. In physics, connection forms are also used broadly in the context of gauge theory, through the gauge covariant derivative.

A connection form associates to each basis of a vector bundle a matrix of differential forms. The connection form is not tensorial because under a change of basis, the connection form transforms in a manner that involves the exterior derivative of the transition functions, in much the same way as the Christoffel symbols for the Levi-Civita connection. The main &quot;tensorial&quot; invariant of a connection form is its curvature form. In the presence of a solder form identifying the vector bundle with the tangent bundle, there is an additional invariant: the torsion form. In many cases, connection forms are considered on vector bundles with additional structure: that of a fiber bundle with a structure group.

==Vector bundles==
===Frames on a vector bundle===

Let formula_1 be a vector bundle of fibre dimension formula_2 over a differentiable manifold formula_3. A local frame for formula_1 is an ordered basis of local sections of formula_1. It is always possible to construct a local frame, as vector bundles are always defined in terms of local trivializations, in analogy to the atlas of a manifold. That is, given any point formula_6 on the base manifold formula_3, there exists an open neighborhood formula_8 of formula_6 for which the vector bundle over formula_10 is locally trivial, that is isomorphic to formula_11 projecting to formula_10. The vector space structure on formula_13 can thereby be extended to the entire local trivialization, and a basis on formula_13 can be extended as well; this defines the local frame. (Here the real numbers are used, although much of the development can be extended to modules over rings in general, and to vector spaces over complex numbers formula_15 in particular.)

Let formula_16 be a local frame on formula_1. This frame can be used to express locally any section of formula_1. For example, suppose that formula_19 is a local section, defined over the same open set as the frame formula_20. Then 
:formula_21
where formula_22 denotes the &quot;components&quot; of formula_19 in the frame formula_24. As a matrix equation, this reads
:formula_25

In general relativity, such frame fields are referred to as tetrads. The tetrad specifically relates the local frame to an explicit coordinate system on the base manifold formula_3 (the coordinate system on formula_3 being established by the atlas).

===Exterior connections===

A connection in &quot;E&quot; is a type of differential operator
:formula_28
where Γ denotes the sheaf of local sections of a vector bundle, and Ω1&quot;M&quot; is the bundle of differential 1-forms on &quot;M&quot;. For &quot;D&quot; to be a connection, it must be correctly coupled to the exterior derivative. Specifically, if &quot;v&quot; is a local section of &quot;E&quot;, and &quot;f&quot; is a smooth function, then
:formula_29
where &quot;df&quot; is the exterior derivative of &quot;f&quot;.

Sometimes it is convenient to extend the definition of &quot;D&quot; to arbitrary &quot;E&quot;-valued forms, thus regarding it as a differential operator on the tensor product of &quot;E&quot; with the full exterior algebra of differential forms. Given an exterior connection &quot;D&quot; satisfying this compatibility property, there exists a unique extension of &quot;D&quot;:
:formula_30
such that
:formula_31
where &quot;v&quot; is homogeneous of degree deg &quot;v&quot;. In other words, &quot;D&quot; is a derivation on the sheaf of graded modules Γ(&quot;E&quot; ⊗ Ω*&quot;M&quot;).

===Connection forms===
The connection form arises when applying the exterior connection to a particular frame e. Upon applying the exterior connection to the &quot;e&quot;&quot;α&quot;, it is the unique &quot;k&quot; × &quot;k&quot; matrix (&quot;ω&quot;&quot;α&quot;&quot;β&quot;) of one-forms on &quot;M&quot; such that
:formula_32
In terms of the connection form, the exterior connection of any section of &quot;E&quot; can now be expressed. For example, suppose that &quot;ξ&quot; = Σ&quot;α&quot; &quot;e&quot;&quot;α&quot;&quot;ξ&quot;&quot;α&quot;. Then
:formula_33

Taking components on both sides,
:formula_34
where it is understood that &quot;d&quot; and ω refer to the component-wise derivative with respect to the frame e, and a matrix of 1-forms, respectively, acting on the components of &quot;ξ&quot;. Conversely, a matrix of 1-forms &quot;ω&quot; is &quot;a priori&quot; sufficient to completely determine the connection locally on the open set over which the basis of sections e is defined.

====Change of frame====
In order to extend &quot;ω&quot; to a suitable global object, it is necessary to examine how it behaves when a different choice of basic sections of &quot;E&quot; is chosen. Write &quot;ω&quot;&quot;α&quot;&quot;β&quot; = &quot;ω&quot;&quot;α&quot;&quot;β&quot;(e) to indicate the dependence on the choice of e.

Suppose that e is a different choice of local basis. Then there is an invertible &quot;k&quot; × &quot;k&quot; matrix of functions &quot;g&quot; such that
:formula_35
Applying the exterior connection to both sides gives the transformation law for &quot;ω&quot;:
:formula_36
Note in particular that &quot;ω&quot; fails to transform in a tensorial manner, since the rule for passing from one frame to another involves the derivatives of the transition matrix &quot;g&quot;.

====Global connection forms====
If {&quot;U&quot;&quot;p&quot;} is an open covering of &quot;M&quot;, and each &quot;U&quot;&quot;p&quot; is equipped with a trivialization e&quot;p&quot; of &quot;E&quot;, then it is possible to define a global connection form in terms of the patching data between the local connection forms on the overlap regions. In detail, a connection form on &quot;M&quot; is a system of matrices &quot;ω&quot;(e&quot;p&quot;) of 1-forms defined on each &quot;U&quot;&quot;p&quot; that satisfy the following compatibility condition
:formula_37
This &quot;compatibility condition&quot; ensures in particular that the exterior connection of a section of &quot;E&quot;, when regarded abstractly as a section of &quot;E&quot; ⊗ Ω1&quot;M&quot;, does not depend on the choice of basis section used to define the connection.

===Curvature===

The curvature two-form of a connection form in &quot;E&quot; is defined by
:formula_38
Unlike the connection form, the curvature behaves tensorially under a change of frame, which can be checked directly by using the Poincaré lemma. Specifically, if e → e &quot;g&quot; is a change of frame, then the curvature two-form transforms by
:formula_39
One interpretation of this transformation law is as follows. Let e* be the dual basis corresponding to the frame &quot;e&quot;. Then the 2-form
:formula_40
is independent of the choice of frame. In particular, Ω is a vector-valued two-form on &quot;M&quot; with values in the endomorphism ring Hom(&quot;E&quot;,&quot;E&quot;). Symbolically,
:formula_41

In terms of the exterior connection &quot;D&quot;, the curvature endomorphism is given by
:formula_42
for &quot;v&quot; ∈ &quot;E&quot; (we can extend &quot;v&quot; to a local section to define this expression). Thus the curvature measures the failure of the sequence
:formula_43
to be a chain complex (in the sense of de Rham cohomology).

===Soldering and torsion===
Suppose that the fibre dimension &quot;k&quot; of &quot;E&quot; is equal to the dimension of the manifold &quot;M&quot;. In this case, the vector bundle &quot;E&quot; is sometimes equipped with an additional piece of data besides its connection: a solder form. A solder form is a globally defined vector-valued one-form θ ∈ Ω1(&quot;M&quot;,&quot;E&quot;) such that the mapping
:formula_44
is a linear isomorphism for all &quot;x&quot; ∈ &quot;M&quot;. If a solder form is given, then it is possible to define the torsion of the connection (in terms of the exterior connection) as
:formula_45
The torsion Θ is an &quot;E&quot;-valued 2-form on &quot;M&quot;.

A solder form and the associated torsion may both be described in terms of a local frame e of &quot;E&quot;. If θ is a solder form, then it decomposes into the frame components
:formula_46
The components of the torsion are then
:formula_47
Much like the curvature, it can be shown that Θ behaves as a contravariant tensor under a change in frame:
:formula_48

The frame-independent torsion may also be recovered from the frame components:
:formula_49

===Bianchi identities===
The Bianchi identities relate the torsion to the curvature. The first Bianchi identity states that

:formula_50

while the second Bianchi identity states that

:formula_51

===Example: the Levi-Civita connection===
As an example, suppose that &quot;M&quot; carries a Riemannian metric. If one has a vector bundle &quot;E&quot; over &quot;M&quot;, then the metric can be extended to the entire vector bundle, as the bundle metric. One may then define a connection that is compatible with this bundle metric, this is the metric connection. For the special case of &quot;E&quot; being the tangent bundle &quot;TM&quot;, the metric connection is called the Riemannian connection. Given a Riemannian connection, one can always find a unique, equivalent connection that is torsion-free. This is the Levi-Civita connection on the tangent bundle &quot;TM&quot; of &quot;M&quot;.

A local frame on the tangent bundle is an ordered list of vector fields , where , defined on an open subset of &quot;M&quot; that are linearly independent at every point of their domain. The Christoffel symbols define the Levi-Civita connection by
:formula_52
If &quot;θ&quot; = , denotes the dual basis of the cotangent bundle, such that &quot;θ&quot;&quot;i&quot;(&quot;e&quot;&quot;j&quot;) = &quot;δ&quot;&quot;i&quot;&quot;j&quot; (the Kronecker delta), then the connection form is
:formula_53

In terms of the connection form, the exterior connection on a vector field is given by
:formula_54
One can recover the Levi-Civita connection, in the usual sense, from this by contracting with &quot;e&quot;i:
:formula_55

====Curvature====
The curvature 2-form of the Levi-Civita connection is the matrix (Ω&quot;i&quot;&quot;j&quot;) given by
:formula_56
For simplicity, suppose that the frame e is holonomic, so that . Then, employing now the summation convention on repeated indices,
:formula_57
where &quot;R&quot; is the Riemann curvature tensor.

====Torsion====
The Levi-Civita connection is characterized as the unique metric connection in the tangent bundle with zero torsion. To describe the torsion, note that the vector bundle &quot;E&quot; is the tangent bundle. This carries a canonical solder form (sometimes called the canonical one-form, especially in the context of classical mechanics) that is the section &quot;θ&quot; of corresponding to the identity endomorphism of the tangent spaces. In the frame e, the solder form is , where again &quot;θ&quot;&quot;i&quot; is the dual basis.

The torsion of the connection is given by , or in terms of the frame components of the solder form by
:formula_58
Assuming again for simplicity that e is holonomic, this expression reduces to
:formula_59,
which vanishes if and only if Γ&quot;i&quot;&quot;kj&quot; is symmetric on its lower indices.

Given a metric connection with torsion, one can always find a single, unique connection that is torsion-free, this is the Levi-Civita connection. The difference between a Riemannian connection and its associated Levi-Civita connection is the contorsion tensor.

==Structure groups==
A more specific type of connection form can be constructed when the vector bundle &quot;E&quot; carries a structure group. This amounts to a preferred class of frames e on &quot;E&quot;, which are related by a Lie group &quot;G&quot;. For example, in the presence of a metric in &quot;E&quot;, one works with frames that form an orthonormal basis at each point. The structure group is then the orthogonal group, since this group preserves the orthonormality of frames. Other examples include:
* The usual frames, considered in the preceding section, have structural group GL(&quot;k&quot;) where &quot;k&quot; is the fibre dimension of &quot;E&quot;.
* The holomorphic tangent bundle of a complex manifold (or almost complex manifold). Here the structure group is GLn(C) ⊂ GL2n(R). In case a hermitian metric is given, then the structure group reduces to the unitary group acting on unitary frames.
* Spinors on a manifold equipped with a spin structure. The frames are unitary with respect to an invariant inner product on the spin space, and the group reduces to the spin group.
* Holomorphic tangent bundles on CR manifolds.

In general, let &quot;E&quot; be a given vector bundle of fibre dimension &quot;k&quot; and &quot;G&quot; ⊂ GL(&quot;k&quot;) a given Lie subgroup of the general linear group of Rk. If (&quot;e&quot;α) is a local frame of &quot;E&quot;, then a matrix-valued function (&quot;g&quot;ij): &quot;M&quot; → &quot;G&quot; may act on the &quot;e&quot;α to produce a new frame
:formula_60
Two such frames are &quot;G&quot;-related. Informally, the vector bundle &quot;E&quot; has the structure of a &quot;G&quot;-bundle if a preferred class of frames is specified, all of which are locally &quot;G&quot;-related to each other. In formal terms, &quot;E&quot; is a fibre bundle with structure group &quot;G&quot; whose typical fibre is Rk with the natural action of &quot;G&quot; as a subgroup of GL(&quot;k&quot;).

===Compatible connections===
A connection is compatible with the structure of a &quot;G&quot;-bundle on &quot;E&quot; provided that the associated parallel transport maps always send one &quot;G&quot;-frame to another. Formally, along a curve γ, the following must hold locally (that is, for sufficiently small values of &quot;t&quot;):
:formula_61
for some matrix &quot;g&quot;αβ (which may also depend on &quot;t&quot;). Differentiation at &quot;t&quot;=0 gives
:formula_62
where the coefficients ωαβ are in the Lie algebra g of the Lie group &quot;G&quot;.

With this observation, the connection form ωαβ defined by
:formula_63
is compatible with the structure if the matrix of one-forms ωαβ(e) takes its values in g.

The curvature form of a compatible connection is, moreover, a g-valued two-form.

===Change of frame===
Under a change of frame
:formula_64
where &quot;g&quot; is a &quot;G&quot;-valued function defined on an open subset of &quot;M&quot;, the connection form transforms via 
:formula_65
Or, using matrix products:
:formula_66
To interpret each of these terms, recall that &quot;g&quot; : &quot;M&quot; → &quot;G&quot; is a &quot;G&quot;-valued (locally defined) function. With this in mind,
:formula_67
where ωg is the Maurer-Cartan form for the group &quot;G&quot;, here pulled back to &quot;M&quot; along the function &quot;g&quot;, and Ad is the adjoint representation of &quot;G&quot; on its Lie algebra.

==Principal bundles==
The connection form, as introduced thus far, depends on a particular choice of frame. In the first definition, the frame is just a local basis of sections. To each frame, a connection form is given with a transformation law for passing from one frame to another. In the second definition, the frames themselves carry some additional structure provided by a Lie group, and changes of frame are constrained to those that take their values in it. The language of principal bundles, pioneered by Charles Ehresmann in the 1940s, provides a manner of organizing these many connection forms and the transformation laws connecting them into a single intrinsic form with a single rule for transformation. The disadvantage to this approach is that the forms are no longer defined on the manifold itself, but rather on a larger principal bundle.

===The principal connection for a connection form===
Suppose that &quot;E&quot; → &quot;M&quot; is a vector bundle with structure group &quot;G&quot;. Let {&quot;U&quot;} be an open cover of &quot;M&quot;, along with &quot;G&quot;-frames on each &quot;U&quot;, denoted by eU. These are related on the intersections of overlapping open sets by
:formula_68
for some &quot;G&quot;-valued function &quot;h&quot;UV defined on &quot;U&quot; ∩ &quot;V&quot;.

Let FG&quot;E&quot; be the set of all &quot;G&quot;-frames taken over each point of &quot;M&quot;. This is a principal &quot;G&quot;-bundle over &quot;M&quot;. In detail, using the fact that the &quot;G&quot;-frames are all &quot;G&quot;-related, FG&quot;E&quot; can be realized in terms of gluing data among the sets of the open cover:
:formula_69
where the equivalence relation formula_70 is defined by
:formula_71

On FG&quot;E&quot;, define a principal &quot;G&quot;-connection as follows, by specifying a g-valued one-form on each product &quot;U&quot; × &quot;G&quot;, which respects the equivalence relation on the overlap regions. First let
:formula_72
be the projection maps. Now, for a point (&quot;x&quot;,&quot;g&quot;) ∈ &quot;U&quot; × &quot;G&quot;, set
:formula_73
The 1-form ω constructed in this way respects the transitions between overlapping sets, and therefore descends to give a globally defined 1-form on the principal bundle FG&quot;E&quot;. It can be shown that ω is a principal connection in the sense that it reproduces the generators of the right &quot;G&quot; action on FG&quot;E&quot;, and equivariantly intertwines the right action on T(FG&quot;E&quot;) with the adjoint representation of &quot;G&quot;.

===Connection forms associated to a principal connection===
Conversely, a principal &quot;G&quot;-connection ω in a principal &quot;G&quot;-bundle &quot;P&quot;→&quot;M&quot; gives rise to a collection of connection forms on &quot;M&quot;. Suppose that e : &quot;M&quot; → &quot;P&quot; is a local section of &quot;P&quot;. Then the pullback of ω along e defines a g-valued one-form on &quot;M&quot;:
:formula_74
Changing frames by a &quot;G&quot;-valued function &quot;g&quot;, one sees that ω(e) transforms in the required manner by using the Leibniz rule, and the adjunction:
:formula_75
where &quot;X&quot; is a vector on &quot;M&quot;, and &quot;d&quot; denotes the pushforward.

==See also==
* Ehresmann connection
* Cartan connection
* Affine connection
* Curvature form

==Notes==
==References==

* Chern, S.-S., &quot;Topics in Differential Geometry&quot;, Institute for Advanced Study, mimeographed lecture notes, 1951.
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="33" end="54" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161687" start="58" end="73" title="Connection form" label="connection form"/>
<link wikidata="Q31924" start="114" end="124" title="connection (mathematics)" label="connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927157" start="147" end="159" title="moving frame" label="moving frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047080" start="165" end="182" title="differential form" label="differential form"/>
<link wikidata="Q274639" start="236" end="247" title="Élie Cartan" label="Élie Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477902" start="424" end="440" title="Frame bundle" label="coordinate frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="458" end="464" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365548" start="623" end="639" title="principal bundle" label="principal bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920850" start="643" end="663" title="connection (principal bundle)" label="principal connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="843" end="866" title="differentiable manifold" label="differentiable manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1071" end="1078" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="1137" end="1149" title="gauge theory" label="gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527631" start="1163" end="1189" title="gauge covariant derivative" label="gauge covariant derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q189569" start="1229" end="1234" title="basis of a vector space" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="1240" end="1253" title="vector bundle" label="vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="1256" end="1262" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q810255" start="1339" end="1354" title="change of basis" label="change of basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754547" start="1417" end="1436" title="exterior derivative" label="exterior derivative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1444" end="1464" title="Atlas (topology)#Transition maps" label="transition functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q847816" start="1494" end="1513" title="Christoffel symbols" label="Christoffel symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q548675" start="1522" end="1544" title="Levi-Civita connection" label="Levi-Civita connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q839832" start="1615" end="1629" title="curvature form" label="curvature form"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557226" start="1652" end="1663" title="solder form" label="solder form"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="1703" end="1717" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229797" start="1757" end="1769" title="torsion (differential geometry)" label="torsion form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="1873" end="1885" title="fiber bundle" label="fiber bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="1893" end="1908" title="Lie group" label="structure group"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="1982" end="1995" title="vector bundle" label="vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="2032" end="2055" title="differentiable manifold" label="differentiable manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q189569" start="2109" end="2114" title="basis of a vector space" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703678" start="2118" end="2132" title="section (fiber bundle)" label="local sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="2246" end="2266" title="local trivialization" label="local trivialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303310" start="2287" end="2292" title="atlas (topology)" label="atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="3308" end="3326" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706302" start="3365" end="3372" title="Tetrad formalism" label="tetrads"/>
<link wikidata="Q521075" start="3586" end="3596" title="connection (vector bundle)" label="connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058681" start="3627" end="3648" title="differential operator" label="differential operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="3681" end="3686" title="sheaf (mathematics)" label="sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703678" start="3696" end="3704" title="section (fibre bundle)" label="sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754547" start="3875" end="3894" title="exterior derivative" label="exterior derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917791" start="4170" end="4196" title="vector-valued differential form" label="&amp;quot;E&amp;quot;-valued forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196652" start="4296" end="4312" title="exterior algebra" label="exterior algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q451323" start="4602" end="4612" title="derivation (abstract algebra)" label="derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608202" start="4966" end="4974" title="one-form" label="one-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="6363" end="6369" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18215105" start="7576" end="7590" title="Poincaré lemma" label="Poincaré lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297777" start="7780" end="7790" title="dual basis" label="dual basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896709" start="7981" end="7998" title="endomorphism ring" label="endomorphism ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143328" start="8348" end="8361" title="chain complex" label="chain complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179446" start="8379" end="8397" title="de Rham cohomology" label="de Rham cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557226" start="8677" end="8688" title="solder form" label="solder form"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917791" start="8726" end="8748" title="vector-valued form" label="vector-valued one-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229797" start="8943" end="8950" title="torsion (differential geometry)" label="torsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555165" start="9390" end="9410" title="Covariance and contravariance of vectors" label="contravariant tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q839832" start="9570" end="9588" title="Bianchi identities" label="Bianchi identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="9833" end="9850" title="Riemannian metric" label="Riemannian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="9865" end="9878" title="vector bundle" label="vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333768" start="9981" end="9994" title="bundle metric" label="bundle metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q788494" start="10085" end="10102" title="metric connection" label="metric connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="10152" end="10166" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q788494" start="10219" end="10240" title="Riemannian connection" label="Riemannian connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229797" start="10333" end="10345" title="torsion tensor" label="torsion-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q548675" start="10359" end="10381" title="Levi-Civita connection" label="Levi-Civita connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q847816" start="10629" end="10648" title="Christoffel symbols" label="Christoffel symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297777" start="10731" end="10741" title="dual basis" label="dual basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142143" start="10749" end="10765" title="cotangent bundle" label="cotangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="10879" end="10894" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884206" start="11338" end="11347" title="Holonomic basis" label="holonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q673253" start="11383" end="11403" title="summation convention" label="summation convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q855112" start="11464" end="11488" title="Riemann curvature tensor" label="Riemann curvature tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q788494" start="11565" end="11582" title="metric connection" label="metric connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014878" start="11773" end="11791" title="canonical one-form" label="canonical one-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="11822" end="11841" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165567" start="12584" end="12601" title="contorsion tensor" label="contorsion tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q427018" start="12731" end="12746" title="associated bundle" label="structure group"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="12835" end="12844" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333768" start="12894" end="12900" title="metric (vector bundle)" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365325" start="12954" end="12971" title="orthonormal basis" label="orthonormal basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="13019" end="13035" title="orthogonal group" label="orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q578874" start="13314" end="13330" title="complex manifold" label="complex manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995691" start="13335" end="13358" title="almost complex manifold" label="almost complex manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741935" start="13417" end="13433" title="hermitian metric" label="hermitian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500617" start="13484" end="13497" title="unitary group" label="unitary group"/>
<link wikidata="Q604907" start="13526" end="13532" title="Spinor" label="Spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577418" start="13564" end="13578" title="spin structure" label="spin structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="13694" end="13704" title="spin group" label="spin group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014001" start="13739" end="13750" title="CR manifold" label="CR manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="14409" end="14421" title="fibre bundle" label="fibre bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q788494" start="14606" end="14616" title="metric compatible" label="compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814838" start="14708" end="14726" title="parallel transport" label="parallel transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="15075" end="15086" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q552787" start="15802" end="15820" title="Maurer-Cartan form" label="Maurer-Cartan form"/>
<link wikidata="Q978505" start="15855" end="15866" title="pullback (differential geometry)" label="pulled back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017106" start="15932" end="15954" title="adjoint representation" label="adjoint representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q304712" start="16507" end="16524" title="Charles Ehresmann" label="Charles Ehresmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="17663" end="17683" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920850" start="17751" end="17785" title="connection (principal bundle)" label="principal &amp;quot;G&amp;quot;-connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969983" start="19212" end="19223" title="pushforward (differential)" label="pushforward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993471" start="19241" end="19261" title="Ehresmann connection" label="Ehresmann connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068049" start="19264" end="19281" title="Cartan connection" label="Cartan connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371213" start="19284" end="19301" title="Affine connection" label="Affine connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q839832" start="19304" end="19318" title="Curvature form" label="Curvature form"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706416" wikidata="Q4725745" url="?curid=706416" title="Alice Barrett">
<text>Alice Barrett (born December 19, 1956) is an American actress.

== Early life and education ==
She was born in New York, New York. She graduated from Hunter College with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in theatre.

== Career ==
Among her TV and movie credits, Barrett is best known for her portrayal of offbeat, psychic private investigator Frankie Frame Winthrop on the soap opera &quot;Another World&quot; from 1989 to 1996. She played Jacqui McCormick on &quot;The Catlins&quot; from 1984 to 1985 and also appeared on &quot;As the World Turns&quot; and &quot;Ryan’s Hope&quot;. She guest starred on the season 12 finale of &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot; in the episode entitled &quot;Smoked&quot;.

== Personal life ==
Barrett is also credited by her married name, Alice Barrett-Mitchell. She is the mother of two daughters.

== Filmography ==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4725745" start="0" end="13" title="Alice Barrett" label="Alice Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="111" end="119" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="121" end="129" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446181" start="150" end="164" title="Hunter College" label="Hunter College"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="364" end="374" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="381" end="394" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721745" start="457" end="468" title="The Catlins (TV series)" label="The Catlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="520" end="538" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970206" start="555" end="566" title="Ryan’s Hope" label="Ryan’s Hope"/>
<link wikidata="" start="625" end="662" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="" start="699" end="705" title="Smoked (Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit)" label="Smoked"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706419" wikidata="Q227575" url="?curid=706419" title="Kirby">
<text>Kirby may refer to:
==Buildings==
* Kirby Building, a skyscraper in Dallas, Texas, United States
* Kirby Lofts, a building in Houston, Texas, United States
* Kirby Hall, an Elizabethan country house near Corby, Northamptonshire, England
* Kirby House (disambiguation), various houses in England and the United States
* Kirby Sports Center, a sports arena in Easton, Pennsylvania, United States
* Kirby&#x27;s Mill, an historic grist mill in Medford, New Jersey, United States

==Businesses==
* Kirby Building Systems, a manufacturer of pre-engineered buildings
* Kirby Corporation, maritime equipment corporation
* Kirby Company, manufacturer of Kirby vacuum cleaners
* Kirby&#x27;s Pig Stand, the first drive-in restaurant in the United States

==Arts and entertainment==
===Fictional characters===
*Kirby (character), the titular character of the &quot;Kirby&quot; game series
*Kirby, a character in &quot;Chicken Little&quot;
*Kirby, the title character of &quot;Rip Kirby&quot;, an American comic strip
*Sir Kirby, a character from &quot;Doc McStuffins&quot;
*Kirby Buckets, the titular character in the live-action series of the same name
* Kirby Reed, a character from the &quot;Scream&quot; franchise
* the Kirby family in the play &quot;You Can&#x27;t Take It with You&quot;
* Officer Kirby, a character from &quot;Chip &#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers&quot;
* Kirby Morris, a character from &quot;The Suite Life on Deck&quot;

===Other arts and entertainment===
* &quot;Kirby&quot; (series), a video game series
* &quot;Kirby&quot;, a song from the album &quot; The Impossible Kid&quot; by Aesop Rock
* &quot;Kirby&quot; (&quot;Dynasty&quot;), an episode of the television series &quot;Dynasty&quot;
* &quot;&quot;, a 2008 biography by Mark Evanier

==Places==
=== United States ===
* Kirby, Arkansas, an unincorporated census-designated place
* Kirby, Indiana, an unincorporated community
* Kirby, Missouri, an unincorporated community
* Kirby, Montana, a populated place
* Kirby, Ohio, a village
* Kirby, Texas, a city
* Kirby, Vermont, a town
* Kirby, West Virginia, an unincorporated community
* Kirby, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community
* Kirby, Wyoming, a town
* Kirby Lake, Abilene, Texas, a man-made reservoir

=== England ===
* Kirby Cane, a village in Norfolk
* Kirby Cross, a village in Essex
* Kirby Grindalythe, a village in North Yorkshire
* Kirby-on-the-Moor, also known as Kirby, a village in North Yorkshire
* Kirby-le-Soken, a village in Essex
* Kirby Muxloe, a village and civil parish west of Leicester

=== Elsewhere ===
* Kirby, Ontario, a hamlet in Canada
* Kirby Cone, a peak in Marie Byrd Land, Antarctica

==People==
* Kirby (surname), people with the surname
* Kirby (given name), people with the given name
** Kirby Howell-Baptiste, English actor credited mononymously as Kirby since 2023
** Kirby Lauryen, American singer-songwriter also known simply as Kirby

==Schools==
* Kirby College of Further Education, now part of Middlesbrough College, North Yorkshire, England
* Kirby High School (disambiguation), several schools in the United States

==Other uses==
* Kirby calculus
* Kirby (cucumber), used for pickling
* Kirby 23, a sailboat designed by Bruce Kirby and produced in the mid-1980s
* Kirby 25, a sailboat designed by Bruce Kirby and produced in the mid-1980s
* Kirby Award, an award presented from 1985 to 1987 for achievements in comic books
* Kirby Forensic Psychiatric Center, a psychiatric hospital in New York City
* 51985 Kirby, an asteroid named after Jack Kirby
* Loteki Supernatural Being (1990–2007), also known as Kirby, the only dog to have won all three major international dog shows in the same year

==See also==
* Kirby Krackle (or Kirby Dots), an artistic convention in comic books
* Kerby (disambiguation)
* Kirkby (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227575" start="0" end="5" title="Kirby" label="Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414903" start="36" end="50" title="Kirby Building" label="Kirby Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560805" start="99" end="110" title="Kirby Lofts" label="Kirby Lofts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171493" start="158" end="168" title="Kirby Hall" label="Kirby Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414928" start="239" end="267" title="Kirby House (disambiguation)" label="Kirby House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414958" start="319" end="338" title="Kirby Sports Center" label="Kirby Sports Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414883" start="396" end="413" title="Kirby&amp;#x27;s Mill" label="Kirby&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414904" start="494" end="516" title="Kirby Building Systems" label="Kirby Building Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151094" start="563" end="580" title="Kirby Corporation" label="Kirby Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265319" start="615" end="628" title="Kirby Company" label="Kirby Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414978" start="670" end="692" title="Kirby&amp;#x27;s Pig Stand" label="Kirby&amp;#x27;s Pig Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q613241" start="801" end="818" title="Kirby (character)" label="Kirby (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q270940" start="908" end="922" title="Chicken Little (2005 film)" label="Chicken Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560785" start="966" end="975" title="Rip Kirby" label="Rip Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q114632" start="1008" end="1017" title="Sir Kirby" label="Sir Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151386" start="1064" end="1077" title="Kirby Buckets" label="Kirby Buckets"/>
<link wikidata="Q111721458" start="1146" end="1156" title="Kirby Reed" label="Kirby Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147779" start="1245" end="1276" title="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You (play)" label="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1323" end="1356" title="Chip &amp;#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers (TV series)" label="Chip &amp;#x27;n Dale: Rescue Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q139849" start="1402" end="1424" title="The Suite Life on Deck" label="The Suite Life on Deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569953" start="1469" end="1495" title="Kirby (series)" label="&amp;quot;Kirby&amp;quot; (series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096409" start="1567" end="1585" title="The Impossible Kid (album)" label="The Impossible Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527952" start="1608" end="1647" title="Kirby (Dynasty)" label="&amp;quot;Kirby&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Dynasty&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414885" start="1790" end="1805" title="Kirby, Arkansas" label="Kirby, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414886" start="1851" end="1865" title="Kirby, Indiana" label="Kirby, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085941" start="1897" end="1912" title="Kirby, Missouri" label="Kirby, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704649" start="1944" end="1958" title="Kirby, Montana" label="Kirby, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q643022" start="1980" end="1991" title="Kirby, Ohio" label="Kirby, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011883" start="2005" end="2017" title="Kirby, Texas" label="Kirby, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948170" start="2028" end="2042" title="Kirby, Vermont" label="Kirby, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414890" start="2053" end="2073" title="Kirby, West Virginia" label="Kirby, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550394" start="2105" end="2121" title="Kirby, Wisconsin" label="Kirby, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q955147" start="2153" end="2167" title="Kirby, Wyoming" label="Kirby, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414940" start="2178" end="2188" title="Kirby Lake" label="Kirby Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518928" start="2246" end="2256" title="Kirby Cane" label="Kirby Cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414911" start="2281" end="2292" title="Kirby Cross" label="Kirby Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665622" start="2315" end="2332" title="Kirby Grindalythe" label="Kirby Grindalythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360894" start="2365" end="2382" title="Kirby-on-the-Moor" label="Kirby-on-the-Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414892" start="2436" end="2450" title="Kirby-le-Soken" label="Kirby-le-Soken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414948" start="2473" end="2485" title="Kirby Muxloe" label="Kirby Muxloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414889" start="2553" end="2567" title="Kirby, Ontario" label="Kirby, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414907" start="2590" end="2600" title="Kirby Cone" label="Kirby Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553818" start="2654" end="2669" title="Kirby (surname)" label="Kirby (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16277992" start="2697" end="2715" title="Kirby (given name)" label="Kirby (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56876940" start="2747" end="2768" title="Kirby Howell-Baptiste" label="Kirby Howell-Baptiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q97011103" start="2829" end="2842" title="Kirby Lauryen" label="Kirby Lauryen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414906" start="2913" end="2947" title="Kirby College of Further Education" label="Kirby College of Further Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414923" start="3011" end="3045" title="Kirby High School (disambiguation)" label="Kirby High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956316" start="3102" end="3116" title="Kirby calculus" label="Kirby calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="3119" end="3135" title="Kirby (cucumber)" label="Kirby (cucumber)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414897" start="3157" end="3165" title="Kirby 23" label="Kirby 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593637" start="3234" end="3242" title="Kirby 25" label="Kirby 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324867" start="3311" end="3322" title="Kirby Award" label="Kirby Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q78638788" start="3395" end="3428" title="Kirby Forensic Psychiatric Center" label="Kirby Forensic Psychiatric Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246165" start="3472" end="3483" title="51985 Kirby" label="51985 Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949149" start="3522" end="3547" title="Loteki Supernatural Being" label="Loteki Supernatural Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414968" start="3680" end="3693" title="Kirby Krackle" label="Kirby Krackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393722" start="3751" end="3773" title="Kerby (disambiguation)" label="Kerby (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q353615" start="3776" end="3799" title="Kirkby (disambiguation)" label="Kirkby (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706420" wikidata="Q7152499" url="?curid=706420" title="Paul Michael Valley">
<text>Paul Michael Valley (born September 24, 1965) is an American television and stage actor.

==Early life and education==
Valley was born in Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin. When he was eight years old he moved with his family to Greenwich, Connecticut. In 1984 he moved to Washington, D.C., where he attended American University for two years, followed by a year as an apprentice to Michael Kahn, the artistic director of the Shakespeare Theatre Company. Valley then attended the Juilliard School in New York City, where he was a member of the drama division&#x27;s &quot;Group 20&quot; (1987–1991). After his third year at Juilliard, he left to take on roles in television soap operas.

==Career==
Among his numerous television credits, his most memorable and long-lasting role was his portrayal of Ryan Harrison on the soap opera &quot;Another World&quot; from 1990 to 1995. He left the show, and executive producer Jill Farren Phelps had his character shot to death by his brother Grant (Mark Pinter).

Valley then took on stage roles, including Bertram in &quot;All&#x27;s Well That Ends Well&quot; at the Shakespeare Theatre and as Thomas Jefferson in &quot;1776&quot; at the Roundabout Theatre, which moved to Broadway in 1997. He followed that with work in regional theater and also appeared in guest roles on the television series &quot;Third Watch&quot;, &quot;Ed&quot;, and &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;.

In 2011, he starred in the off-Broadway comedy &quot;Any Given Monday&quot; at the 59E59 Theaters. In 2015 he played the role of Richard Hart in &quot;Hold Outs&quot; the 9th episode of the 6th season of the CBS police procedural drama &quot;Blue Bloods&quot;.

==Stage==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7152499" start="0" end="19" title="Paul Michael Valley" label="Paul Michael Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944698" start="138" end="162" title="Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin" label="Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="220" end="242" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="264" end="280" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q168000" start="300" end="319" title="American University" label="American University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202676" start="374" end="386" title="Michael Kahn (theatre director)" label="Michael Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462820" start="417" end="444" title="Shakespeare Theatre Company" label="Shakespeare Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="471" end="487" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="491" end="504" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="665" end="675" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="812" end="822" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="829" end="842" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145085" start="909" end="927" title="Jill Farren Phelps" label="Jill Farren Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119932" start="982" end="993" title="Mark Pinter" label="Mark Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q506865" start="1057" end="1087" title="All&amp;#x27;s Well That Ends Well" label="All&amp;#x27;s Well That Ends Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462820" start="1101" end="1120" title="Shakespeare Theatre Company" label="Shakespeare Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="1128" end="1144" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553152" start="1154" end="1158" title="1776 (musical)" label="1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371225" start="1172" end="1190" title="Roundabout Theatre" label="Roundabout Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q927245" start="1336" end="1347" title="Third Watch" label="Third Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q930797" start="1361" end="1363" title="Ed (TV series)" label="Ed"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1381" end="1418" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640970" start="1510" end="1524" title="59E59 Theaters" label="59E59 Theaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1635" end="1638" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q885643" start="1669" end="1680" title="Blue Bloods (TV series)" label="Blue Bloods"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706422" wikidata="Q129611" url="?curid=706422" title="Cleveite">
<text>Cleveite is an impure radioactive variety of uraninite containing uranium, found in Norway. It has the composition UO2 with about 10% of the uranium substituted by rare-earth elements. It was named after Swedish chemist Per Teodor Cleve.

Cleveite was the first known terrestrial source of helium, which is created over time by alpha decay of the uranium and accumulates trapped (occluded) within the mineral. The first sample of helium was obtained by William Ramsay in 1895 when he treated a sample of the mineral with acid. Cleve and Abraham Langlet succeeded in isolating helium from cleveite at about the same time.

Yttrogummite is a variant of cleveite also found in Norway.

==See also==

* List of minerals
* List of minerals named after people

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q129611" start="0" end="8" title="Cleveite" label="Cleveite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="22" end="33" title="radioactivity" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="45" end="54" title="uraninite" label="uraninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="66" end="73" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="84" end="90" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q378379" start="115" end="118" title="Uranium dioxide" label="UO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="164" end="182" title="rare-earth element" label="rare-earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q377822" start="220" end="236" title="Per Teodor Cleve" label="Per Teodor Cleve"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="290" end="296" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="328" end="339" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q950726" start="453" end="467" title="William Ramsay" label="William Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="521" end="525" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706401" start="537" end="552" title="Abraham Langlet" label="Abraham Langlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099911" start="622" end="634" title="Yttrogummite" label="Yttrogummite"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="674" end="680" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q243479" start="699" end="715" title="List of minerals" label="List of minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291565" start="718" end="753" title="List of minerals named after people" label="List of minerals named after people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706429" wikidata="Q546304" url="?curid=706429" title="Christine Tucci">
<text>Christine Tucci (born January 19, 1967) () is an American actress.

==Life and career==
Tucci, an Italian American, who was born January 19, 1967, in Katonah, New York. She is the daughter of Joan (née Tropiano), a retired secretary and writer, and Stanley Tucci, Sr., a retired high school art teacher, both of whom have roots in the town of Marzi in Calabria. 

Tucci had a semi-regular role on the television series &quot;MDs&quot; (2002) and played Amanda Cory on the soap opera &quot;Another World&quot; from 1993 to 1995. She was a regular cast member on &quot;C-16: FBI&quot;, in the role of Special Agent Annie Rooney, from 1997 to 1998. She played Sergeant Welles in the movie &quot;K-911&quot;, released direct-to-video in 1999; in 2000, she made an appearance as Dr. Kiera Behrle on &quot;&quot;. She appeared in the 2003 TV movie &quot;Straight from the Heart&quot; as Carla Dimaggio.

==Personal life==
Tucci married Vincent Angell in 1999. They have one son, who is autistic. Tucci and Angell played parents of an autistic boy on an episode of &quot;Without a Trace&quot;.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
==Soundtrack==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q546304" start="0" end="15" title="Christine Tucci" label="Christine Tucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888777" start="150" end="167" title="Katonah, New York" label="Katonah, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455914" start="198" end="201" title="married and maiden names" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="279" end="290" title="high school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q53914" start="343" end="348" title="Marzi, Calabria" label="Marzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="352" end="360" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715231" start="425" end="428" title="MDs (TV series)" label="MDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="472" end="482" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="489" end="502" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="" start="567" end="576" title="C-16: FBI" label="C-16: FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972463" start="692" end="697" title="K-911" label="K-911"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="714" end="729" title="direct-to-video" label="direct-to-video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576731" start="848" end="871" title="Straight from the Heart (2003 film)" label="Straight from the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q826477" start="1064" end="1079" title="Without a Trace" label="Without a Trace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706434" wikidata="Q3364408" url="?curid=706434" title="San Gorgonio Mountain">
<text>San Gorgonio Mountain, also known locally as Mount San Gorgonio, or Old Greyback, is the highest peak in Southern California and the Transverse Ranges at .

It is in the San Bernardino Mountains, east of the city of San Bernardino and north-northeast of San Gorgonio Pass. It lies within the San Gorgonio Wilderness, part of the Sand to Snow National Monument managed by the San Bernardino National Forest.

Spanish missionaries in the area during the early 17th century named the peak after Saint Gorgonius.

Since it is the highest point in a region which is separated from higher peaks (e.g. in the Sierra Nevada) by relatively low terrain, San Gorgonio Mountain is one of the most topographically prominent peaks in the United States. It is ranked 7th among peaks in the 48 contiguous states and 18th overall.

Like other high peaks in the Transverse Ranges, the mountain has a pyramid shape, with a steep north face and a slightly shallower south face. The mountain is large and broad; the summit plateau itself is one square-mile in area (2.6 km2).

In contrast to its spectacular but lower neighbor, San Jacinto Peak, San Gorgonio is not particularly craggy, and from a distance, it appears to be an extremely high hill, earning it the name of &quot;greyback&quot;. Despite not being particularly striking in appearance during the summer, it is the only mountain in Southern California with a summit a significant distance above the tree line. As such its bright white winter snow cap, unobstructed by vegetation, makes the mountain noticeable from many miles away. The mountain hosts the longest recorded line of sight in the contiguous United States; it is plainly visible from the summit of Mount Whitney, away.

==Geography==

San Gorgonio Mountain lies at the easternmost extremity of the Transverse Ranges. The mountain is a heavily eroded, partially dissected plateau.

Big Bear Lake, California is the largest city near San Gorgonio, and hosts two major ski resorts; it is also used for summer recreation.

===Geology===
The shape of the mountain is influenced by a series of steeply dipping thrust faults on the north face of the mountain. The south side of the mountain contains river canyons typical of a dissected plateau.

The mountain consists of a massive block of quartz monzonite, which sits on an ancient platform of Precambrian gneissic rocks. Glacial and fluvial deposits dominate the surface of the lowest part of the mountain.

===Hydrology===
Three major Southern California rivers have their source on San Gorgonio Mountain: the Santa Ana River, the Whitewater River, and the San Gorgonio River.

Jenks Lake, on the north slope of the mountain, is one of the few perennial lakes in Southern California.

San Gorgonio Mountain sits on the Great Basin Divide, which separates streams that flow into the basins of the Basin and Range Province from rivers that flow into the Pacific Ocean.

===Climate===
The climate on most of the mountain is &quot;Csb&quot; (Warm-summer Mediterranean) under the Köppen climate classification. The summit of San Gorgonio has a dry summer subalpine climate (Köppen &quot;Dfc&quot;), bordering on Alpine climate (&quot;ET&quot;), with only two months averaging over 10 °C.
==Hiking==
Like most other peaks in the Transverse Ranges, the summit is a technically easy &quot;class 1&quot; hike. Several trails lead to the broad summit of San Gorgonio Mountain, which rises a few hundred feet (100 m) above the tree line. Most routes are very strenuous and require well over of elevation gain.

The trail leading from the Fish Creek Trailhead to San Gorgonio Mountain has about of gain, less than the routes from the South Fork and Vivian Creek trailheads. Some junctions on this trail are not well marked.

==Aircraft wreckages==
On December 1, 1952, a Douglas C-47, serial number 45-1124, crashed at the level on the eastern face of the mountain. The C-47 was en route from Offutt Air Force Base, Nebraska to March Air Force Base near Riverside, California when it struck the mountain at night in the middle of a storm. &quot;The aircraft was last heard from at 9:51 p.m. Pacific Standard Time, Monday.&quot; Thirteen people died.

Nearly one month after the C-47 accident a Marine Corps HRS-2 helicopter, bureau number 129037, crashed on the mountain in coordination of the efforts of recovering the victims. The three crewmen of the helicopter survived the impact. The remains of the wreckage of the two aircraft were left on the mountain and are accessible via the Fish Creek Trailhead or the South Fork Trailhead.

In more recent years, the mountain claimed the lives of Frank Sinatra&#x27;s mother, Dolly (January 6, 1977) and Dean Paul Martin (March 21, 1987), son of Dean Martin, in unrelated plane crashes. Martin was an Air National Guard pilot; the McDonnell Douglas F-4C he was flying disappeared in a snowstorm and the wreckage was found on the mountain several days later.

==See also==
* List of California county high points
* List of Ultras of the United States

==References==
==External links==
* 
* OnTheTrail.org – San Gorgonio Topo and Trail Map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3364408" start="0" end="21" title="San Gorgonio Mountain" label="San Gorgonio Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364408" start="45" end="63" title="San Gorgonio Mountain" label="Mount San Gorgonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364408" start="68" end="80" title="San Gorgonio Mountain" label="Old Greyback"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="105" end="124" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q942677" start="133" end="150" title="Transverse Ranges" label="Transverse Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577959" start="170" end="194" title="San Bernardino Mountains" label="San Bernardino Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="216" end="230" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897453" start="254" end="271" title="San Gorgonio Pass" label="San Gorgonio Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414265" start="292" end="315" title="San Gorgonio Wilderness" label="San Gorgonio Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q22829057" start="329" end="359" title="Sand to Snow National Monument" label="Sand to Snow National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413436" start="375" end="405" title="San Bernardino National Forest" label="San Bernardino National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q704817" start="492" end="507" title="Gorgonius" label="Saint Gorgonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="602" end="615" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q656751" start="685" end="710" title="topographic prominence" label="topographically prominent"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="775" end="795" title="contiguous United States" label="48 contiguous states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414344" start="1107" end="1123" title="San Jacinto Peak" label="San Jacinto Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q235539" start="1701" end="1714" title="Mount Whitney" label="Mount Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q942677" start="1801" end="1818" title="Transverse Ranges" label="Transverse Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584293" start="1864" end="1881" title="dissected plateau" label="dissected plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q430708" start="1884" end="1909" title="Big Bear Lake, California" label="Big Bear Lake, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584293" start="2223" end="2240" title="dissected plateau" label="dissected plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q781461" start="2287" end="2303" title="quartz monzonite" label="quartz monzonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="2342" end="2353" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="2354" end="2360" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761189" start="2560" end="2575" title="Santa Ana River" label="Santa Ana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996346" start="2581" end="2597" title="Whitewater River (California)" label="Whitewater River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414264" start="2607" end="2625" title="San Gorgonio River" label="San Gorgonio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177664" start="2628" end="2638" title="Jenks Lake" label="Jenks Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598719" start="2769" end="2787" title="Great Basin Divide" label="Great Basin Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="2846" end="2870" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2988" end="2999" title="Mediterranean climate#Warm-summer Mediterranean climate" label="Warm-summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="3000" end="3013" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3025" end="3054" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="3100" end="3117" title="subarctic climate" label="subalpine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3119" end="3125" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="3157" end="3171" title="Alpine climate" label="Alpine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="3466" end="3475" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="3809" end="3821" title="Douglas C-47" label="Douglas C-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q626985" start="3931" end="3952" title="Offutt Air Force Base" label="Offutt Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="3954" end="3962" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031829" start="3966" end="3986" title="March Air Force Base" label="March Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q49243" start="3992" end="4013" title="Riverside, California" label="Riverside, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="4232" end="4244" title="United States Marines" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q694765" start="4245" end="4261" title="Sikorsky H-19" label="HRS-2 helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="4632" end="4645" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078200" start="4661" end="4666" title="Dolly Sinatra" label="Dolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181118" start="4689" end="4705" title="Dean Paul Martin" label="Dean Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="4731" end="4742" title="Dean Martin" label="Dean Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407622" start="4786" end="4804" title="Air National Guard" label="Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="4816" end="4838" title="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II" label="McDonnell Douglas F-4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622439" start="4959" end="4996" title="List of California county high points" label="List of California county high points"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601398" start="4999" end="5034" title="List of Ultras of the United States" label="List of Ultras of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706435" wikidata="Q1443036" url="?curid=706435" title="Parseval's theorem">
<text>In mathematics, Parseval&#x27;s theorem usually refers to the result that the Fourier transform is unitary; loosely, that the sum (or integral) of the square of a function is equal to the sum (or integral) of the square of its transform. It originates from a 1799 theorem about series by Marc-Antoine Parseval, which was later applied to the Fourier series. It is also known as Rayleigh&#x27;s energy theorem, or Rayleigh&#x27;s identity, after John William Strutt, Lord Rayleigh. 

Although the term &quot;Parseval&#x27;s theorem&quot; is often used to describe the unitarity of &quot;any&quot; Fourier transform, especially in physics, the most general form of this property is more properly called the Plancherel theorem.

== Statement of Parseval&#x27;s theorem ==

Suppose that formula_1 and formula_2 are two complex-valued functions on formula_3 of period formula_4 that are square integrable (with respect to the Lebesgue measure) over intervals of period length, with Fourier series

:formula_5
and
:formula_6

respectively. Then
where formula_7 is the imaginary unit and horizontal bars indicate complex conjugation. Substituting formula_1 and formula_9:

:formula_10
As is the case with the middle terms in this example, many terms will integrate to formula_11 over a full period of length formula_12 (see harmonics):
:formula_13

More generally, if formula_1 and formula_2 are instead two complex-valued functions on formula_3 of period formula_17 that are square integrable (with respect to the Lebesgue measure) over intervals of period length, with Fourier series

:formula_18
and
:formula_19

respectively. Then

Even more generally, given an abelian locally compact group &quot;G&quot; with Pontryagin dual &quot;G^&quot;, Parseval&#x27;s theorem says the Pontryagin–Fourier transform is a unitary operator between Hilbert spaces &quot;L&quot;2(&quot;G&quot;) and &quot;L&quot;2(&quot;G^&quot;) (with integration being against the appropriately scaled Haar measures on the two groups.) When &quot;G&quot; is the unit circle T, &quot;G^&quot; is the integers and this is the case discussed above. When &quot;G&quot; is the real line formula_3, &quot;G^&quot; is also formula_3 and the unitary transform is the Fourier transform on the real line. When &quot;G&quot; is the cyclic group Zn, again it is self-dual and the Pontryagin–Fourier transform is what is called discrete Fourier transform in applied contexts.

Parseval&#x27;s theorem can also be expressed as follows:

Suppose formula_22 is a square-integrable function over formula_23 (i.e., formula_22 and formula_25 are integrable on that interval), with the Fourier series
:formula_26
Then

:formula_27

== Notation used in engineering ==

In electrical engineering, Parseval&#x27;s theorem is often written as:

:formula_28

where formula_29 represents the continuous Fourier transform (in non-unitary form) of formula_30, and formula_31 is frequency in radians per second.

The interpretation of this form of the theorem is that the total energy of a signal can be calculated by summing power-per-sample across time or spectral power across frequency. 

For discrete time signals, the theorem becomes:

:formula_32

where formula_33 is the discrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT) of formula_34 and formula_35 represents the angular frequency (in radians per sample) of formula_34.

Alternatively, for the discrete Fourier transform (DFT), the relation becomes:

:formula_37

where formula_38 is the DFT of formula_39, both of length formula_40.

We show the DFT case below. For the other cases, the proof is similar. By using the definition of inverse DFT of formula_38, we can derive

:formula_42

where formula_43 represents complex conjugate.

== See also ==
Parseval&#x27;s theorem is closely related to other mathematical results involving unitary transformations:
*Parseval&#x27;s identity
*Plancherel&#x27;s theorem
*Wiener–Khinchin theorem
*Bessel&#x27;s inequality

==Notes==
==External links==
* Parseval&#x27;s Theorem on Mathworld</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1443036" start="16" end="39" title="Parseval&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Parseval&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="78" end="95" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972470" start="99" end="106" title="Unitary operator" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="278" end="284" title="series (mathematics)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q527008" start="288" end="309" title="Marc-Antoine Parseval" label="Marc-Antoine Parseval"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="342" end="356" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443036" start="378" end="408" title="Parseval&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Rayleigh&amp;#x27;s energy theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443036" start="413" end="437" title="Parseval&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Rayleigh&amp;#x27;s identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83297" start="445" end="464" title="John William Strutt" label="John William Strutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="629" end="636" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096184" start="705" end="723" title="Plancherel theorem" label="Plancherel theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="856" end="862" title="periodic function" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530791" start="882" end="899" title="square integrable" label="square integrable"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="921" end="937" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="977" end="991" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="1062" end="1076" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="1106" end="1125" title="complex conjugation" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="1284" end="1290" title="Periodic_function" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="1317" end="1326" title="harmonic" label="harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530791" start="1469" end="1486" title="square integrable" label="square integrable"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="1508" end="1524" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="1564" end="1578" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122103" start="1659" end="1688" title="Locally compact abelian group" label="abelian locally compact group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632419" start="1708" end="1723" title="Pontryagin dual" label="Pontryagin dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="1832" end="1846" title="Hilbert spaces" label="Hilbert spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162676" start="1969" end="1982" title="Haar measure" label="Haar measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="2029" end="2040" title="unit circle" label="unit circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="2226" end="2243" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="2288" end="2300" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="2382" end="2408" title="discrete Fourier transform" label="discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="2718" end="2740" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="2833" end="2861" title="continuous Fourier transform" label="continuous Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q442787" start="3016" end="3022" title="Energy (signal processing)" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15963867" start="3135" end="3148" title="discrete time" label="discrete time"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="3149" end="3156" title="signal (information theory)" label="signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440048" start="3217" end="3248" title="discrete-time Fourier transform" label="discrete-time Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="3300" end="3317" title="angular frequency" label="angular frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="3322" end="3328" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="3381" end="3407" title="discrete Fourier transform" label="discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q944238" start="3847" end="3871" title="Parseval&amp;#x27;s identity" label="Parseval&amp;#x27;s identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096184" start="3873" end="3898" title="Plancherel&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Plancherel&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301141" start="3900" end="3923" title="Wiener–Khinchin theorem" label="Wiener–Khinchin theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q794042" start="3925" end="3949" title="Bessel&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Bessel&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706444" wikidata="Q4866451" url="?curid=706444" title="1936 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting">
<text>The first elections to select inductees to the Baseball Hall of Fame were held in 1936. Members of the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America (BBWAA) were given authority to select individuals from the 20th century; while a special Veterans Committee, made up of individuals with greater familiarity with the 19th century game, were polled to select deserving individuals from that era. The intent was for 15 honorees to be selected before the 1939 ceremonies – 10 from the 20th century and 5 from the 19th; additional players from both eras would be selected in later years. Voters were given free rein to decide for themselves in which group a candidate belonged, with neither group knowing the outcome of the other election; some candidates had their vote split between the elections as a result – Cy Young, the pitcher with the most wins in Major League history, finished 8th in the BBWAA vote and 4th in the Veterans vote. In addition, there was no prohibition on voting for active players, a number of whom received votes. Individuals who had been banned from baseball – such as Shoeless Joe Jackson and Hal Chase – were also not formally excluded, though few voters chose to include them on ballots.

In the BBWAA election, voters were instructed to cast votes for 10 candidates, the same number of desired selections; in the Veterans&#x27; election, voters were also instructed to vote for 10, although the desire for only 5 initial selections led to revisions in the way the votes were counted. Any candidate receiving votes on at least 75% of the ballots in either election would be honored with induction to the Hall upon its opening in the sport&#x27;s supposed centennial year of 1939.
==BBWAA vote==
A total of 226 ballots were cast, with 2,231 individual votes for 47 specific candidates, an average of 9.87 per ballot; 170 votes were required for election. Initial ballots included 33 players listed as suggestions, although revised ballots were later sent with an additional seven names; when questions arose about players who had been omitted, voters needed to be reminded that these names were simply intended as &quot;suggestions&quot; rather than the entire field of possibilities, and that write-in votes were fully allowed. Candidates who were listed on the ballot as suggestions are indicated here with a dagger (†). The five candidates who received at least 75% of the vote and were elected are indicated in bold italics; candidates who have since been selected in subsequent elections are indicated in &quot;italics&quot;:





==Veterans vote==
A total of 78 ballots were cast by players, writers, managers and officials who had first-hand familiarity with 19th-century baseball, resulting in 371 individual votes for 57 specific candidates; 59 votes were required for election. No candidates were elected, possibly because of a great deal of confusion regarding the voting procedure. The ballots which were issued in this vote also featured a list of suggested candidates, which was amended after complaints that Ed Delahanty, Willie Keeler and Cy Young should be on this ballot as well as that for the 20th century; but when some voters expressed doubts regarding the possibility of write-in votes, a letter including clearer instructions specifically allowing for write-ins had to be mailed. Many voters were also under the impression that they were to select an &quot;All-Star team&quot; of 10 players, with one at each position; 58 ballots cast in this manner were sent back to the voters to be re-cast, although 10 voters returned the ballots unaltered, stating that was the way they wished to vote regardless of the instructions. The results were delayed for several days until early February while these reminders and revisions took place.

It was further decided, during the tabulations and after the voting, that voters would each be restricted to 5 total votes in order to limit the initial 19th century selections to 5 players; but since most voters had cast votes for 10, it was ruled that each vote would only count as 1/2 in the total for that candidate – making a 75% tally nearly mathematically impossible. When the votes were tabulated with this method, only two candidates had totals reaching even 50% of the required number. Plans for a runoff election featuring only the top 12 finishers, to be held prior to the 1939 opening of the Hall, never materialized; even with all the problems, the 1936 vote would remain the Hall&#x27;s most successful attempt to seek a wide vote from experts on the era regarding candidates from that period.

Candidates who were listed as suggestions on the ballot are indicated here with a †. Candidates who have since been selected in subsequent elections are indicated in &quot;italics&quot;, as is Honus Wagner, who was elected in the BBWAA vote:

*†&quot;Cap Anson&quot; – 391/2
*†&quot;Buck Ewing&quot; – 391/2
*†&quot;Willie Keeler&quot; – 33
*†&quot;Cy Young&quot; – 321/2
*†&quot;Ed Delahanty&quot; – 211/2
*†&quot;John McGraw&quot; – 17
*†&quot;Charles Radbourn&quot; – 16
*†Herman Long – 151/2
*†&quot;Mike &quot;King&quot; Kelly&quot; – 15
*†&quot;Amos Rusie&quot; – 111/2
*†&quot;Hughie Jennings&quot; – 11
*†&quot;Fred Clarke&quot; – 9
*&quot;Jimmy Collins&quot; – 8
*†&quot;Charles Comiskey&quot; – 6
*†Jerry Denny – 6
*Bill Lange – 6
*†&quot;Wilbert Robinson&quot; – 6
*Harry Stovey – 6
*†&quot;George Wright&quot; – 6
*†&quot;John Clarkson&quot; – 5
*&quot;Honus Wagner&quot; – 5
*†&quot;Albert Spalding&quot; – 4
*†&quot;Hugh Duffy&quot; – 31/2
*†Ross Barnes – 3
*†Charlie Bennett – 3
*&quot;Kid Nichols&quot; – 3
*†&quot;John Montgomery Ward&quot; – 3
*†Fred Dunlap – 21/2
*&quot;Dan Brouthers&quot; – 2
*Jack Glasscock – 2
*&quot;Billy Hamilton&quot; – 2
*&quot;Nap Lajoie&quot; – 2
*Ned Williamson – 2
*Bobby Lowe – 11/2
*Doug Allison – 1
*Joe Battin – 1
*&quot;Jake Beckley&quot; – 1
*Tommy Bond – 1
*†&quot;Jesse Burkett&quot; – 1
*Lou Criger – 1
*Bill Dahlen – 1
*Jake Daubert – 1
*Jack Doyle – 1
*&quot;Tim Keefe&quot; – 1
*†Matt Kilroy – 1
*Arlie Latham – 1
*Jimmy McAleer – 1
*&quot;Tommy McCarthy&quot; – 1
*Cal McVey – 1
*Charlie Pabor – 1
*Lip Pike – 1
*Jack Remsen – 1
*Hardy Richardson – 1
*Fred Tenney – 1
*George Van Haltren – 1
*†&quot;Bobby Wallace&quot; – 1
*&quot;Deacon White&quot; – 1
*†&quot;Candy Cummings&quot; – 0
*†Silver Flint – 0
*†Lee Richmond – 0

==See also==
* List of members of the Baseball Hall of Fame

==References==
==External links==
*1936 Election at www.baseballhalloffame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="47" end="68" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="103" end="148" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521285" start="239" end="257" title="Veterans Committee" label="Veterans Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="808" end="816" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q955322" start="1092" end="1112" title="Shoeless Joe Jackson" label="Shoeless Joe Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640726" start="1117" end="1126" title="Hal Chase" label="Hal Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047165" start="3048" end="3060" title="Ed Delahanty" label="Ed Delahanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q710260" start="3062" end="3075" title="Willie Keeler" label="Willie Keeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="3080" end="3088" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316903" start="4786" end="4798" title="Honus Wagner" label="Honus Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028466" start="4844" end="4853" title="Cap Anson" label="Cap Anson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562569" start="4876" end="4886" title="Buck Ewing" label="Buck Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q710260" start="4909" end="4922" title="Willie Keeler" label="Willie Keeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="4942" end="4950" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047165" start="4973" end="4985" title="Ed Delahanty" label="Ed Delahanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q712153" start="5008" end="5019" title="John McGraw" label="John McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028712" start="5039" end="5055" title="Charles Radbourn" label="Charles Radbourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739990" start="5069" end="5080" title="Herman Long (baseball)" label="Herman Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527827" start="5097" end="5124" title="King Kelly" label="Mike &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747947" start="5144" end="5154" title="Amos Rusie" label="Amos Rusie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634713" start="5177" end="5192" title="Hughie Jennings" label="Hughie Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494850" start="5212" end="5223" title="Fred Clarke" label="Fred Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186024" start="5241" end="5254" title="Jimmy Collins" label="Jimmy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q597832" start="5273" end="5289" title="Charles Comiskey" label="Charles Comiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12957712" start="5302" end="5313" title="Jerry Denny" label="Jerry Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909831" start="5319" end="5329" title="Bill Lange" label="Bill Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q339617" start="5342" end="5358" title="Wilbert Robinson" label="Wilbert Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563080" start="5370" end="5382" title="Harry Stovey" label="Harry Stovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252827" start="5395" end="5408" title="George Wright (sportsman)" label="George Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251902" start="5427" end="5440" title="John Clarkson" label="John Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316903" start="5458" end="5470" title="Honus Wagner" label="Honus Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272299" start="5489" end="5504" title="Albert Spalding" label="Albert Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634294" start="5523" end="5533" title="Hugh Duffy" label="Hugh Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562614" start="5549" end="5560" title="Ross Barnes" label="Ross Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066826" start="5567" end="5582" title="Charlie Bennett" label="Charlie Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196371" start="5594" end="5605" title="Kid Nichols" label="Kid Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562672" start="5624" end="5644" title="John Montgomery Ward" label="John Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095292" start="5657" end="5668" title="Fred Dunlap" label="Fred Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q284797" start="5683" end="5696" title="Dan Brouthers" label="Dan Brouthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112727" start="5708" end="5722" title="Jack Glasscock" label="Jack Glasscock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251899" start="5734" end="5748" title="Billy Hamilton (baseball, born 1866)" label="Billy Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335869" start="5766" end="5776" title="Nap Lajoie" label="Nap Lajoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q255824" start="5788" end="5802" title="Ned Williamson" label="Ned Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935308" start="5808" end="5818" title="Bobby Lowe" label="Bobby Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300241" start="5827" end="5839" title="Doug Allison" label="Doug Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208524" start="5845" end="5855" title="Joe Battin" label="Joe Battin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678813" start="5867" end="5879" title="Jake Beckley" label="Jake Beckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188946" start="5891" end="5901" title="Tommy Bond (baseball)" label="Tommy Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688144" start="5914" end="5927" title="Jesse Burkett" label="Jesse Burkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16026985" start="5939" end="5949" title="Lou Criger" label="Lou Criger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908652" start="5955" end="5966" title="Bill Dahlen" label="Bill Dahlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11309086" start="5972" end="5984" title="Jake Daubert" label="Jake Daubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112178" start="5990" end="6000" title="Jack Doyle (baseball)" label="Jack Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264106" start="6012" end="6021" title="Tim Keefe" label="Tim Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566935" start="6034" end="6045" title="Matt Kilroy" label="Matt Kilroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792230" start="6051" end="6063" title="Arlie Latham" label="Arlie Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179083" start="6069" end="6082" title="Jimmy McAleer" label="Jimmy McAleer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819667" start="6094" end="6108" title="Tommy McCarthy (baseball)" label="Tommy McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10947564" start="6120" end="6129" title="Cal McVey" label="Cal McVey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085337" start="6135" end="6148" title="Charlie Pabor" label="Charlie Pabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556136" start="6154" end="6162" title="Lip Pike" label="Lip Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114799" start="6168" end="6179" title="Jack Remsen" label="Jack Remsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392623" start="6185" end="6201" title="Hardy Richardson" label="Hardy Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496389" start="6207" end="6218" title="Fred Tenney" label="Fred Tenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545447" start="6224" end="6242" title="George Van Haltren" label="George Van Haltren"/>
<link wikidata="Q888704" start="6255" end="6268" title="Bobby Wallace (baseball)" label="Bobby Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566790" start="6286" end="6298" title="Deacon White" label="Deacon White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251998" start="6317" end="6331" title="Candy Cummings" label="Candy Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516032" start="6344" end="6356" title="Silver Flint" label="Silver Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251856" start="6363" end="6375" title="Lee Richmond" label="Lee Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q649861" start="6396" end="6440" title="List of members of the Baseball Hall of Fame" label="List of members of the Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706449" wikidata="Q4119932" url="?curid=706449" title="Mark Pinter">
<text>Mark Pinter (born March 7, 1950) is an American actor best known for his numerous roles in daytime soap operas.

==Early life and education==
Pinter was born in Decorah, Iowa. He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in theatre arts from Iowa State University and a Master of Fine Arts from the Hilberry Theatre at Wayne State University.

==Career==

===Acting===
Often cast as a villain, Pinter has been a contract player on such shows as &quot;Love of Life&quot;, &quot;Guiding Light&quot;, &quot;As the World Turns&quot;, &quot;Loving&quot;, and &quot;All My Children&quot;. His most famous role was that of crooked politician Grant Harrison on &quot;Another World&quot; (1991–99), for which he won the Soap Opera Digest Award for Best Villain in 1996.

In addition to his work in daytime television, Pinter has guest-starred on numerous primetime television series such as &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot; and performed extensively on regional theatre stages across the country. He has also appeared in Norman Jewison&#x27;s &quot;Other People&#x27;s Money&quot; and Cameron Crowe&#x27;s &quot;Vanilla Sky&quot;. He has starred in the independent films &quot;Season of Youth&quot; and &quot;The Eden Myth&quot;.

A classically trained stage actor, Pinter has enjoyed numerous roles on renowned stages across the country including The Arena Stage in Washington, DC and The Old Globe Theater in San Diego, CA, and The York Theater Company off Broadway. Most recently, he played Avery Brundage in the world premiere production of Kemp Power&#x27;s play &quot;The Nineteenth&quot; at The Old Globe Theater.

===Directing===
Pinter made his directorial debut in 2003 when he directed the world premiere of Jonathan Bell&#x27;s &quot;Portraits&quot; at the Union Square Theatre in New York. The play starred Roberta Maxwell and Dana Reeve.

==Personal life==
Pinter has six biological children and three step-children. His daughter, Siri, is married to television and radio host Carson Daly. Pinter was married to fellow soap opera star Colleen Zenk from 1986 to 2010. In 2017, he married Jenie Dahlmann who serves as co-CEO and Chief Marketing and Communications officer for Overture Center for the Arts in Madison, WI. They reside in Madison.

==Filmography==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4119932" start="0" end="11" title="Mark Pinter" label="Mark Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="99" end="109" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781710" start="161" end="174" title="Decorah, Iowa" label="Decorah, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="233" end="254" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175466" start="261" end="280" title="Master of Fine Arts" label="Master of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716138" start="290" end="306" title="Hilberry Theatre (Wayne State University)" label="Hilberry Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q349055" start="310" end="332" title="Wayne State University" label="Wayne State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545719" start="442" end="454" title="Love of Life" label="Love of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="468" end="481" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="495" end="513" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q607295" start="527" end="533" title="Loving (TV series)" label="Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q205474" start="551" end="566" title="All My Children" label="All My Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="650" end="663" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549799" start="702" end="719" title="Soap Opera Digest" label="Soap Opera Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077429" start="879" end="894" title="Law &amp;amp; Order (franchise)" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q309214" start="998" end="1012" title="Norman Jewison" label="Norman Jewison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168292" start="1026" end="1051" title="Other People&amp;#x27;s Money" label="Other People&amp;#x27;s Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q318287" start="1062" end="1075" title="Cameron Crowe" label="Cameron Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q110278" start="1089" end="1100" title="Vanilla Sky" label="Vanilla Sky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1154" end="1169" title="Season of Youth" label="Season of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1186" end="1199" title="The Eden Myth" label="The Eden Myth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1551" end="1565" title="The Nineteenth" label="The Nineteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886049" start="1746" end="1766" title="Union Square Theatre" label="Union Square Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159369" start="1797" end="1812" title="Roberta Maxwell" label="Roberta Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q235685" start="1817" end="1827" title="Dana Reeve" label="Dana Reeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739748" start="1968" end="1979" title="Carson Daly" label="Carson Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034036" start="2026" end="2038" title="Colleen Zenk" label="Colleen Zenk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="2225" end="2232" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706451" wikidata="Q450098" url="?curid=706451" title="Most-perfect magic square">
<text>A most-perfect magic square of order &quot;n&quot; is a magic square containing the numbers 1 to &quot;n&quot;2 with two additional properties:

# Each 2 × 2 subsquare sums to 2&quot;s&quot;, where &quot;s&quot; = &quot;n&quot;2 + 1.
# All pairs of integers distant &quot;n&quot;/2 along a (major) diagonal sum to &quot;s&quot;.


==Examples==
Two 12 × 12 most-perfect magic squares can be obtained adding 1 to each element of:

 [,1] [,2] [,3] [,4] [,5] [,6] [,7] [,8] [,9] [,10] [,11] [,12]
 [1,] 64 92 81 94 48 77 67 63 50 61 83 78
 [2,] 31 99 14 97 47 114 28 128 45 130 12 113
 [3,] 24 132 41 134 8 117 27 103 10 101 43 118
 [4,] 23 107 6 105 39 122 20 136 37 138 4 121
 [5,] 16 140 33 142 0 125 19 111 2 109 35 126
 [6,] 75 55 58 53 91 70 72 84 89 86 56 69
 [7,] 76 80 93 82 60 65 79 51 62 49 95 66
 [8,] 115 15 98 13 131 30 112 44 129 46 96 29
 [9,] 116 40 133 42 100 25 119 11 102 9 135 26
 [10,] 123 7 106 5 139 22 120 36 137 38 104 21
 [11,] 124 32 141 34 108 17 127 3 110 1 143 18
 [12,] 71 59 54 57 87 74 68 88 85 90 52 73

 [,1] [,2] [,3] [,4] [,5] [,6] [,7] [,8] [,9] [,10] [,11] [,12]
 [1,] 4 113 14 131 3 121 31 138 21 120 32 130
 [2,] 136 33 126 15 137 25 109 8 119 26 108 16
 [3,] 73 44 83 62 72 52 100 69 90 51 101 61
 [4,] 64 105 54 87 65 97 37 80 47 98 36 88
 [5,] 1 116 11 134 0 124 28 141 18 123 29 133
 [6,] 103 66 93 48 104 58 76 41 86 59 75 49
 [7,] 112 5 122 23 111 13 139 30 129 12 140 22
 [8,] 34 135 24 117 35 127 7 110 17 128 6 118
 [9,] 43 74 53 92 42 82 70 99 60 81 71 91
 [10,] 106 63 96 45 107 55 79 38 89 56 78 46
 [11,] 115 2 125 20 114 10 142 27 132 9 143 19
 [12,] 67 102 57 84 68 94 40 77 50 95 39 85

==Properties==
All most-perfect magic squares are panmagic squares.

Apart from the trivial case of the first order square, most-perfect magic squares are all of order 4&quot;n&quot;. In their book, Kathleen Ollerenshaw and David S. Brée give a method of construction and enumeration of all most-perfect magic squares. They also show that there is a one-to-one correspondence between reversible squares and most-perfect magic squares.

For &quot;n&quot; = 36, there are about 2.7 × 1044 essentially different most-perfect magic squares.

==References==
*Kathleen Ollerenshaw, David S. Brée: &quot;Most-perfect Pandiagonal Magic Squares: Their Construction and Enumeration&quot;, Southend-on-Sea : Institute of Mathematics and its Applications, 1998, 186 pages, ISBN 0-905091-06-X
*T.V.Padmakumar, &quot;Number Theory and Magic Squares&quot;, Sura books , India, 2008, 128 pages, ISBN 978-81-8449-321-4

==External links==
* STRONGLY MAGIC SQUARES by T. V. Padmakumar
* Number of essentially different most-perfect pandiagonal magic squares of order 4n from The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q450098" start="2" end="27" title="Most-perfect magic square" label="most-perfect magic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q192089" start="56" end="68" title="magic square" label="magic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940397" start="1691" end="1706" title="panmagic square" label="panmagic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q467786" start="1840" end="1860" title="Kathleen Ollerenshaw" label="Kathleen Ollerenshaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1865" end="1878" title="David S. Brée" label="David S. Brée"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="1991" end="2016" title="bijection" label="one-to-one correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2025" end="2042" title="reversible square" label="reversible square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077490" start="2128" end="2149" title="Frénicle standard form" label="essentially different"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="2702" end="2743" title="On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences" label="On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706453" wikidata="Q3812969" url="?curid=706453" title="Karen Malina White">
<text>Karen Malina White is an American film and television actress. She is best known for her roles as Kaneesha Carter in the 1989 drama film &quot;Lean on Me&quot;, Charmaine Brown during the two final seasons on &quot;The Cosby Show&quot; (1990–1992) and its spin-off &quot;A Different World&quot; (1992–1993), Nicolette Vandross on &quot;Malcolm &amp; Eddie&quot; (1996–2000), and as the voice of Dijonay Jones on the Disney Channel animated comedy &quot;The Proud Family&quot; (2001–2005) and its 2022 Disney+ reboot &quot;The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder&quot;.

== Biography ==
Born and raised in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, White studied at the Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts. After graduating high school, White continued her studies at Howard University, where she graduated &quot;cum laude&quot; with a Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree. During her senior year, White won the title of &quot;Miss Howard University&quot; and landed her first role as an actress.

== Career ==
In 1989, White starred in &quot;Lean on Me&quot; alongside actor Morgan Freeman, which White considers her first major role. She was nominated for the 1990 Young Artist Award for Best Young Actress Supporting Role in a Motion Picture for her performance in the film. During the 1990s, White made many guest appearances in various television shows. White portrayed Charmaine Brown during Seasons 7 and 8 of &quot;The Cosby Show&quot; (1990–1992), and Season 6 of &quot;A Different World&quot; (1992–1993). White also guest starred as Jewel, Jazz&#x27;s wife, in two episodes of &quot;The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air&quot;. White portrayed series regular Nicolette Vandross on &quot;Malcom &amp; Eddie&quot;. White appeared in recurring guest star roles on &quot;Animal Kingdom, Bruh, Better Things, Lodge 49, Kidding, Snowfall, Veep&quot;, and &quot;I Didn&#x27;t Do It&quot;. White appeared as a guest star in &quot;9-1-1, The Middle, Mike &amp; Molly, Herman&#x27;s Head, Hangin&#x27; With Mr. Cooper, Roc, My So-Called Life, Chicago Hope, Living Single, The Shield, Southland, How to Get Away With Murder&quot;, and &quot;Young Sheldon&quot;. 

White has had several theater roles, most notably playing the role of Camae in Katori Hall&#x27;s &quot;The Mountaintop&quot; and Arlene/Lacy in &quot;Eight Nights&quot;. In 2010, White played a role in &quot;The Ballad of Emmett Till&quot; - a role which she reprised in an online reading of the play in 2020. 

From 2001 to 2005, she provided the voice of Dijonay Jones on the animated Disney Channel series &quot;The Proud Family&quot;. White stated that series creator Bruce W. Smith designed the character as White was reading lines for an initial presentation of the show. In 2022, she reprised her role as Dijonay Jones in the revival series &quot;The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder&quot; for which she was nominated for an Annie Award for Outstanding Achievement for Voice Acting in a Television Production.

White played the role of Shirley Hughes on &quot;Dahmer – Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Story&quot;, a role that allowed her to utilize American Sign Language, which she has been learning since she was 15. White says that the role provided her an outlet for anger, anxiety, and fear from the COVID-19 pandemic and the social unrest from the deaths of George Floyd and Ahmed Arbery. &quot;Dahmer - Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Show&quot; became Netflix&#x27;s second most-watched series of all time.

White was a guest speaker in the online acting class &quot;Mastering the Business of Acting&quot;, a program that teaches acting students the business side of the acting industry.

In 2023, White appeared in a FanDuel commercial alongside former American football player Rob Gronkowski.

== Personal life ==
White has never married and has no children, although she was in a relationship with her co-star Malcolm-Jamal Warner for seven and a half years. He said,&quot;I&#x27;m not married. People probably started saying that because we were in a relationship for seven and a half years.&quot;

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3812969" start="0" end="18" title="Karen Malina White" label="Karen Malina White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199323" start="143" end="153" title="Lean on Me (film)" label="Lean on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q463999" start="215" end="229" title="The Cosby Show" label="The Cosby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109026" start="271" end="288" title="A Different World (TV series)" label="A Different World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742150" start="336" end="355" title="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie" label="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="416" end="430" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215573" start="453" end="469" title="The Proud Family" label="The Proud Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="501" end="508" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="" start="522" end="558" title="The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder" label="The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="602" end="614" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="616" end="628" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182716" start="651" end="708" title="Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts" label="Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="771" end="788" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="816" end="825" title="cum laude" label="cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199323" start="1038" end="1048" title="Lean on Me (film)" label="Lean on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q48337" start="1071" end="1085" title="Morgan Freeman" label="Morgan Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="1162" end="1180" title="Young Artist Award" label="Young Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q463999" start="1418" end="1432" title="The Cosby Show" label="The Cosby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109026" start="1474" end="1491" title="A Different World (TV series)" label="A Different World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1546" end="1550" title="List of The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air characters#Recurring characters" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q309063" start="1589" end="1616" title="The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air" label="The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742150" start="1683" end="1701" title="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie" label="Malcom &amp;amp; Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q22266766" start="1763" end="1777" title="Animal Kingdom (TV series)" label="Animal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q82123309" start="1779" end="1783" title="Bruh (TV series)" label="Bruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016657" start="1785" end="1798" title="Better Things (TV series)" label="Better Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229162" start="1800" end="1808" title="Lodge 49" label="Lodge 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q16886598" start="1810" end="1817" title="Kidding" label="Kidding"/>
<link wikidata="Q28429799" start="1819" end="1827" title="Snowfall (TV series)" label="Snowfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q74801" start="1829" end="1833" title="Veep" label="Veep"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564523" start="1851" end="1870" title="I Didn&amp;#x27;t Do It (TV series)" label="I Didn&amp;#x27;t Do It"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611820" start="1918" end="1923" title="9-1-1 (TV series)" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138000" start="1925" end="1935" title="The Middle (TV series)" label="The Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575230" start="1937" end="1953" title="Mike &amp;amp; Molly" label="Mike &amp;amp; Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266796" start="1955" end="1973" title="Herman&amp;#x27;s Head" label="Herman&amp;#x27;s Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q999386" start="1975" end="2003" title="Hangin&amp;#x27; with Mr. Cooper" label="Hangin&amp;#x27; With Mr. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353650" start="2005" end="2008" title="Roc (TV series)" label="Roc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161822" start="2010" end="2027" title="My So-Called Life" label="My So-Called Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071958" start="2029" end="2041" title="Chicago Hope" label="Chicago Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835569" start="2043" end="2056" title="Living Single" label="Living Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q265152" start="2058" end="2068" title="The Shield" label="The Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156746" start="2070" end="2079" title="Southland (TV series)" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862534" start="2081" end="2108" title="How to Get Away with Murder" label="How to Get Away With Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q30014613" start="2126" end="2139" title="Young Sheldon" label="Young Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377805" start="2228" end="2239" title="Katori Hall" label="Katori Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752497" start="2253" end="2268" title="The Mountaintop" label="The Mountaintop"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="2537" end="2551" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215573" start="2565" end="2581" title="The Proud Family" label="The Proud Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926483" start="2622" end="2636" title="Bruce W. Smith" label="Bruce W. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2804" end="2840" title="The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder" label="The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="2882" end="2893" title="Annie Awards" label="Annie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q108809699" start="2898" end="2966" title="Annie Award for Outstanding Achievement for Voice Acting in an Animated Television/Broadcast Production" label="Outstanding Achievement for Voice Acting in a Television Production."/>
<link wikidata="" start="3017" end="3059" title="Dahmer – Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Story" label="Dahmer – Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="3102" end="3124" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="3258" end="3275" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="3307" end="3329" title="Murder of George Floyd" label="deaths of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q93439010" start="3334" end="3346" title="Murder of Ahmaud Arbery" label="Ahmed Arbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="3409" end="3416" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433511" start="3675" end="3682" title="FanDuel" label="FanDuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334384" start="3736" end="3750" title="Rob Gronkowski" label="Rob Gronkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349215" start="3870" end="3890" title="Malcolm-Jamal Warner" label="Malcolm-Jamal Warner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706454" wikidata="Q2706401" url="?curid=706454" title="Abraham Langlet">
<text>Nils Abraham Langlet (9 July 1868 – 30 March 1936; known by his second given name) was a Swedish chemist.

==Biography==
Langlet was born in Södertälje, Sweden. He was the son of architect Emil Victor Langlet (1824–1898) and his wife, author Clara Mathilda Ulrika Clementine Söderén (1832–1904). His brothers included author Valdemar Langlet (1872–1960).

From 1886 to 1896, he studied chemistry under Per Teodor Cleve (1840–1905) at Uppsala University, where he became a philosophy graduate in 1888, Philosophy Licentiate in 1893 and obtained a doctorate in 1896 and was made &quot;docent&quot; in the same year. 
In 1899, he became lecturer in Chemistry and Chemical Technology at the Chalmers University of Technology in Gothenburg, where he received a professorship in the same field in 1911. From 1926, when his professorship was divided, he was professor of Organic Chemistry.

In 1895, while working with Cleve in Uppsala, he made the independent discovery of the element helium (in the same year discovered by William Ramsay) in the mineral cleveite. Langlet was the first to correctly define its atomic weight. He died in Gothenburg, Sweden.
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2706401" start="0" end="20" title="Abraham Langlet" label="Nils Abraham Langlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="89" end="96" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="97" end="104" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q26518" start="141" end="151" title="Södertälje" label="Södertälje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472294" start="189" end="208" title="Emil Victor Langlet" label="Emil Victor Langlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q52570" start="325" end="341" title="Valdemar Langlet" label="Valdemar Langlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q377822" start="402" end="418" title="Per Teodor Cleve" label="Per Teodor Cleve"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="434" end="452" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q462390" start="583" end="589" title="docent" label="docent"/>
<link wikidata="Q836805" start="687" end="720" title="Chalmers University of Technology" label="Chalmers University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="724" end="734" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="864" end="881" title="Organic Chemistry" label="Organic Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="979" end="985" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q950726" start="1018" end="1032" title="William Ramsay" label="William Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q129611" start="1049" end="1057" title="cleveite" label="cleveite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="1105" end="1118" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="1131" end="1141" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706465" wikidata="Q16145085" url="?curid=706465" title="Jill Farren Phelps">
<text>Jill Farren Phelps (born July 7, 1950) is an American television producer. She is known for her work with American soap operas, having served as executive producer of &quot;Santa Barbara&quot;, &quot;Another World&quot;, &quot;Guiding Light&quot;, &quot;One Life to Live&quot;, &quot;General Hospital&quot;, and &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;.

==Background==
Jill Farren was born in New York City and earned a BFA in directing from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. She became a stage manager at McCarter Theater in Princeton, New Jersey before becoming a production assistant for various New York stage productions.

She began her television career in 1974 with &quot;Guiding Light&quot; as a production assistant. From 1977 to 1984, she served as an Emmy Award-winning music director on the ABC Daytime drama &quot;General Hospital&quot;. In 1984 she joined &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; where she ultimately rose to the position of executive producer. She has since worked as an executive producer at all three major U.S. television networks producing six daytime dramas, as well as two prime-time dramas on cable television.

==Career overview==
Phelps has been the executive producer of six American television daytime dramas, a record in the soap industry, including &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; (1987–1991), &quot;Guiding Light&quot; (1991–1995), &quot;Another World&quot; (1995–1996; resigned August 4, 1996), &quot;One Life to Live&quot; (1997–2001), &quot;General Hospital&quot; (January 2001–January 2012), and as of now, &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; (October 2012–July 2016).

Additionally, she has served as executive producer of two prime time cable dramas, the first season of SOAPnet&#x27;s prime time &quot;General Hospital&quot; spin-off &quot;General Hospital: Night Shift&quot; (2007) and Nick at Nite&#x27;s &quot;Hollywood Heights&quot; (2012). Phelps broke into the daytime television industry as a production assistant on &quot;Guiding Light&quot;. She served as a music director on &quot;General Hospital&quot; and later on &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; before she started producing. During Phelps&#x27; time at &quot;Santa Barbara&quot;, the show won three consecutive Daytime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Drama Series (1988 - 1990). She scored four more Emmy victories in the same category while serving as executive producer at &quot;General Hospital&quot; (2005, 2006, 2008, and 2012).

On December 1, 2011, it was announced that Phelps&#x27; run in the television industry was coming to end, and that she would be replaced as &quot;General Hospital&quot;&#x27;s executive producer by former &quot;One Life to Live&quot; executive producer Frank Valentini. In January 2012, Phelps accepted a position as executive producer of &quot;Hollywood Heights&quot;, a night-time soap opera airing on Nick at Nite. On July 26, 2012, Sony Pictures Television, which produced &quot;Hollywood Heights&quot;, announced Phelps had been named executive producer of &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;. Phelps was dismissed in June 2016, following the appointment of British television producer, Mal Young.

===&quot;Santa Barbara&quot;===
In 1984, Phelps was hired as a music director after previously working in a similar capacity at &quot;General Hospital&quot;. She rose through the ranks, and was later promoted to producer. In 1987, when executive producer Mary-Ellis Bunim was let go, NBC Daytime named Phelps executive producer. Under Phelps&#x27; leadership, the show saw a moderate increase in the ratings and won three consecutive Daytime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Drama Series in 1988, 1989, and 1990.

===&quot;Guiding Light&quot;===
After Robert Calhoun left &quot;Guiding Light&quot;, Phelps, who had recently departed &quot;Santa Barbara&quot;, took over as executive producer in 1991.

===&quot;Another World&quot;===
While Phelps was executive producer at &quot;Another World&quot;, the creation of an updated opening sequence and refreshed sets, along with casting and other changes, were credited with ratings improving in the key demographic of women 18–49 by 34%.

===&quot;One Life to Live&quot;===
After Phelps resigned as executive producer of &quot;Another World&quot;, ABC Daytime hired her to be the executive producer of &quot;One Life to Live&quot; in 1997.

===&quot;General Hospital&quot;===
Phelps was named executive producer of &quot;General Hospital&quot; in 2001. During her tenure there, the show won four Daytime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Drama Series (2005, 2006, 2008, and 2012).

One highlight of Phelps&#x27; time at &quot;General Hospital&quot; was the addition of television and screen actor James Franco to the cast. Franco has portrayed the mysterious Robert &quot;Franco&quot; Frank intermittently since 2009.

Phelps was replaced by former &quot;One Life to Live&quot; executive producer Frank Valentini in January 2012. The future of the show Phelps led for over a decade has been uncertain due to poor ratings, but &quot;GH&quot; was renewed in April, 2012 for another year.

===&quot;General Hospital: Night Shift&quot;===
In 2007, Phelps served as the executive producer for the first season of SOAPnet&#x27;s prime time &quot;General Hospital&quot; spin-off &quot;General Hospital: Night Shift&quot;.

===&quot;Hollywood Heights&quot;===
In January 2012, Phelps was hired as executive producer of &quot;Hollywood Heights&quot;, a soap opera for Nick at Nite. The 80-episode limited series, which premiered on June 18, revolves around Loren (Brittany Underwood), a teen whose life is transformed after becoming a music star. Phelps shared producing duties with Hisham Abed and the show&#x27;s head writer, fellow daytime drama veteran Josh Griffith, and she is working with several former daytime television actors on the show, most notably recurring &quot;General Hospital&quot; cast member James Franco (ex-Franco).

===&quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;===
In July 2012, following the firing of executive producer and head writer Maria Arena Bell and co-head writer Scott Hamner, Sony Pictures Television appointed Phelps executive producer of &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;, alongside the show&#x27;s former head writer Josh Griffith. She was let go from the show in June 2016.

==Controversies==

===Firing of Anna Lee===
In 2003, Phelps did not renew the contract of nonagenarian veteran screen and television actress Anna Lee, who had portrayed matriarch Lila Quartermaine on &quot;General Hospital&quot; for a quarter of a century. According to fellow cast member Leslie Charleson, Lee had been promised the role for life by former executive producer Wendy Riche. Charleson said in 2007, &quot;The woman was in her 90s ... they fired her, and it broke her heart. It was not necessary.&quot; Lee died of pneumonia the following year, aged 91.

===&quot;The Young and the Restless&quot; sets===
Among other changes at &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;, Phelps&#x27; (and head writer Josh Griffith) revamped some long-running sets. In 2012, the Newman Ranch was destroyed by fire in a storyline, with &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; noting, &quot;Who &quot;won&#x27;t&quot; miss the way-too-compact Newman ranch?&quot; The magazine praised the set&#x27;s successor, Victor Newman&#x27;s penthouse, calling it &quot;a welcome step in the right direction&quot;.

However, polled fan reaction was largely negative to the 2016 revamp of the Chancellor mansion set. Phelps was dismissed in June 2016, following CBS&#x27; decision to promote Mal Young to the executive producer position.

==Positions held==




==Awards and nominations==
As an executive producer, Phelps has been nominated for fifteen Daytime Emmy Awards and has won nine times (1988–1990, 2005–06, 2008, 2012, 2014–15).

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16145085" start="0" end="18" title="Jill Farren Phelps" label="Jill Farren Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q578109" start="54" end="73" title="television producer" label="television producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="115" end="125" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q22272" start="173" end="186" title="Santa Barbara (TV series)" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="200" end="213" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="227" end="240" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="254" end="270" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="284" end="300" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="318" end="344" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="392" end="405" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878277" start="419" end="422" title="Bachelor of Fine Arts" label="BFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="441" end="467" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="471" end="495" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453426" start="527" end="543" title="McCarter Theater" label="McCarter Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="547" end="568" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="783" end="793" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819000" start="824" end="835" title="ABC Daytime" label="ABC Daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053574" start="1197" end="1215" title="executive producer" label="executive producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q387755" start="1726" end="1733" title="SOAPnet" label="SOAPnet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1796" end="1825" title="General Hospital: Night Shift" label="General Hospital: Night Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q541051" start="1843" end="1855" title="Nick at Nite" label="Nick at Nite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346564" start="1869" end="1886" title="Hollywood Heights (TV series)" label="Hollywood Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="2225" end="2244" title="Daytime Emmy Awards" label="Daytime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490068" start="2698" end="2713" title="Frank Valentini" label="Frank Valentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q541051" start="2849" end="2861" title="Nick at Nite" label="Nick at Nite"/>
<link wikidata="Q652390" start="2881" end="2905" title="Sony Pictures Television" label="Sony Pictures Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483764" start="3140" end="3149" title="Mal Young" label="Mal Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296123" start="3407" end="3423" title="Mary-Ellis Bunim" label="Mary-Ellis Bunim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482524" start="3436" end="3447" title="NBC Daytime" label="NBC Daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q306403" start="4685" end="4697" title="James Franco" label="James Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971630" start="5543" end="5561" title="Brittany Underwood" label="Brittany Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288925" start="5736" end="5749" title="Josh Griffith" label="Josh Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q306403" start="5893" end="5905" title="James Franco" label="James Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761015" start="6038" end="6054" title="Maria Arena Bell" label="Maria Arena Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436462" start="6074" end="6086" title="Scott Hamner" label="Scott Hamner"/>
<link wikidata="Q460474" start="6437" end="6445" title="Anna Lee" label="Anna Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571679" start="6475" end="6492" title="Lila Quartermaine" label="Lila Quartermaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820757" start="6585" end="6601" title="Leslie Charleson" label="Leslie Charleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="6824" end="6833" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288925" start="7007" end="7020" title="Josh Griffith" label="Josh Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="7130" end="7150" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483764" start="7560" end="7569" title="Mal Young" label="Mal Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="7721" end="7739" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706471" wikidata="Q2936030" url="?curid=706471" title="Sankey Canal">
<text>The Sankey Canal in North West England, initially known as the Sankey Brook Navigation and later the St Helens Canal, is a former industrial canal, which when opened in 1757 was England&#x27;s first of the Industrial revolution, and the first modern canal.

The canal eventually connected St Helens to the River Mersey at Spike Island in Widnes. Originally it followed the valley of the Sankey Brook from the Mersey through Warrington to Parr following which extensions were constructed at the Mersey end to Fiddlers Ferry and then to Widnes, while at the northern end it was extended to Sutton. 

The canal was abandoned between 1931 and 1963 but has been the object of ongoing restoration attempts since 1985.

==History==
The Sankey Canal was built principally to transport coal from Haydock Collieries and Parr to the growing chemical industries of Liverpool, although iron ore and corn were important cargoes. The industries rapidly expanded, and spread along the line of the canal to St Helens, Haydock, Newton le Willows and Widnes, which were small villages until this period. The canal was an important factor in the industrial growth of the region.

The line of the canal was surveyed by Henry Berry and William Taylor, for which they charged £66. Berry, who had previously worked with Thomas Steers, Liverpool’s first dock engineer, on the Newry Canal in Northern Ireland, was Liverpool’s second dock engineer, but was appointed engineer for the navigation when the promoters convinced the Dock Trustees to release him for two days a week. It is not known whether Berry or the promoters presented the plans to Parliament as an upgrade to the river navigation, despite building it as a true canal, but it is thought to be the only time a canal was authorised by Parliament without anyone petitioning against it.

===First act of Parliament===

The act of Parliament authorising the construction of the navigation, the (28 Geo. 2. c. 8), was passed on 20 March 1755. It was entitled &quot;An Act for making navigable the River or Brook called Sankey Brook, and Three several Branches thereof from the River Mersey below Sankey Bridges, up to Boardman&#x27;s Stone Bridge on the South Branch, to Gerrard&#x27;s Bridge on the Middle Branch, and to Penny Bridge on the North Branch, all in the county palatine of Lancaster.&quot;

The canal was open and carrying coal by 1757; carriage of all goods was charged at a flat rate of 10d (ten old pence – £0.04, equivalent to £ when adjusted for inflation) per ton. Upon its opening it became Britain&#x27;s first canal of the Industrial Revolution.

As the title of the act states, in addition to the mainline between the Mersey and Parr, three branches were built to nearby collieries: the South Branch to Boardman&#x27;s Stone Bridge, Parr; the Middle Branch to Gerrard&#x27;s Bridge; and the North Branch to Penny Bridge.

===Second act of Parliament===

A second act of Parliament, the (2 Geo. 3. c. 56), was obtained on 8 April 1762, amending the earlier act, and was entitled &quot;An Act to amend and render more effectual, an Act made in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Reign of his late Majesty King George the Second, for making navigable Sankey Brook, in the county of Lancaster, and for the extending and improving the said Navigation&quot;.

This authorised the extension of the navigation to Fiddler&#x27;s Ferry on the River Mersey, and to take an additional toll of two-pence per ton, making the rate one shilling (£0.05) per ton.

The line of this extension was surveyed by John Eyes, who acted as principal witness to see the bill through Parliament.

An early trial of steam power took place on 16 June 1797, when, according to the &quot;Billing&#x27;s Liverpool Advertiser&quot;, dated 26 June, John Smith&#x27;s &quot;vessel heavily laden with copper slag, passed along the Sankey Canal ... by the application of steam only ... it appears, that the vessel after a course of 10 miles [16 km], returned the same evening to St Helens whence it had set out&quot;. The boat was powered by a Newcomen engine working a paddle crankshaft through a beam and connecting rod.

===Third act of Parliament===
To counter competition from the new railways, another extension was planned from Fiddler&#x27;s Ferry across Cuerdley and Widnes Salt Marshes to Widnes Wharf, on the west bank of the River Mersey near Runcorn Gap, creating a second connection to the Mersey and another basin.
This was authorised by a third act of Parliament, the (11 Geo. 4 &amp; 1 Will. 4. c. l), granted on 29 May 1830, entitled &quot;An Act to consolidate and amend the Acts relating to the Sankey Brook Navigation, in the county of Lancaster; and to make a New Canal from the said Navigation at Fidler&#x27;s Ferry, to communicate with the River Mersey at Widness Wharf, near West Bank, in the township of Widnes, in the said county&quot;.

This act repealed the acts of 1755 and 1762, and incorporated the proprietors under the title of &quot;The Company of Proprietors of the Sankey Brook Navigation.&quot;

Francis Giles was appointed engineer for this extension, which opened in 1833. In 1825 Giles, who was a pupil of John Rennie and involved in many canal projects of the period, had proposed a link from the Sankey, via an aqueduct across the Mersey, to the Bridgewater Canal and the Mersey and Irwell Navigation, but this was never implemented.

==Operation==
The Sankey Canal was built for Mersey Flats, the common sailing craft of the local rivers; they were used on the Mersey, Irwell and Weaver and along the Lancashire and North Wales coasts. To allow for the masts of the flats, swing bridges were constructed where roads crossed the canal. When the railways were built, they too had to cross in similar fashion. The exception was near the newly built town in Newton-Le-Willows that was to become Earlestown, where George Stephenson erected the Sankey Viaduct for the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, leaving headroom for the flats&#x27; sails.

The canal&#x27;s immediate commercial success, followed soon after by that of the Bridgewater Canal, led to a mania of canal building, and for further extension schemes to be proposed for the Sankey Canal. Francis Giles&#x27; proposal to link the canal to the Bridgwater Canal was not implemented, and neither was a plan to link the canal to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal near Leigh, to the North-East. Apart from the early extension to Fiddlers Ferry, which provided better access to the River Mersey, and the 1775 extension to St Helens, the only major change came with the extension to Widnes in the 1830s. Built primarily to take coal from Haydock and Parr down to the Mersey and so on to the saltfields of Cheshire and Liverpool, the final traffic on the Sankey Canal was very different, and in the opposite direction, consisting of raw sugar for the Sankey Sugar Works at Earlestown, Newton-le-Willows, from Liverpool.

In 1877, it was reportedly the case that, due to the pollution of a local Leblanc alkali works, &quot;The mud deposited in the Sankey Brook, near St Helens, has been found to contain no less than 2.26 percent of arsenic ... The water of the Sankey Brook is so acid that iron fittings cannot safely be used in the barges and lock gates.&quot;

In 2004, St Michael&#x27;s Golf Course, a municipal golf course in nearby Widnes built atop 30 hectares of land from old chemical waste tips was closed due to high levels of arsenic found in the soil. Reportedly, by 1891, of nearby Widnes and Ditton Marshes were buried under an average depth of of toxic galligu from alkali operations near the Sankey Canal. The galligu detritus was estimated at 10 million tonnes in total weight. 

In 1845 the St Helens and Runcorn Gap Railway Company and the then more prosperous Sankey Canal Company merged to form the St Helens Canal and Railway Company.

===Closure===
The ending of the sugar traffic in 1959 led to the closure of the canal in 1963. North of the sugar works, closure had taken place in 1931, and fixed bridges quickly replaced the old wooden swing bridges.

==Restoration==
Restoration of the canal began in 1980, when work began on the section between Bewsey and Liverpool Road, Great Sankey, funded by a Derelict Land Grant. Most of the canal is still in water and much has been restored to navigable standard, with short sections at Fiddlers Ferry, Warrington and Spike Island, Widnes having locks into the Mersey which have allowed craft access to the canal for mooring since the locks were restored in the 1980s. However, fixed bridges which replaced the original wooden swing bridges and other obstructions isolate the sections from one another. The route of the canal passes through the Sankey Valley Park and the towpath from Sankey Bridges to Widnes now forms part of the Trans Pennine Trail.

There are plans to restore the canal, and perhaps to extend it northwards to join the main canal system via the Leeds and Liverpool Canal. The total cost of this would be in excess of £100m and it is therefore a long-term project. There are, however, plans to dig out an infilled section in the centre of St Helens as part of the town&#x27;s Eastside development. A feasibility study for this work was funded by a grant from the Single Regeneration Budget Fund, while at the other end of the canal, the Widnes Waterfront plan, published by Halton Council, and the new Mersey crossing between Widnes and Runcorn were expected to lead to further restoration at Widnes. One major obstacle is that the canal is severed by the A57 dual carriageway in Warrington.

Following the closure of the Fiddlers Ferry power station which previously pumped water into the canal, the water level at Spike Island has begun to drop. The locks to the River Mersey are currently unable to be opened for fear of losing more water.

==Structures==
The Sankey Viaduct railway viaduct over the Sankey Canal in Newton-le-Willows, known locally as the &quot;Nine Arches&quot; was completed in 1830. It is still in use and carries the intercity Liverpool to Manchester (via Rainhill and St Helens Junction) railway. It actually comprises nine sandstone arches, with a 60-foot (18.3m) minimum clearance above the canal, which was required to allow the masts of the Mersey flats to clear. Designated Grade I listed building in 1966, it has been described as being &quot;the earliest major railway viaduct in the world&quot;.

A staircase lock was built on the Sankey Canal and a second staircase was built later when the Ravenhead Branch was constructed in 1775. They are known respectively as the Old Double Lock and the New Double Lock. The latter was restored by St. Helens Borough Council in 1992, although it has no navigable waterway either above or below it.

==See also==

*Canals of the United Kingdom
*History of the British canal system

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
==External links==
*Sankey Canal Restoration Society
*images &amp; map of mile markers seen along the Sankey canal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2936030" start="4" end="16" title="Sankey Canal" label="Sankey Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="20" end="38" title="North West England" label="North West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936030" start="63" end="86" title="Sankey Canal" label="Sankey Brook Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936030" start="101" end="116" title="Sankey Canal" label="St Helens Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153647" start="289" end="298" title="St Helens, Merseyside" label="St Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19724" start="306" end="318" title="River Mersey" label="River Mersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577198" start="322" end="334" title="Spike Island, Widnes" label="Spike Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022741" start="338" end="344" title="Widnes" label="Widnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215733" start="424" end="434" title="Warrington" label="Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139714" start="438" end="442" title="Parr, St Helens" label="Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650196" start="588" end="594" title="Sutton, St Helens" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="777" end="781" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993775" start="787" end="805" title="Haydock Collieries" label="Haydock Collieries"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="873" end="881" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783795" start="1001" end="1008" title="Haydock" label="Haydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q750000" start="1010" end="1027" title="Newton le Willows" label="Newton le Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994301" start="1198" end="1209" title="Henry Berry (engineer)" label="Henry Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525594" start="1296" end="1309" title="Thomas Steers" label="Thomas Steers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="1311" end="1320" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019131" start="1351" end="1362" title="Newry Canal" label="Newry Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1366" end="1382" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="1858" end="1875" title="act of Parliament" label="act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q121854946" start="1929" end="1938" title="28 Geo. 2" label="28 Geo. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q667419" start="2512" end="2515" title="long ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131374840" start="2943" end="2951" title="2 Geo. 3" label="2 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224989" start="4057" end="4072" title="Newcomen steam engine" label="Newcomen engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022741" start="4289" end="4295" title="Widnes" label="Widnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945398" start="4498" end="4523" title="11 Geo. 4 &amp;amp; 1 Will. 4" label="11 Geo. 4 &amp;amp; 1 Will. 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481073" start="5048" end="5061" title="Francis Giles" label="Francis Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q544521" start="5161" end="5172" title="John Rennie the Elder" label="John Rennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820549" start="5437" end="5448" title="Mersey Flat" label="Mersey Flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47901" start="5527" end="5533" title="River Irwell" label="Irwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634834" start="5538" end="5544" title="River Weaver" label="Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="5574" end="5585" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q950431" start="5631" end="5644" title="swing bridges" label="swing bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748301" start="5849" end="5859" title="Earlestown" label="Earlestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q133614" start="5867" end="5884" title="George Stephenson" label="George Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418706" start="5897" end="5911" title="Sankey Viaduct" label="Sankey Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398696" start="5920" end="5952" title="Liverpool and Manchester Railway" label="Liverpool and Manchester Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q913932" start="6081" end="6098" title="Bridgewater Canal" label="Bridgewater Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936125" start="6109" end="6132" title="Canal Mania" label="mania of canal building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424148" start="6345" end="6370" title="Leeds and Liverpool Canal" label="Leeds and Liverpool Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588021" start="6376" end="6381" title="Leigh (Greater Manchester)" label="Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783795" start="6643" end="6650" title="Haydock" label="Haydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139714" start="6655" end="6659" title="Parr, St Helens" label="Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q750000" start="6889" end="6906" title="Newton-le-Willows" label="Newton-le-Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q8903754" start="6999" end="7019" title="Leblanc process" label="Leblanc alkali works"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="7137" end="7144" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="7442" end="7449" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022741" start="7500" end="7506" title="Widnes" label="Widnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283729" start="7511" end="7525" title="Ditton, Cheshire" label="Ditton Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7573" end="7580" title="Leblanc process#Pollution issues" label="galligu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593362" start="7714" end="7755" title="St Helens and Runcorn Gap Railway" label="St Helens and Runcorn Gap Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418701" start="8719" end="8737" title="Sankey Valley Park" label="Sankey Valley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558322" start="8806" end="8825" title="Trans Pennine Trail" label="Trans Pennine Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424148" start="8940" end="8965" title="Leeds and Liverpool Canal" label="Leeds and Liverpool Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944663" start="9616" end="9644" title="Fiddlers Ferry power station" label="Fiddlers Ferry power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577198" start="9710" end="9722" title="Spike Island, Widnes" label="Spike Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418706" start="9857" end="9871" title="Sankey Viaduct" label="Sankey Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820549" start="10264" end="10276" title="Mersey flat" label="Mersey flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="10436" end="10440" title="Canal lock" label="lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031104" start="10780" end="10808" title="Canals of the United Kingdom" label="Canals of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984375" start="10810" end="10845" title="History of the British canal system" label="History of the British canal system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706482" wikidata="Q3516031" url="?curid=706482" title="Tatiana (singer)">
<text>Tatiana Palacios Chapa (born 12 December 1968), known mononymously as Tatiana, is an American-born Mexican singer, actress and television presenter. Referred to as the &quot;Queen of Kids&quot;, she has been nominated for five Latin Grammy Awards for Best Children&#x27;s Album and has sold over 9 million records.

==Early life==
Tatiana was born on 12 December 1968 in Philadelphia, while her father was attending the University of Pennsylvania. A dual citizen of the United States and Mexico, Tatiana was raised in Monterrey, Mexico, by her parents, Dr. José Ramón Palacios Ortega and Diana Perla Chapa de Palacios, after her father&#x27;s studies were completed in Pennsylvania.

==Early career and pop music==
Tatiana&#x27;s first major musical project was as the character Jane in the 1984 live stage performance, &quot;Kuman&quot;, a Mexican rock opera about a Tarzan-like character. The show&#x27;s 1984 album soundtrack also entitled &quot;Kuman&quot; was released under the group name, Cristal y Acero ‒ the rock trio consisting of guitarist Icar Smith, bassist Carlos Ortega, and drummer Samuel Shapiro.

IN 1986, Tatiana released a single and filmed a video, both titled &quot;Cuando Estemos Juntos&quot;, with former Menudo member, Puerto Rican singer Johnny Lozada. The song was meant to create awareness among youth in Puerto Rico, Mexico and the rest of Latin America about the potential consequences of sex before marriage, including sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy at an early age.

From 1984 to 1994, Tatiana released 10 pop music albums which garnered numerous hits throughout Mexico and some parts of Latin America.
==Career as children&#x27;s entertainer ==
In 1995, Tatiana began releasing children&#x27;s music albums.
From 1997 to 2001, Tatiana hosted the children&#x27;s television show, &quot;El Espacio de Tatiana&quot; on the Mexican network Televisa. She would later host another children&#x27;s television show, &quot;El Show De Tatiana&quot;, on TV Azteca (version de El Show de Xuxa). She had also performed voice-over work and recorded soundtrack songs for various television and film projects produced by The Walt Disney Company. She provided her voice to the character Megara in the Latin American Spanish dub of Disney&#x27;s &quot;Hercules&quot; (1997).

In 2004, she appeared as the character Coral on the Mexican telenovela, &quot;Amy, la niña de la mochila azul&quot;.

In 2016, she returned to Televisa, appearing in programs such as &quot;Hoy&quot; and &quot;Recuerda y Gana&quot;

==Return to pop music==
In 2005, she released her first non-children&#x27;s album in over a decade entitled &quot;Acústico – Mil Gracias&quot;, an unplugged acoustic album with renditions of some of her earlier pop hits as well a number of new songs including two in English.

Her 2007 tour had 56 sold-out concerts, and her subsequent 2008 tour, &quot;Espapirifárctico&quot;, covered 64 concert dates throughout five countries.

==Select discography==
===Pop music===

*1984: &quot;Tatiana&quot;
*1986: &quot;Chicas de Hoy&quot;
*1987: &quot;Baila Conmigo&quot;
*1988: &quot;Un Lobo En La Noche&quot;
*1989: &quot;Las Cosas Que He Visto&quot;
*1990: &quot;Vientos de Libertad&quot;
*1992: &quot;Leyes del Corazón&quot;
*1994: &quot;Un Alma Desnuda&quot;
*2005: &quot;Acústico – Mil Gracias&quot;
*2014: &quot;Reencuentro Conmigo&quot;

===Children&#x27;s music===
*1995: &quot;Brinca&quot;
*1996: &quot;Brinca II&quot;
*1996: &quot;Navidad Con Tatiana&quot;
*1997: &quot;Sigue La Magia&quot;
*1997: &quot;Navidad Mágica&quot;
*1998: &quot;Superfantástico&quot;
*1999: &quot;Vamos A Jugar&quot;
*1999: &quot;Navidad Mágica 2&quot;
*2000: &quot;Acapulco Rock&quot;
*2002: &quot;Los Mejores Temas De Las Películas De Walt Disney Vol. 1&quot;
*2003: &quot;Los Mejores Temas De Las Películas De Walt Disney Vol. 2&quot;
*2003: &quot;El Regalo 1&quot;
*2005: &quot;El Regalo 2&quot;
*2006: &quot;Aventuras En Tatilandia&quot;
*2006: &quot;Tu Regalo De Navidad&quot;
*2007: &quot;Espapirifáctico&quot;
*2009: &quot;Te Quiero&quot;
*2011: &quot;El Mundo De Tatiana&quot;
*2012: &quot;Llegó Navidad&quot;
*2015: &quot;Salta Sin Parar&quot;
*2021: &quot;Kidsongs Vol. 1&quot;

===Other===
*1984: Cristal y Acero ‒ &quot;Kuman&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3516031" start="0" end="22" title="Tatiana (singer)" label="Tatiana Palacios Chapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985549" start="54" end="66" title="mononymously" label="mononymously"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516031" start="70" end="77" title="Tatiana (singer)" label="Tatiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375931" start="174" end="187" title="Honorific nicknames in popular music" label="Queen of Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q921469" start="227" end="246" title="Latin Grammy Awards" label="Latin Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="371" end="383" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="420" end="446" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="518" end="527" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="849" end="859" title="rock opera" label="rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q170241" start="868" end="879" title="Tarzan" label="Tarzan-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555767" start="1230" end="1236" title="Menudo (group)" label="Menudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q527697" start="1265" end="1278" title="Johnny Lozada" label="Johnny Lozada"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="1552" end="1561" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1634" end="1647" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389651" start="1725" end="1746" title="children&amp;#x27;s music" label="children&amp;#x27;s music"/>
<link wikidata="Q47099" start="1883" end="1891" title="Televisa" label="Televisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281055" start="1990" end="1999" title="TV Azteca" label="TV Azteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="2053" end="2063" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="2082" end="2092" title="soundtrack" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="2152" end="2175" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094271" start="2217" end="2223" title="Megara (Disney character)" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q271189" start="2281" end="2289" title="Hercules (1997 film)" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q23745" start="2365" end="2375" title="telenovela" label="telenovela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890948" start="2383" end="2414" title="Amy, la niña de la mochila azul" label="Amy, la niña de la mochila azul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005071" start="2494" end="2497" title="Hoy (TV series)" label="Hoy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706488" wikidata="Q989846" url="?curid=706488" title="Siewierz">
<text>Siewierz is a town in southern Poland, in the Będzin County in the Silesian Voivodeship, seat of Gmina Siewierz. Siewierz is located in Dąbrowa Basin (&quot;Zagłębie Dąbrowskie&quot;), which is part of the historical and geographical region of Lesser Poland.

==History==
Siewierz was first mentioned in 1125, and was administered by the Castellan of Bytom. In 1177, Casimir II of Poland granted Siewierz to Mieszko IV Tanglefoot, duke of Silesia and Racibórz, together with whole Duchy of Bytom. The town became a seat of a separate castellan by the beginning of the 13th century. During the first Mongol invasion of Poland, in 1241, the Mongols burned the town, and razed the fort to ground.

In 1276, Siewierz received city status. On 26 February 1289, in front of the town gates, the allied forces of Władysław I the Elbow-high, then Duke of Kujawy and Mazovia, defeated the army of Henry IV Probus, duke of Wrocław and Kraków.

Together with most of Silesia in years 1327–35, Siewierz – as a part of the Bytom Duchy – was subjugated to the Kingdom of Bohemia. In 1337, Duke Vladislaus of Bytom sold Siewierz to Casimir I, Duke of Cieszyn. In 1359 the duke of Cieszyn bought Siewierz from Duke Bolko II the Small, for 2,500 marks. The king Charles IV authorized the sale the same year.

On 30 December 1443, Zbigniew Oleśnicki, the bishop of Kraków, bought Siewierz from Wenceslaus I of Cieszyn, who was deeply in debts then. The sale was for 6,000 Prague groschen. The bishops of Kraków became dukes of Siewierz, the duchy became &quot;de facto&quot; a part of the Polish Crown, and the town became the seat of the bishops of Kraków. They also constructed a castle in Siewierz. Through these events, Siewierz again became part of Lesser Poland, where it remains to this day.

Polish Baroque poet stayed in the town in the early 17th century. In 1790, near to the doom of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, the ecclesiastic duchy of Siewierz was incorporated directly into the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland. In 1795, Siewierz was annexed by Prussia in the Third Partition of Poland, and included in the new province of New Silesia. In 1800, the seat of the bishop moved away from the town.
In 1807, Napoleon recreated the duchy of Siewierz (&quot;Sievers&quot;), and granted it to Jean Lannes, after Prussia was forced to cede all her acquisitions from the Second and Third Partitions of Poland. After the defeat of Napoleon, Siewierz was included in Congress Poland, under Imperial Russian rule. The town declined continuously, due to the lacking of industry and communication. During the January Uprising, in February 1863, Siewierz was captured by Polish insurgents after their victory in the Battle of Sosnowiec nearby. In 1870, it lost its city status as part of Tsarist anti-Polish repressions following the fall of the January Uprising. In 1918, Poland regained independence, and Siewierz became part of the Second Polish Republic.

During the German invasion of Poland, which started World War II in September 1939, Siewierz was invaded and captured by Nazi Germany, and already on September 4, 1939, German troops committed a massacre of 10 Poles in the town, including one woman and several teenagers (see &quot;Nazi crimes against the Polish nation&quot;). The town was then occupied by Germany until 1945.

In 1962 it regained its city status.

==Sights==
The most significant historic sights of Siewierz are the ruins of the medieval castle of Kraków bishops, the Baroque Church of Saint Matthias and the Romanesque Church of Saint John, which is one of the oldest preserved churches in Poland.

==Sports==
The local football club is LKS Przemsza Siewierz. It competes in the IV Liga Silesian group (fifth division of polish football)

==Twin towns – sister cities==
See twin towns of Gmina Siewierz.

==References==
==External links==
* Website of Public Information Bulletin: http://siewierz.bip.info.pl/
* Jewish Community in Siewierz on Virtual Shtetl</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q989846" start="0" end="8" title="Siewierz" label="Siewierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="14" end="18" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="31" end="37" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q972886" start="46" end="59" title="Będzin County" label="Będzin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54181" start="67" end="87" title="Silesian Voivodeship" label="Silesian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q553706" start="97" end="111" title="Gmina Siewierz" label="Gmina Siewierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q140480" start="136" end="149" title="Dąbrowa Basin" label="Dąbrowa Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="244" end="257" title="Lesser Poland" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505781" start="338" end="347" title="Castellan" label="Castellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102350" start="351" end="356" title="Bytom" label="Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q53456" start="367" end="387" title="Casimir II of Poland" label="Casimir II of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54010" start="408" end="429" title="Mieszko IV Tanglefoot" label="Mieszko IV Tanglefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="439" end="446" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700117" start="451" end="459" title="Duchy of Racibórz" label="Racibórz"/>
<link wikidata="Q682001" start="481" end="495" title="Duchy of Bytom" label="Duchy of Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667645" start="593" end="624" title="first Mongol invasion of Poland" label="first Mongol invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="639" end="646" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="722" end="733" title="Magdeburg rights" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q54048" start="805" end="831" title="Władysław I the Elbow-high" label="Władysław I the Elbow-high"/>
<link wikidata="Q836693" start="846" end="852" title="Kujawy" label="Kujawy"/>
<link wikidata="Q643843" start="857" end="864" title="Mazovia" label="Mazovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53447" start="887" end="902" title="Henry IV Probus" label="Henry IV Probus"/>
<link wikidata="Q568638" start="912" end="919" title="Duchy of Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q11750541" start="924" end="930" title="Duchy of Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="1045" end="1063" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Kingdom of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q479930" start="1079" end="1098" title="Władysław of Bytom" label="Vladislaus of Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q689157" start="1116" end="1142" title="Casimir I, Duke of Cieszyn" label="Casimir I, Duke of Cieszyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q666676" start="1198" end="1216" title="Bolko II the Small" label="Bolko II the Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281830" start="1228" end="1233" title="Mark (money)" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="1244" end="1254" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q168150" start="1312" end="1330" title="Zbigniew Oleśnicki (cardinal)" label="Zbigniew Oleśnicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q17375334" start="1336" end="1352" title="bishop of Kraków" label="bishop of Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q571461" start="1375" end="1398" title="Wenceslaus I, Duke of Cieszyn" label="Wenceslaus I of Cieszyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q539573" start="1453" end="1468" title="Prague groschen" label="Prague groschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395320" start="1499" end="1516" title="Duchy of Siewierz" label="dukes of Siewierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="1570" end="1582" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Polish Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17375334" start="1620" end="1637" title="bishop of Kraków" label="bishops of Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="1735" end="1748" title="Lesser Poland" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863053" start="1788" end="1795" title="Baroque in Poland" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="1880" end="1910" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1916" end="1928" title="ecclesiastic" label="ecclesiastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395320" start="1929" end="1946" title="duchy of Siewierz" label="duchy of Siewierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="2047" end="2054" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="2062" end="2087" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q708159" start="2125" end="2136" title="New Silesia" label="New Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2205" end="2213" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395320" start="2228" end="2245" title="duchy of Siewierz" label="duchy of Siewierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q273032" start="2287" end="2298" title="Jean Lannes" label="Jean Lannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="2380" end="2400" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="2457" end="2472" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2480" end="2495" title="Imperial Russia" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="2596" end="2612" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q9173792" start="2702" end="2721" title="Battle of Sosnowiec" label="Battle of Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q10929914" start="2751" end="2762" title="city status" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="2921" end="2943" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="2964" end="2982" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2998" end="3010" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3067" end="3079" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="3156" end="3161" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="3228" end="3265" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="3292" end="3311" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="occupied by Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q10929914" start="3349" end="3360" title="city status" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863053" start="3483" end="3490" title="Baroque in Poland" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159154" start="3524" end="3534" title="Romanesque architecture in Poland" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="3636" end="3644" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710571" start="3695" end="3717" title="IV liga Silesia" label="IV Liga Silesian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583360" start="3719" end="3752" title="Polish football league system" label="fifth division of polish football"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3790" end="3818" title="Gmina Siewierz#Twin towns – sister cities" label="twin towns of Gmina Siewierz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706489" wikidata="Q708159" url="?curid=706489" title="New Silesia">
<text>New Silesia ( or &quot;Neu-Schlesien&quot;) was a small province of the Kingdom of Prussia from 1795 to 1807, created after the Third Partition of Poland. It was located northwest of Kraków and southeast of Częstochowa, in the lands that had been part of the Duchy of Siewierz and the adjacent Polish historical province of Lesser Poland (the Kraków Voivodeship), including the towns of Żarki, Pilica, Będzin, and Sławków.

New Silesia had its capital at Siewierz. However, it was originally to be governed by the Silesian capital Breslau (Wrocław) and later largely administered by South Prussia. After the defeat of Prussia in the War of the Fourth Coalition in 1806, the province was dissolved and the territory was made part of the Napoleonic Duchy of Warsaw in the Treaties of Tilsit of 1807.

== See also ==
*South Prussia
*New East Prussia
*Partitions of Poland
*Prussia

== External links ==
*Neu-Schlesien at Genealogy.net </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q708159" start="0" end="11" title="New Silesia" label="New Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574299" start="56" end="64" title="Provinces of Prussia" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="72" end="90" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="128" end="153" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="183" end="189" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q103217" start="207" end="218" title="Częstochowa" label="Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395320" start="259" end="276" title="Duchy of Siewierz" label="Duchy of Siewierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="324" end="337" title="Lesser Poland" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q94449" start="343" end="361" title="Kraków Voivodeship (14th century – 1795)" label="Kraków Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q149411" start="387" end="392" title="Żarki" label="Żarki"/>
<link wikidata="Q555053" start="394" end="400" title="Pilica, Silesian Voivodeship" label="Pilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q461513" start="402" end="408" title="Będzin" label="Będzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q841380" start="414" end="421" title="Sławków" label="Sławków"/>
<link wikidata="Q989846" start="455" end="463" title="Siewierz" label="Siewierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q675032" start="514" end="522" title="Province of Silesia" label="Silesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="531" end="548" title="Wrocław" label="Breslau (Wrocław)"/>
<link wikidata="Q614761" start="583" end="596" title="South Prussia" label="South Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605977" start="633" end="660" title="War of the Fourth Coalition" label="War of the Fourth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="747" end="762" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q154596" start="770" end="788" title="Treaties of Tilsit" label="Treaties of Tilsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q614761" start="815" end="828" title="South Prussia" label="South Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q661939" start="830" end="846" title="New East Prussia" label="New East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="848" end="868" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="870" end="877" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
</links>
</doc>
