<doc id="706498" wikidata="Q935025" url="?curid=706498" title="Metropolitan Railway">
<text>The Metropolitan Railway (also known as the Met) was a passenger and goods railway that served London from 1863 to 1933, its main line heading north-west from the capital&#x27;s financial heart in the City to what were to become the Middlesex suburbs. Its first line connected the main-line railway termini at , , and King&#x27;s Cross to the City. The first section was built beneath the New Road using cut-and-cover between Paddington and King&#x27;s Cross and in tunnel and cuttings beside Farringdon Road from King&#x27;s Cross to near Smithfield, near the City. It opened to the public on 10 January 1863 with gas-lit wooden carriages hauled by steam locomotives, the world&#x27;s first passenger-carrying designated underground railway.

The line was soon extended from both ends, and northwards via a branch from Baker Street. Southern branches, directly served, reached Hammersmith in 1864, Richmond in 1877 and the original completed the &quot;Inner Circle&quot; in 1884. The most important route was northwest into the Middlesex countryside, stimulating the development of new suburbs. Harrow was reached in 1880, and from 1897, having achieved the early patronage of the Duke of Buckingham and the owners of Waddesdon Manor, services extended for many years to in Buckinghamshire.

Electric traction was introduced in 1905, and by 1907 electric multiple units operated most of the services, though electrification of outlying sections did not occur until decades later. Unlike other railway companies in the London area, the Met developed land for housing, and after World War I promoted housing estates near the railway using the &quot;Metro-land&quot; brand. On 1 July 1933, the Met was amalgamated with the Underground Electric Railways Company of London and the capital&#x27;s tramway and bus operators to form the London Passenger Transport Board.

Former Met tracks and stations are used by the London Underground&#x27;s Metropolitan, Circle, District, Hammersmith &amp; City, Piccadilly, Jubilee and Victoria lines, and by Chiltern Railways and Great Northern.

==History==

===Paddington to the City, 1853–63===

====Establishment====
In the first half of the 19th century the population and physical extent of London grew greatly. The increasing resident population and the development of a commuting population arriving by train each day led to a high level of traffic congestion with huge numbers of carts, cabs, and omnibuses filling the roads and up to 200,000 people entering the City of London, the commercial heart, each day on foot. By 1850 there were seven railway termini around the urban centre of London: London Bridge and Waterloo to the south, Shoreditch and Fenchurch Street to the east, Euston and King&#x27;s Cross to the north, and Paddington to the west. Only Fenchurch Street station was within the City.

The congested streets and the distance to the City from the stations to the north and west prompted many attempts to get parliamentary approval to build new railway lines into the City. None were successful, and the 1846 Royal Commission on Metropolitan Railway Termini banned construction of new lines or stations in the built-up central area. The concept of an underground railway linking the City with the mainline termini was first proposed in the 1830s. Charles Pearson, Solicitor to the City, was a leading promoter of several schemes and in 1846 proposed a central railway station to be used by multiple railway companies. The scheme was rejected by the 1846 commission, but Pearson returned to the idea in 1852 when he helped set up the City Terminus Company to build a railway from Farringdon to King&#x27;s Cross. The plan was supported by the City, but the railway companies were not interested and the company struggled to proceed.

The Bayswater, Paddington, and Holborn Bridge Railway Company was established to connect the Great Western Railway&#x27;s (GWR&#x27;s) Paddington station to Pearson&#x27;s route at King&#x27;s Cross. A bill was published in November 1852 and in January 1853 the directors held their first meeting and appointed John Fowler as its engineer. After successful lobbying, the company secured parliamentary approval under the name of the &quot;North Metropolitan Railway&quot; in mid-1853. The bill submitted by the City Terminus Company was rejected by Parliament, which meant that the North Metropolitan Railway would not be able to reach the City: to overcome this obstacle, the company took over the City Terminus Company and submitted a new bill in November 1853. This dropped the City terminus and extended the route south from Farringdon to the General Post Office in St. Martin&#x27;s Le Grand. The route at the western end was also altered so that it connected more directly to the GWR station. Permission was sought to connect to the London and North Western Railway (LNWR) at Euston and to the Great Northern Railway (GNR) at King&#x27;s Cross, the latter by hoists and lifts. The company&#x27;s name was also to be changed again, to Metropolitan Railway. royal assent was granted to the Metropolitan Railway Act 1854 (17 &amp; 18 Vict. c. ccxxi) on 7 August 1854.

Construction of the railway was estimated to cost £1 million. Initially, with the Crimean War under way, the Met found it hard to raise the capital. While it attempted to raise the funds it presented new bills to Parliament seeking an extension of time to carry out the works. In July 1855, the Metropolitan Railway (Deviation) Act 1855 (18 &amp; 19 Vict. c. cii), which made a direct connection to the GNR at King&#x27;s Cross, received royal assent. The plan was modified by the Metropolitan (Great Northern Branch and Amendment) Act 1856 and again later by the Great Northern and Metropolitan Junction Railway Act 1860 (23 &amp; 24 Vict. c. clxviii).

The GWR agreed to contribute £175,000 and a similar sum was promised by the GNR, but sufficient funds to make a start on construction had not been raised by the end of 1857. Costs were reduced by cutting back part of the route at the western end so that it did not connect directly to the GWR station, and by dropping the line south of Farringdon. In 1858, Pearson arranged a deal between the Met and the City of London Corporation whereby the Met bought land it needed around the new Farringdon Road from the City for £179,000 and the City purchased £200,000 worth of shares. The route changes were approved by Parliament in August 1859, meaning that the Met finally had the funding to match its obligations and construction could begin.

====Construction====
Despite concerns about undermining and vibrations causing subsidence of nearby buildings and compensating the thousands of people whose homes were destroyed during the digging of the tunnel, construction began in March 1860. The line was mostly built using the &quot;cut-and-cover&quot; method from Paddington to King&#x27;s Cross; east of there it continued in a tunnel under Mount Pleasant, Clerkenwell then followed the culverted River Fleet beside Farringdon Road in an open cutting to near the new meat market at Smithfield.

The trench was wide, with brick retaining walls supporting an elliptical brick arch or iron girders spanning . The tunnels were wider at stations to accommodate the platforms. Most of the excavation work was carried out manually by navvies; a primitive earth-moving conveyor was used to remove excavated soil from the trench.

Within the tunnel, two lines were laid with a gap between. To accommodate both the standard gauge trains of the GNR and the broad gauge trains of the GWR, the track was three-rail dual gauge, the rail nearest the platforms being shared by both gauges. Signalling was on the absolute block method, using electric Spagnoletti block instruments and fixed signals.

Construction was not without incident. In May 1860, a GNR train overshot the platform at King&#x27;s Cross and fell into the workings. Later that year, a boiler explosion on an engine pulling contractor&#x27;s wagons killed the driver and his assistant. In May 1861, the excavation collapsed at Euston causing considerable damage to the neighbouring buildings. The final accident occurred in June 1862 when the Fleet sewer burst following a heavy rainstorm and flooded the excavations. The Met and the Metropolitan Board of Works managed to stem and divert the water and the construction was delayed by only a few months.

Trial runs were carried out from November 1861 while construction was still under way. The first trip over the whole line was in May 1862 with William Gladstone among the guests. By the end of 1862, work was complete at a cost of £1.3 million.
In that year, Myles Fenton, then serving as assistant manager of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway, was appointed as the first manager of the new company.

====Opening====

Board of Trade inspections took place in late December 1862 and early January 1863 to approve the railway for opening. After minor signalling changes were made, approval was granted and a few days of operating trials were carried out before the grand opening on 9 January 1863, which included a ceremonial run from Paddington and a large banquet for 600 shareholders and guests at Farringdon. Charles Pearson did not live to see the completion of the project; he died in September 1862.

The railway opened to the public on 10 January 1863, with stations at Paddington (Bishop&#x27;s Road) (now Paddington), Edgware Road, Baker Street, Portland Road (now Great Portland Street), Gower Street (now Euston Square), King&#x27;s Cross (now King&#x27;s Cross St Pancras), and Farringdon Street (now Farringdon). The railway was hailed a success, carrying 38,000 passengers on the opening day, using GNR trains to supplement the service. In the first 12 months 9.5 million passengers were carried and in the second 12 months this increased to 12 million.

The original timetable allowed 18 minutes for the journey. Off-peak service frequency was every 15 minutes, increased to ten minutes during the morning peak and reduced 20 minutes in the early mornings and after 8 pm. From May 1864, workmen&#x27;s returns were offered on the 5:30 am and 5:40 am services from Paddington at the cost of a single ticket (3d).

The railway was initially worked by GWR broad-gauge Metropolitan Class tank locomotives and rolling stock. Soon after the opening, disagreement arose between the Met and the GWR over the need to increase the frequency, and the GWR withdrew its stock in August 1863. The Met continued operating a reduced service using GNR standard-gauge rolling stock before purchasing its own standard-gauge locomotives from Beyer, Peacock and Company and rolling stock.

The Metropolitan initially ordered 18 tank locomotives, of which a key feature was condensing equipment which prevented most of the steam from escaping while trains were in tunnels; they have been described as &quot;beautiful little engines, painted green and distinguished particularly by their enormous external cylinders.&quot; The design proved so successful that eventually 120 were built to provide traction on the Metropolitan, the District Railway (in 1871) and all other &#x27;cut and cover&#x27; underground lines. This 4-4-0 tank engine can therefore be considered as the pioneer motive power on London&#x27;s first underground railway; ultimately, 148 were built between 1864 and 1886 for various railways, and most kept running until electrification in 1905.

In the belief that it would be operated by smokeless locomotives, the line had been built with little ventilation and a long tunnel between Edgware Road and King&#x27;s Cross. Initially the smoke-filled stations and carriages did not deter passengers and the ventilation was later improved by making an opening in the tunnel between Gower Street and King&#x27;s Cross and removing glazing in the station roofs. With the problem continuing after the 1880s, conflict arose between the Met, who wished to make more openings in the tunnels, and the local authorities, who argued that these would frighten horses and reduce property values. This led to an 1897 Board of Trade report, which reported that a pharmacist was treating people in distress after having travelled on the railway with his &#x27;Metropolitan Mixture&#x27;. The report recommended more openings be authorised but the line was electrified before these were built.

===Extensions and the Inner Circle, 1863–84===

====Farringdon to Moorgate and the City Widened Lines====


With connections to the GWR and GNR under construction and connections to the Midland Railway and London, Chatham and Dover Railway (LC&amp;DR) planned, the Met obtained permission in 1861 and 1864 for two additional tracks from King&#x27;s Cross to Farringdon Street and a four-track eastward extension to Moorgate. The Met used two tracks: the other two tracks, the City Widened Lines, were used mainly by other railway companies.

A pair of single-track tunnels at King&#x27;s Cross connecting the GNR to the Met opened on 1 October 1863 when the GNR began running services, the GWR returning the same day with through suburban trains from such places as Windsor. By 1864 the Met had sufficient carriages and locomotives to run its own trains and increase the frequency to six trains an hour.

On 1 January 1866, LC&amp;DR and GNR joint services from Blackfriars Bridge began operating via the Snow Hill tunnel under Smithfield market to Farringdon and northwards to the GNR. The extension to Aldersgate Street and Moorgate Street (now Barbican and Moorgate) had opened on 23 December 1865 and all four tracks were open on 1 March 1866.

The new tracks from King&#x27;s Cross to Farringdon were first used by a GNR freight train on 27 January 1868. The Midland Railway junction opened on 13 July 1868 when services ran into Moorgate Street before its St Pancras terminus had opened. The line left the main line at St Paul&#x27;s Road Junction, entering a double-track tunnel and joining the Widened Lines at Midland Junction.
====Hammersmith &amp; City Railway====

In November 1860, a bill was presented to Parliament, supported by the Met and the GWR, for a railway from the GWR&#x27;s main line a mile west of Paddington to the developing suburbs of Shepherd&#x27;s Bush and Hammersmith, with a connection to the West London Railway at Latimer Road. Authorised on 22 July 1861 in the Hammersmith and City Railway Act 1861 (24 &amp; 25 Vict. c. clxiv) as the Hammersmith and City Railway (H&amp;CR), the line, constructed on a high viaduct largely across open fields, opened on 13 June 1864 with a broad-gauge GWR service from Farringdon Street, with stations at Notting Hill (now Ladbroke Grove), Shepherd&#x27;s Bush (replaced by the current Shepherd&#x27;s Bush Market in 1914) and Hammersmith. The link to the West London Railway opened on 1 July that year, served by a carriage that was attached or detached at Notting Hill for Kensington (Addison Road). Following an agreement between the Met and the GWR, from 1865 the Met ran a standard-gauge service to Hammersmith and the GWR a broad-gauge service to Kensington. In 1867, the H&amp;CR became jointly owned by the two companies. The GWR began running standard-gauge trains and the broad gauge rail was removed from the H&amp;CR and the Met in 1869. In 1871, two additional tracks parallel to the GWR between Westbourne Park and Paddington were brought into use for the H&amp;CR and in 1878 the flat crossing at Westbourne Park was replaced by a diveunder. In August 1872, the GWR Addison Road service was extended over the District Railway via Earl&#x27;s Court to Mansion House. This became known as the Middle Circle and ran until January 1905; from 1 July 1900 trains terminated at Earl&#x27;s Court. Additional stations were opened at Westbourne Park (1866), Latimer Road (1868), Royal Oak (1871), Wood Lane (1908) and Goldhawk Road (1914).

Between 1 October 1877 and 31 December 1906, some services on the H&amp;CR were extended to Richmond over the London and South Western Railway (L&amp;SWR) via its station at Hammersmith (Grove Road).

====Inner Circle====
The early success of the Met prompted a flurry of applications to Parliament in 1863 for new railways in London, many of them competing for similar routes. To consider the best proposals, the House of Lords established a select committee, which issued a report in July 1863 with a recommendation for an &quot;inner circuit of railway that should abut, if not actually join, nearly all of the principal railway termini in the Metropolis&quot;. A number of railway schemes were presented for the 1864 parliamentary session that met the recommendation in varying ways and a Joint Committee of the Parliament of the United Kingdom was set up to review the options.

Proposals from the Met to extend south from Paddington to South Kensington and east from Moorgate to Tower Hill were accepted and received royal assent on 29 July 1864 as the &#x27; (27 &amp; 28 Vict. c. ccxci) and the &#x27; (27 &amp; 28 Vict. c. cccxv) respectively. To complete the circuit, the committee encouraged the amalgamation of two schemes via different routes between Kensington and the City, and a combined proposal under the name Metropolitan District Railway (commonly known as the District railway) passed into law on the same day in the Metropolitan District Railways Act 1864 (27 &amp; 28 Vict. c. cccxxii). Initially, the District and the Met were closely associated and it was intended that they would soon merge. The Met&#x27;s chairman and three other directors were on the board of the District, John Fowler was the engineer of both companies and the construction works for all of the extensions were let as a single contract. The District was established as a separate company to enable funds to be raised independently of the Met.

Starting as a branch from Praed Street junction, a short distance east of the Met&#x27;s Paddington station, the western extension passed through fashionable districts in Bayswater, Notting Hill, and Kensington. Land values here were higher and, unlike the original line, the route did not follow an easy alignment under existing roads. Compensation payments for property were much higher. In Leinster Gardens, Bayswater, a façade of two five-storey houses was built at Nos. 23 and 24 to conceal the gap in a terrace created by the railway passing through. To ensure adequate ventilation, most of the line was in cutting except for a tunnel under Campden Hill. Construction of the District proceeded in parallel with the work on the Met and it too passed through expensive areas. Construction costs and compensation payments were so high that the cost of the first section of the District from South Kensington to Westminster was £3 million, almost three times as much as the Met&#x27;s original, longer line.

The first section of the Met extension opened to Brompton (Gloucester Road) (now Gloucester Road) on 1 October 1868, with stations at Paddington (Praed Street) (now Paddington), Bayswater, Notting Hill Gate, and Kensington (High Street) (now High Street Kensington). Three months later, on 24 December 1868, the Met extended eastwards to a shared station at South Kensington and the District opened its line from there to Westminster, with other stations at Sloane Square, Victoria, St James&#x27;s Park, and Westminster Bridge (now Westminster).

The District also had parliamentary permission to extend westward from Brompton and, on 12 April 1869, it opened a single-track line to West Brompton on the WLR. There were no intermediate stations and at first this service operated as a shuttle from Gloucester Road. By mid-1869 separate tracks had been laid between South Kensington and Brompton and from Kensington (High Street) to a junction with the line to West Brompton. During the night of 5 July 1870 the District secretly built the disputed Cromwell curve connecting Brompton and Kensington (High Street).

East of Westminster, the next section of the District&#x27;s line ran in the new Victoria Embankment built by the Metropolitan Board of Works along the north bank of the River Thames. The line opened from Westminster to Blackfriars on 30 May 1870 with stations at Charing Cross (now Embankment), The Temple (now Temple) and Blackfriars.

On its opening the Met operated the trains on the District, receiving 55% of the gross receipts for a fixed level of service. Extra trains required by the District were charged for and the District&#x27;s share of the income dropped to about 40%. The District&#x27;s level of debt meant that the merger was no longer attractive to the Met and did not proceed, so the Met&#x27;s directors resigned from the District&#x27;s board. To improve its finances, the District gave the Met notice to terminate the operating agreement. Struggling under the burden of its very high construction costs, the District was unable to continue with the remainder of the original scheme to reach Tower Hill and made a final extension of its line just one station east from Blackfriars to a previously unplanned City terminus at Mansion House.

On Saturday 1 July 1871, an opening banquet was attended by Prime Minister William Gladstone, who was also a shareholder. The following Monday, Mansion House opened and the District began running its own trains. From this date, the two companies operated a joint &quot;Inner Circle&quot; service between Mansion House and Moorgate Street via South Kensington and Edgware Road every ten minutes, supplemented by a District service every ten minutes between Mansion House and West Brompton and H&amp;CR and GWR suburban services between Edgware Road and Moorgate Street. The permissions for the railway east of Mansion House were allowed to lapse. At the other end of the line, the District part of South Kensington station opened on 10 July 1871 and Earl&#x27;s Court station opened on the West Brompton extension on 30 October 1871.

In 1868 and 1869, judgements had been against the Met in a number of hearings, finding financial irregularities such as the company paying a dividend it could not afford and expenses being paid out of the capital account. In 1870, the directors were guilty of a breach of trust and were ordered to compensate the company. All appealed and were allowed, in 1874, to settle for a much lower amount. In October 1872, to restore shareholders&#x27; confidence, Edward Watkin was appointed chairman and the directors were replaced. Watkin was an experienced railwayman and already on the board of several railway companies, including the South Eastern Railway (SER), and had an aspiration to construct a line from the north through London to that railway.

Owing to the cost of land purchases, the Met&#x27;s eastward extension from Moorgate Street was slow to progress and it had to obtain an extension of the act&#x27;s time limit in 1869. The extension was begun in 1873, but after construction exposed burials in the vault of a Roman Catholic chapel, the contractor reported that it was difficult to keep the men at work. The first section opened to the Great Eastern Railway&#x27;s (GER&#x27;s) recently opened terminus at Liverpool Street on 1 February 1875. For a short time, while the Met&#x27;s station was being built, services ran into the GER station via a curve. The Met opened its station later that year on 12 July and the curve was not used again by regular traffic. During the extension of the railway to Aldgate several hundred cartloads of bullocks&#x27; horn were discovered in a layer below the surface. A terminus opened at Aldgate on 18 November 1876, initially for a shuttle service to Bishopsgate before all Met and District trains worked through from 4 December.

Conflict between the Met and the District and the expense of construction delayed further progress on the completion of the inner circle. In 1874, frustrated City financiers formed the with the aim of finishing the route. This company was supported by the District and obtained parliamentary authority on 7 August 1874. The company struggled to raise the funding and an extension of time was granted in 1876. A meeting between the Met and the District was held in 1877 with the Met now wishing to access the SER via the East London Railway (ELR). Both companies promoted and obtained an act of Parliament, the Metropolitan and District Railways (City Lines and Extensions) Act 1879 (42 &amp; 43 Vict. c. cci) for the extension and link to the ELR, the act also ensuring future co-operation by allowing both companies access to the whole circle. A large contribution was made by authorities for substantial road and sewer improvements. In 1882, the Met extended its line from Aldgate to a temporary station at Tower of London. Two contracts to build joint lines were placed, from Mansion House to the Tower in 1882 and from the circle north of Aldgate to Whitechapel with a curve onto the ELR in 1883. From 1 October 1884, the District and the Met began working trains from St Mary&#x27;s via this curve onto the ELR to the SER&#x27;s New Cross station. After an official opening ceremony on 17 September and trial running a circular service started on Monday 6 October 1884. On the same day the Met extended some H&amp;CR services over the ELR to New Cross, calling at new joint stations at Aldgate East and St Mary&#x27;s. Joint stations opened on the circle line at Cannon Street, Eastcheap (Monument from 1 November 1884) and Mark Lane. The Met&#x27;s Tower of London station closed on 12 October 1884 after the District refused to sell tickets to the station. Initially, the service was eight trains an hour, completing the circle in 81–84 minutes, but this proved impossible to maintain and so the frequency was reduced to six trains an hour - albeit with an improved timing of 70 minutes - in 1885. Guards were permitted no relief breaks during their shift until September 1885, when they were permitted three 20-minute breaks.

===Extension Line, 1868–99===

====Baker Street to Harrow====

In April 1868, the Metropolitan &amp; St John&#x27;s Wood Railway (M&amp;SJWR) opened a single-track railway in tunnel to Swiss Cottage from new platforms at Baker Street (called Baker Street East). There were intermediate stations at St John&#x27;s Wood Road and Marlborough Road, both with crossing loops, and the line was worked by the Met with a train every 20 minutes. A junction was built with the Inner Circle at Baker Street, but there were no through trains after 1869.

The original intention of the M&amp;SJWR was to run to the London and North Western Railway&#x27;s station at Finchley Road (now Finchley Road &amp; Frognal). Before construction had begun, a branch was proposed from a junction a short distance north of Swiss Cottage station running north for across mostly open countryside to Hampstead Village where the station was to be located east of the village centre. The branch was authorised in May 1865. This appeared on some maps. Financial difficulties meant the scope of the line only progressed as far as Swiss Cottage, The branch to Hampstead was cancelled in 1870. A section of tunnel was built north of Swiss Cottage station for the Hampstead branch most of which was used for the later extension to the north-west. A short length towards Hampstead was unused. This is still visible today when travelling on a southbound Metropolitan line service.

In the early 1870s, passenger numbers were low and the M&amp;SJWR was looking to extend the line to generate new traffic. Recently placed in charge of the Met, Watkin saw this as the priority as the cost of construction would be lower than in built-up areas and fares higher; traffic would also be fed into the Circle. In 1873, the M&amp;SJWR was given authority to reach the Middlesex countryside at Neasden, but as the nearest inhabited place to Neasden was Harrow it was decided to build the line further to Harrow and permission was granted in 1874. To serve the Royal Agricultural Society&#x27;s 1879 show at Kilburn, a single line to West Hampstead opened on 30 June 1879 with a temporary platform at Finchley Road. Double track and a full service to Willesden Green started on 24 November 1879 with a station at Kilburn &amp; Brondesbury (now Kilburn). The line was extended to Harrow, the service from Baker Street beginning on 2 August 1880. The intermediate station at Kingsbury Neasden (now Neasden) was opened the same day. Two years later, the single-track tunnel between Baker Street and Swiss Cottage was duplicated and the M&amp;SJWR was absorbed by the Met.

In 1882, the Met moved its carriage works from Edgware Road to Neasden. A locomotive works was opened in 1883 and a gas works in 1884. To accommodate employees moving from London over 100 cottages and ten shops were built for rent. In 1883, a school room and church took over two of the shops; two years later land was given to the Wesleyan Church for a church building and a school for 200 children.

====Harrow to Verney Junction, Brill Branch and Wembley Park Station====
In 1868, the Duke of Buckingham opened the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway (A&amp;BR), a single track from to a new station at on the Buckinghamshire Railway&#x27;s Bletchley to Oxford line. At the beginning lukewarm support had been given by the LNWR, which worked the Bletchley to Oxford line, but by the time the line had been built the relationship between the two companies had collapsed. The Wycombe Railway built a single-track railway from to Aylesbury and when the GWR took over this company it ran shuttles from Princes Risborough through Aylesbury to Quainton Road and from Quainton Road to Verney Junction.

The A&amp;BR had authority for a southern extension to Rickmansworth, connecting with the LNWR&#x27;s Watford and Rickmansworth Railway. Following discussions between the duke and Watkin it was agreed that this line would be extended south to meet the Met at Harrow and permission for this extension was granted in 1874 and Watkin joined the board of the A&amp;BR in 1875. Money was not found for this scheme and the Met had to return to Parliament to obtain the &#x27; (43 &amp; 44 Vict. c. cxxxiv) and &#x27; (44 &amp; 45 Vict. c. cxvii) giving permission for a railway from Harrow to Aylesbury. Pinner was reached in 1885 and an hourly service from Rickmansworth and Northwood to Baker Street started on 1 September 1887. By then raising money was becoming very difficult although there was local support for a station at Chesham. Authorised in 1885, double track from Rickmansworth was laid for , then single to Chesham. Services to Chesham calling at Chorley Wood and Chalfont Road (now Chalfont &amp; Latimer) started on 8 July 1889.

The Met took over the A&amp;BR on 1 July 1891 and a temporary platform at Aylesbury opened on 1 September 1892 with trains calling at , , and . In 1894, the Met and GWR joint station at Aylesbury opened. Beyond Aylesbury to Verney Junction, the bridges were not strong enough for the Met&#x27;s locomotives. The GWR refused to help, so locomotives were borrowed from the LNWR until two D Class locomotives were bought. The line was upgraded, doubled and the stations rebuilt to main-line standards, allowing a through Baker Street to service from 1 January 1897, calling at a new station at , a rebuilt , and .

From Quainton Road, the Duke of Buckingham had built a branch railway, the Brill Tramway. In 1899, there were four mixed passenger and goods trains each way between and Quainton Road. There were suggestions of the Met buying the line and it took over operations in November 1899, renting the line for £600 a year. The track was relaid and stations rebuilt in 1903. Passenger services were provided by A Class and D Class locomotives and Oldbury rigid eight-wheeled carriages.

In 1893, a new station at Wembley Park was opened, initially used by the Old Westminsters Football Club, but primarily to serve a planned sports, leisure and exhibition centre. A tower (higher than the recently built Eiffel Tower) was planned, but the attraction was not a success and only the tall first stage was built. The tower became known as &quot;Watkin&#x27;s Folly&quot; and was dismantled in 1907 after it was found to be tilting.

Around 1900, there were six stopping trains an hour between Willesden Green and Baker Street. One of these came from Rickmansworth and another from Harrow, the rest started at Willesden Green. There was also a train every two hours from Verney Junction, which stopped at all stations to Harrow, then Willesden Green and Baker Street. The timetable was arranged so that the fast train would leave Willesden Green just before a stopping service and arrived at Baker Street just behind the previous service.

====Great Central Railway====

Watkin was also director of the Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway (MS&amp;LR) and had plans for a 99-mile (159 km) London extension to join the Met just north of Aylesbury. There were suggestions that Baker Street could be used as the London terminus, but by 1891–1892 the MS&amp;LR had concluded it needed its own station and goods facilities in the area. An act for this railway was passed in 1893, but Watkin became ill and resigned his directorships in 1894. For a while after his departure the relationship between the companies turned sour.

In 1895, the MS&amp;LR put forward a bill to Parliament to build two tracks from Wembley Park to Canfield Place, near Finchley Road station, to allow its express trains to pass the Met&#x27;s stopping service. The Met protested before it was agreed that it would build the lines for the MS&amp;LR&#x27;s exclusive use. When rebuilding bridges over the lines from Wembley Park to Harrow for the MS&amp;LR, seeing a future need the Met quadrupled the line at the same time and the MS&amp;LR requested exclusive use of two tracks. The MS&amp;LR had the necessary authority to connect to the Circle at Marylebone, but the Met suggested onerous terms. At the time the MS&amp;LR was running short of money and abandoned the link.

Because of the state of the relationship between the two companies the MS&amp;LR was unhappy being wholly reliant on the Met for access to London and, unlike its railway to the north, south of Aylesbury there were several speed restrictions and long climbs, up to 1 in 90 in places. In 1898, the MS&amp;LR and the GWR jointly presented a bill to Parliament for a railway (the Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway) with short connecting branches from Grendon Underwood, north of Quainton Road, to Ashendon and from Northolt to Neasden. The Met protested, claiming that the bill was &#x27;incompatible with the spirit and terms&#x27; of the agreements between it and the MS&amp;LR. The MS&amp;LR was given authority to proceed, but the Met was given the right to compensation. A temporary agreement was made to allow four MS&amp;LR coal trains a day over the Met lines from 26 July 1898. The MS&amp;LR wished these trains to also use the GWR route from Aylesbury via Princes Risborough into London, whereas the Met considered this was not covered by the agreement. A train scheduled to use the GWR route was not allowed access to the Met lines at Quainton Road in the early hours of 30 July 1898 and returned north. A subsequent court hearing found in the Met&#x27;s favour, as it was a temporary arrangement.

The MS&amp;LR changed its name to the Great Central Railway (GCR) in 1897 and the Great Central Main Line from London Marylebone to Manchester Central opened for passenger traffic on 15 March 1899. Negotiations about the line between the GCR and the Met took several years and in 1906 it was agreed that two tracks from Canfield Place to Harrow would be leased to the GCR for £20,000 a year and the Metropolitan and Great Central Joint Railway was created, leasing the line from Harrow to Verney Junction and the Brill branch for £44,000 a year, the GCR guaranteeing to place at least £45,000 of traffic on the line. Aylesbury station, which had been jointly run by the GWR and the Met, was placed with a joint committee of the Great Western &amp; Great Central and Metropolitan &amp; Great Central Joint Committees, and generally known as Aylesbury Joint Station. The Met &amp; GC Joint Committee took over the operation of the stations and line, but had no rolling stock. The Met provided the management and the GCR the accounts for the first five years before the companies switched functions, then alternating every five years until 1926. The Met maintained the line south of milepost 28.5 (south of Great Missenden), the GCR to the north.

===Electrification, 1900–14===

====Development====

At the start of the 20th century, the District and the Met saw increased competition in central London from the new electric deep-level tube lines. With the opening in 1900 of the Central London Railway from Shepherd&#x27;s Bush to the City with a flat fare of 2d, the District and the Met together lost four million passengers between the second half of 1899 and the second half of 1900. The polluted atmosphere in the tunnels was becoming increasingly unpopular with passengers and conversion to electric traction was seen as the way forward. Electrification had been considered by the Met as early as the 1880s, but such a method of traction was still in its infancy, and agreement would be needed with the District because of the shared ownership of the Inner Circle. A jointly owned train of six coaches ran an experimental passenger service on the Earl&#x27;s Court to High Street Kensington section for six months in 1900. This was considered a success, tenders were requested and in 1901 a Met and District joint committee recommended the Ganz three-phase AC system with overhead wires. This was accepted by both parties until the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) took control of the District. The UERL was led by the American Charles Yerkes, whose experience in the United States led him to favour DC with a third rail similar to that on the City and South London Railway and Central London Railway. After arbitration by the Board of Trade a DC system with four rails was taken up and the railways began electrifying using multiple-unit stock and electric locomotives hauling carriages.
In 1904, the Met opened a 10.5 MW coal-fired power station at Neasden, which supplied 11 kV 33.3 Hz current to five substations that converted this to 600 V DC using rotary converters.

Meanwhile, the District had been building a line from Ealing to South Harrow and had authority for an extension to Uxbridge. In 1899, the District had problems raising the finance and the Met offered a rescue package whereby it would build a branch from Harrow to Rayners Lane and take over the line to Uxbridge, with the District retaining running rights for up to three trains an hour. The necessary Act was passed in 1899 and construction on the long branch started in September 1902, requiring 28 bridges and a long viaduct with 71 arches at Harrow. As this line was under construction it was included in the list of lines to be electrified, together with the railway from Baker Street to Harrow, the inner circle and the joint GWR and Met H&amp;C. The Met opened the line to Uxbridge on 30 June 1904 with one intermediate station at Ruislip, initially worked by steam. Wooden platforms the length of three cars opened at Ickenham on 25 September 1905, followed by similar simple structures at Eastcote and Rayners Lane on 26 May 1906.

====Running electric trains====
Electric multiple units began running on 1 January 1905, and by 20 March all local services between Baker Street and Harrow were electric. The use of six-car trains was considered wasteful on the lightly used line to Uxbridge and in running an off-peak three-car shuttle to Harrow the Met aroused the displeasure of the Board of Trade for using a motor car to propel two trailers. A short steam train was used for off-peak services from the end of March while some trailers were modified to add a driving cab, entering service from 1 June.

On 1 July 1905, the Met and the District both introduced electric units on the inner circle until later that day a Met multiple unit overturned the positive current rail on the District and the Met service was withdrawn. An incompatibility was found between the way the shoe-gear was mounted on Met trains and the District track and Met trains were withdrawn from the District and modified. Full electric service started on 24 September, reducing the travel time around the circle from 70 to 50 minutes.

The GWR built a 6 MW power station at Park Royal and electrified the line between Paddington and Hammersmith and the branch from Latimer Road to Kensington (Addison Road). An electric service with jointly owned rolling stock started on the H&amp;CR on 5 November 1906. In the same year, the Met suspended running on the East London Railway, terminating instead at the District station at Whitechapel until that line was electrified in 1913. The H&amp;CR service stopped running to Richmond over the L&amp;SWR on 31 December 1906; GWR steam rail motors ran from Ladbroke Grove to Richmond until 31 December 1910.

The line beyond Harrow was not electrified so trains were hauled by an electric locomotive from Baker Street, changed for a steam locomotive en route. From 1 January 1907, the exchange took place at Wembley Park. From 19 July 1908, locomotives were changed at Harrow. GWR rush hour services to the city continued to operate, electric traction taking over from steam at Paddington from January 1907, although freight services to Smithfield continued to be steam hauled throughout.

In 1908, Robert Selbie was appointed General Manager, a position he held until 1930.
In 1909, limited through services to the City restarted. Baker Street station was rebuilt with four tracks and two island platforms in 1912. To cope with the rise in traffic the line south of Harrow was quadrupled, in 1913 from Finchley Road to Kilburn, in 1915 to Wembley Park; the line from Finchley Road to Baker Street remained double track, causing a bottleneck.

====London Underground====

To promote travel by the underground railways in London a joint marketing arrangement was agreed. In 1908, the Met joined this scheme, which included maps, joint publicity and through ticketing. UD signs were used outside stations in Central London. Eventually the UERL controlled all the underground railways except the Met and the Waterloo &amp; City and introduced station name boards with a red disc and a blue bar. The Met responded with station boards with a red diamond and a blue bar.
Further coordination in the form of a General Managers&#x27; Conference faltered after Selbie withdrew in 1911 when the Central London Railway, without any reference to the conference, set its season ticket prices significantly lower than those on the Met&#x27;s competitive routes. Suggestions of merger with the Underground Group were rejected by Selbie, a press release of November 1912 noting the Met&#x27;s interests in areas outside London, its relationships with main-line railways and its freight business.

====East London Railway====

After the Met and the District had withdrawn from the ELR in 1906, services were provided by the South Eastern Railway, the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway (LB&amp;SCR) and the Great Eastern Railway. Both the Met and the District wanted to see the line electrified, but could not justify the whole cost themselves. Discussions continued, and in 1911 it was agreed that the ELR would be electrified with the UERL providing power and the Met the train service. Parliamentary powers were obtained in 1912 and through services restarted on 31 March 1913, the Met running two trains an hour from both the SER&#x27;s and the LB&amp;SCR&#x27;s New Cross stations to South Kensington and eight shuttles an hour alternately from the New Cross stations to Shoreditch.

====Great Northern &amp; City Railway====

The Great Northern &amp; City Railway (GN&amp;CR) was planned to allow trains to run from the GNR line at Finsbury Park directly into the City at Moorgate. The tunnels were large enough to take a main-line train with an internal diameter of , in contrast to those of the Central London Railway with a diameter less than . The GNR eventually opposed the scheme, and the line opened in 1904 with the northern terminus in tunnels underneath GNR Finsbury Park station.

Concerned that the GNR would divert its Moorgate services over the City Widened Lines to run via the GN&amp;CR, the Met sought to take over the GN&amp;CR. A bill was presented in 1912–1913 to allow this with extensions to join the GN&amp;CR to the inner circle between Moorgate and Liverpool Street and to the Waterloo &amp; City line. The takeover was authorised, but the new railway works were removed from the bill after opposition from City property owners. The following year, a bill was jointly presented by the Met and GNR with amended plans that would have also allowed a connection between the GN&amp;CR and GNR at Finsbury Park. Opposed, this time by the North London Railway, this bill was withdrawn.

===War and &quot;Metro-land&quot;, 1914–32===

====World War I====
On 28 July 1914 World War I broke out, and on 5 August 1914 the Met was made subject to government control in the form of the Railway Executive Committee. It lost significant numbers of staff who volunteered for military service and from 1915 women were employed as booking clerks and ticket collectors. The City Widened Lines assumed major strategic importance as a link between the channel ports and the main lines to the north, used by troop movements and freight. During the four years of war the line saw 26,047 military trains which carried of materials; the sharp curves prevented ambulance trains returning with wounded using this route. Government control was relinquished on 15 August 1921.

====Metro-land development====

Unlike other railway companies, which were required to dispose of surplus land, the Met was in a privileged position with clauses in its acts allowing it to retain such land that it believed was necessary for future railway use. Initially, the surplus land was managed by the Land Committee, made up of Met directors. In the 1880s, at the same time as the railway was extending beyond Swiss Cottage and building the workers&#x27; estate at Neasden, roads and sewers were built at Willesden Park Estate and the land was sold to builders. Similar developments followed at Cecil Park, near Pinner and, after the failure of the tower at Wembley, plots were sold at Wembley Park.

In 1912, Selbie, then General Manager, thought that some professionalism was needed and suggested a company be formed to take over from the Surplus Lands Committee to develop estates near the railway. World War I delayed these plans and it was 1919, with expectation of a housing boom, before Metropolitan Railway Country Estates Limited (MRCE) was formed. Concerned that Parliament might reconsider the unique position the Met held, the railway company sought legal advice, which was that the Met had authority to hold land, but had none to develop it. A new company was created; all but one of its directors were also directors of the Met. MRCE developed estates at Kingsbury Garden Village near Neasden, Wembley Park, Cecil Park and Grange Estate at Pinner, and the Cedars Estate at Rickmansworth, and created places such as Harrow Garden Village.

The term Metro-land was coined by the Met&#x27;s marketing department in 1915 when the &quot;Guide to the Extension Line&quot; became the &quot;Metro-land&quot; guide, priced at 1d. This promoted the land served by the Met for the walker, visitor and later the house-hunter. Published annually until 1932, the last full year of independence, the guide extolled the benefits of &quot;The good air of the Chilterns&quot;, using language such as &quot;Each lover of Metroland may well have his own favourite wood beech and coppice — all tremulous green loveliness in Spring and russet and gold in October&quot;. The dream promoted was of a modern home in beautiful countryside with a fast railway service to central London.

From about 1914 the company promoted itself as &quot;The Met&quot;, but after 1920 the commercial manager, John Wardle, ensured that timetables and other publicity material used &quot;Metro&quot; instead. Land development also occurred in central London when in 1929 Chiltern court, a large, luxurious block of apartments, opened at Baker Street, designed by the Met&#x27;s architect Charles Walter Clark, who was also responsible for the design of a number of station reconstructions in outer &quot;Metro-land&quot; at this time.

====Infrastructure improvements====
To improve outer passenger services, powerful H Class steam locomotives were introduced in 1920, followed in 1922–1923 by new electric locomotives with a top speed of . The generating capacity of the power station at Neasden was increased to approximately 35 MW and on 5 January 1925 electric services reached Rickmansworth, allowing the locomotive change over point to be moved.

In 1924 and 1925, the British Empire Exhibition was held on the Wembley Park Estate and the adjacent Wembley Park station was rebuilt with a new island platform with a covered bridge linking to the exhibition. The Met exhibited an electric multiple unit car in 1924, which returned the following year with electric locomotive No. 15, subsequently to be named &quot;Wembley 1924&quot;. A national sports arena, Wembley Stadium was built on the site of Watkin&#x27;s Tower. With a capacity of 125,000 spectators it was first used for the FA Cup Final on 28 April 1923 where the match was preceded by chaotic scenes as crowds in excess of capacity surged into the stadium. In the 1926 &quot;Metro-land&quot; edition, the Met boasted that that had carried 152,000 passengers to Wembley Park on that day.

In 1925, a branch opened from Rickmansworth to Watford. There had been a railway station in Watford since 1837, but in 1895 the Watford Tradesmen&#x27;s Association had approached the Met with a proposal for a line to Watford via Stanmore. They approached again in 1904, this time jointly with the local District Council, to discuss a new plan for a shorter branch from Rickmansworth. A possible route was surveyed in 1906 and a bill deposited in 1912 seeking authority for a joint Met &amp; GCR line from Rickmansworth to Watford town centre that would cross Cassiobury Park on an embankment. There was local opposition to the embankment and the line was cut back to a station with goods facilities just short of the park. The amended Act was passed on 7 August 1912 and the Watford Joint Committee formed before the start of World War I in 1914 delayed construction. After the war, the Trade Facilities Act 1921 (11 &amp; 12 Geo. 5. c. 65) offered government financial guarantees for capital projects that promoted employment, and taking advantage of this construction started in 1922. During construction, the Railways Act 1921 (11 &amp; 12 Geo. 5. c. 55) meant that the GCR would be replaced by the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER) in 1923. Where the branch met the extension line two junctions were built, allowing trains access to Rickmansworth and London. Services started on 3 November 1925 with one intermediate station at Croxley Green (now Croxley), with services provided by Met electric multiple units to Liverpool Street via Moor Park and Baker Street and by LNER steam trains to Marylebone. The Met also ran a shuttle service between Watford and Rickmansworth. During 1924–1925 the flat junction north of Harrow was replaced with a long diveunder to separate Uxbridge and main-line trains. Another attempt was made in 1927 to extend the Watford branch across Cassiobury Park to the town centre, the Met purchasing a property on Watford High Street with the intention of converting it to a station. The proposals for tunnelling under the park proved controversial and the scheme was dropped.
There remained a bottleneck at Finchley Road where the fast and slow tracks converged into one pair for the original M&amp;SJWR tunnels to Baker Street. In 1925, a plan was developed for two new tube tunnels, large enough for the Met rolling stock that would join the extension line at a junction north of Kilburn &amp; Brondesbury station and run beneath Kilburn High Street, Maida Vale and Edgware Road to Baker Street. The plan included three new stations, at Quex Road, Kilburn Park Road and Clifton Road, but did not progress after Ministry of Transport revised its &quot;Requirements for Passenger Lines&quot; requiring a means of exit in an emergency at the ends of trains running in deep-level tubes – compartment stock used north of Harrow did not comply with this requirement. Edgware Road station had been rebuilt with four platforms and had train destination indicators including stations such as Verney Junction and Uxbridge.

In the 1920s, off-peak there was a train every 4–5 minutes from Wembley Park to Baker Street. There were generally two services per hour from both Watford and Uxbridge that ran non-stop from Wembley Park and stopping services started from Rayners Lane, Wembley Park, and Neasden; most did not stop at Marlborough Road and St John&#x27;s Wood Road. Off-peak, stations north of Moor Park were generally served by Marylebone trains. During the peak trains approached Baker Street every 2.5–3 minutes, half running through to Moorgate, Liverpool Street or Aldgate. On the inner circle a train from Hammersmith ran through Baker Street every 6 minutes, and Kensington (Addison Road) services terminated at Edgware Road. Maintaining a frequency of ten trains an hour on the circle was proving difficult and the solution chosen was for the District to extend its Putney to Kensington High Street service around the circle to Edgware Road, using the new platforms, and the Met to provide all the inner circle trains at a frequency of eight trains an hour.

Construction on a branch from Wembley Park to Stanmore started in 1929, which intended to serve a new housing development at Canons Park, with stations at Kingsbury and Canons Park (Edgware) (renamed Canons Park in 1933). The government again guaranteed finance, this time under the Development Loans Guarantees &amp; Grants Act, the project also quadrupling the tracks from Wembley Park to Harrow. The line was electrified with automatic colour light signals controlled from a signal box at Wembley Park and opened on 9 December 1932.

===London Passenger Transport Board, 1933===
Unlike the UERL, the Met profited directly from development of Metro-land housing estates near its lines; the Met had always paid a dividend to its shareholders. The early accounts are untrustworthy, but by the late 19th century it was paying a dividend of about 5%. This dropped from 1900 onwards as electric trams and the Central London Railway attracted passengers away; a low of per cent was reached in 1907–1908. Dividends rose to 2% in 1911–1913 as passengers returned after electrification; the outbreak of war in 1914 reduced the dividend to 1 per cent. By 1921 recovery was sufficient for a dividend of per cent to be paid and then, during the post-war housing boom, for the rate to steadily rise to 5 per cent in 1924–1925. The 1926 General Strike reduced this to 3 per cent; by 1929 it was back to 4%.

In 1913, the Met had refused a merger proposal made by the UERL and it remained stubbornly independent under the leadership of Robert Selbie. The Railways Act 1921, which became law on 19 August 1921, did not list any of London&#x27;s underground railways among the companies that were to be grouped, although at the draft stage the Met had been included. When proposals for integration of public transport in London were published in 1930, the Met argued that it should have the same status as the four main-line railways, and it was incompatible with the UERL because of its freight operations; the government saw the Met in a similar way to the District as they jointly operated the inner circle. After the &quot;London Passenger Transport Bill&quot;, aimed primarily at co-ordinating the small independent bus services, was published on 13 March 1931, the Met spent £11,000 opposing it. The bill survived a change in government in 1931 and the Met gave no response to a proposal made by the new administration that it could remain independent if it were to lose its running powers over the circle. The directors turned to negotiating compensation for its shareholders; by then passenger numbers had fallen due to competition from buses and the depression. In 1932, the last full year of operation, a per cent dividend was declared. On 1 July 1933, the London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB), was created as a public corporation and the Met was amalgamated with the other underground railways, tramway companies and bus operators. Met shareholders received £19.7 million in LPTB stock.

===Legacy===

The Met became the Metropolitan line of London Transport, the Brill branch closing in 1935, followed by the line from Quainton Road to Verney Junction in 1936. The LNER took over steam workings and freight. In 1936, Metropolitan line services were extended from to along the District line. The New Works Programme meant that in 1939 the Bakerloo line was extended from Baker Street in new twin tunnels and stations to Finchley Road before taking over the intermediate stations to Wembley Park and the Stanmore branch. The branch transferred to the Jubilee line when that line opened in 1979. The Great Northern and City Railway remained isolated and was managed as a section of the Northern line until being taken over by British Railways in 1976.

Steam locomotives were used north of Rickmansworth until the early 1960s, when they were replaced following the electrification to Amersham and the introduction of electric multiple units, London Transport withdrawing its service north of Amersham. In 1988, the route from Hammersmith to Aldgate and Barking was branded as the Hammersmith &amp; City line, and the route from the New Cross stations to Shoreditch became the East London line, leaving the Metropolitan line as the route from Aldgate to Baker Street and northwards to stations via Harrow.

After amalgamation in 1933, the &quot;Metro-land&quot; brand was rapidly dropped. In the mid-20th century, the spirit of Metro-land was remembered in John Betjeman&#x27;s poems such as &quot;The Metropolitan Railway&quot; published in the &quot;A Few Late Chrysanthemums&quot; collection in 1954 and he later reached a wider audience with his television documentary &quot;Metro-land&quot;, first broadcast on 26 February 1973. The suburbia of Metro-land is one locale of Julian Barnes&#x27; &quot;Bildungsroman&quot; novel &quot;Metroland&quot;, first published in 1980. A film based on the novel, also called &quot;Metroland&quot;, was released in 1997.

==Goods trains==
Until 1880, the Met did not run goods trains although goods trains ran over its tracks when the GNR began a service to the LC&amp;DR via Farringdon Street, followed by a service from the Midland Railway. The GNR, the GWR and the Midland opened goods depots in the Farringdon area, accessed from the city widened lines. Goods traffic was to play an important part of Met traffic on the extension line out of Baker Street. In 1880, the Met secured the coal traffic of the Harrow District Gas Co., worked from an exchange siding with the Midland at Finchley Road to a coal yard at Harrow. Goods and coal depots were provided at most of the stations on the extension line as they were built. Goods for London were initially handled at Willesden, with delivery by road or by transfer to the Midland. The arrival of the GCR gave connections to the north at Quainton Road and south via Neasden, Acton and Kew.

In 1909, the Met opened Vine Street goods depot near Farringdon with two sidings each seven wagons long and a regular service from West Hampstead. Trains were electrically hauled with a maximum length of 14 wagons and restricted to inwards and on the return. In 1910, the depot handled , which rose to in 1915. In 1913, the depot was reported above capacity, but after World War I motor road transport became an important competitor and by the late 1920s traffic had reduced to manageable levels.

Coal for the steam locomotives, the power station at Neasden and local gasworks were brought in via Quainton Road. Milk was conveyed from Vale of Aylesbury to the London suburbs and foodstuffs from Vine Street to Uxbridge for Alfred Button &amp; Son, wholesale grocers. Fish to Billingsgate Market via the Met and the District joint station at Monument caused some complaints, leaving the station approaches in an &quot;indescribably filthy condition&quot;. The District suggested a separate entrance for the fish, but nothing was done. The traffic reduced significantly when the GCR introduced road transport to Marylebone, but the problem remained until 1936, being one reason the LPTB gave for abolishing the carrying of parcels on Inner Circle trains. Initially private contractors were used for road delivery, but from 1919 the Met employed its own hauliers. In 1932, before it became part of London Underground, the company owned 544 goods vehicles and carried of coal, of materials and tons of goods.

==Rolling stock==

===Steam locomotives===
Concern about smoke and steam in the tunnels led to new designs of steam locomotive. Before the line opened, in 1861 trials were made with the experimental &quot;hot brick&quot; locomotive nicknamed Fowler&#x27;s Ghost. This was unsuccessful and the first public trains were hauled by broad-gauge GWR Metropolitan Class condensing 2-4-0 tank locomotives designed by Daniel Gooch. They were followed by standard-gauge GNR locomotives until the Met received its own 4-4-0 tank locomotives, built by Beyer Peacock of Manchester. Their design is frequently attributed to the Met&#x27;s Engineer John Fowler, but the locomotive was a development of one Beyer had built for the Spanish Tudela to Bilbao Railway, Fowler specifying only the driving wheel diameter, axle weight and the ability to navigate sharp curves. Eighteen were ordered in 1864, initially carrying names, and 40 had been built by 1870. To reduce smoke underground, at first coke was burnt, changed in 1869 to smokeless Welsh coal.

From 1879, more locomotives were needed, and the design was updated and 24 were delivered between 1879 and 1885. Originally they were painted bright olive green lined in black and yellow, chimneys copper capped with the locomotive number in brass figures at the front and domes of polished brass. In 1885, the colour changed to a dark red known as Midcared, and this was to remain the standard colour, taken up as the colour for the Metropolitan line by London Transport in 1933. When in 1925 the Met classified its locomotives by letters of the alphabet, these were assigned A Class and B Class. When the M&amp;SJWR was being built, it was considered that they would struggle on the gradients and five Worcester Engine 0-6-0 tank locomotives were delivered in 1868. It was soon found that A and B Classes could manage trains without difficulty and the 0-6-0Ts were sold to the Taff Vale Railway in 1873 and 1875.

From 1891, more locomotives were needed for work on the extension line from Baker Street into the country. Four C Class (0-4-4) locomotives, a development of South Eastern Railway&#x27;s &#x27;Q&#x27; Class, were received in 1891. In 1894, two D Class locomotives were bought to run between Aylesbury and Verney Junction. These were not fitted with the condensing equipment needed to work south of Finchley Road. Four more were delivered in 1895 with condensing equipment; these were prohibited working south of Finchley Road. In 1896, two E Class (0-4-4T) locomotives were built at Neasden works, followed by one in 1898 to replace the original Class A No. 1, damaged in an accident. Four more were built by Hawthorn Leslie &amp; Co in 1900 and 1901. To cope with the growing freight traffic on the extension line, the Met received four F Class (0-6-2) locomotives in 1901, similar to the E Class except for the wheel arrangement and without steam heat. In 1897 and 1899, the Met received two 0-6-0 saddle tank locomotives to a standard Peckett design. Unclassified by the Met, these were generally used for shunting at Neasden and Harrow.

Many locomotives were made redundant by the electrification of the inner London lines in 1905–1906. By 1907, 40 of the class A and B locomotives had been sold or scrapped, and by 1914 only 13 locomotives of these classes had been retained for shunting, departmental work and working trains over the Brill Tramway. The need for more powerful locomotives for both passenger and freight services meant that, in 1915, four G Class (0-6-4) locomotives arrived from Yorkshire Engine Co. Eight capable H Class (4-4-4) locomotives were built in 1920 and 1921 and used mainly on express passenger services. To run longer, faster and less frequent freight services in 1925 six K Class (2-6-4) locomotives arrived, rebuilt from 2-6-0 locomotives manufactured at Woolwich Arsenal after World War I. These were not permitted south of Finchley Road.

Two locomotives have been preserved: A Class No. 23 (LT L45) at the London Transport Museum, and E Class No. 1 (LT L44) at the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre. No. 1 ran in steam as part of the Met&#x27;s 150th anniversary celebrations during 2013.

===Carriages===
The Met opened with no stock of its own, with the GWR and then the GNR providing services. The GWR used eight-wheeled compartment carriages constructed from teak. By 1864, the Met had taken delivery of its own stock, made by the Ashbury Railway Carriage and Iron Company Ltd, based on the GWR design but standard gauge. Lighting was provided by gas — two jets in first class compartments and one in second and third class compartments, and from 1877 a pressurised oil gas system was used. Initially the carriages were braked with wooden blocks operated by hand from the guards&#x27; compartments at the front and back of the train, giving off a distinctive smell. This was replaced in 1869 by a chain that operated brakes on all carriages. The operation of the chain brake could be abrupt, leading to some passenger injuries, and it was replaced by a non-automatic vacuum brake by 1876. In the 1890s, a mechanical &#x27;next station&#x27; indicator was tested in some carriages on the Circle, triggered by a wooden flap between the tracks. It was considered unreliable and not approved for full installation.

In 1870, some close-coupled rigid-wheelbase four-wheeled carriages were built by Oldbury. After some derailments in 1887, a new design of long rigid-wheelbase four-wheelers known as Jubilee Stock was built by the Cravens Railway Carriage and Wagon Co. for the extension line. With the pressurised gas lighting system and non-automatic vacuum brakes as-built, steam heating was added later. More trains followed in 1892, but all had been withdrawn by 1912. By May 1893, following an order by the Board of Trade, automatic vacuum brakes had been fitted to all carriages and locomotives. A Jubilee Stock first class carriage was restored to carry passengers during the Met&#x27;s 150th anniversary celebrations.

Bogie stock was built by Ashbury in 1898 and by Cravens and at Neasden Works in 1900. This gave a better ride quality, steam heating, automatic vacuum brakes, electric lighting and upholstered seating in all classes. The Bluebell Railway has four 1898–1900 Ashbury and Cravens carriages and a fifth, built at Neasden, is at the London Transport Museum.
Competition with the Great Central Railway on outer suburban services on the extension line saw the introduction of more comfortable Dreadnought Stock carriages from 1910. Ninety-two of these wooden compartment carriages were built, fitted with pressurised gas lighting and steam heating. Electric lighting had replaced the gas by 1917 and electric heaters were added in 1922 to provide warmth when hauled by an electric locomotive. Later formed into rakes of five, six or seven coaches, conductor rail pick-ups on the leading and trailing guard coaches were joined by a bus line and connected to the electric locomotive to help prevent gapping. Two rakes were formed with a Pullman coach that provided a buffet service for a supplementary fare. The Vintage Carriages Trust has three preserved Dreadnought carriages.

From 1906, some of the Ashbury bogie stock was converted into electric multiple units. Some Dreadnought carriages were used with electric motor cars, and two-thirds remained in use as locomotive hauled stock on the extension line.

===Electric locomotives===

After electrification, the outer suburban routes were worked with carriage stock hauled from Baker Street by an electric locomotive that was exchanged for a steam locomotive en route. The Met ordered 20 electric locomotives from Metropolitan Amalgamated with two types of electrical equipment. The first ten, with Westinghouse equipment, entered service in 1906. These &#x27;camel-back&#x27; bogie locomotives had a central cab, weighed 50 tons, and had four traction motors The second type were built to a box car design with British Thomson-Houston equipment, replaced with the Westinghouse type in 1919.

In the early 1920s, the Met placed an order with Metropolitan-Vickers of Barrow-in-Furness for rebuilding the 20 electric locomotives. When work started on the first locomotive, it was found to be impractical and uneconomical and the order was changed to building new locomotives using some equipment recovered from the originals. The new locomotives were built in 1922–1923 and named after famous London residents. They had four motors, totalling (one-hour rating), giving a top speed of .

No. 5 &quot;John Hampden&quot; is preserved as a static display at the London Transport Museum and No. 12 &quot;Sarah Siddons&quot; has been used for heritage events, and ran during the Met&#x27;s 150th anniversary celebrations.

===Electric multiple units===

The first order for electric multiple units was placed with Metropolitan Amalgamated in 1902 for 50 trailers and 20 motor cars with Westinghouse equipment, which ran as 6-car trains. First and third class accommodation was provided in open saloons, second class being withdrawn from the Met. Access was at the ends via open lattice gates and the units were modified so that they could run off-peak as 3-car units. For the joint Hammersmith &amp; City line service, the Met and the GWR purchased 20 × 6-cars trains with Thomson-Houston equipment. In 1904, a further order was placed by the Met for 36 motor cars and 62 trailers with an option for another 20 motor cars and 40 trailers. Problems with the Westinghouse equipment led to Thomson-Houston equipment being specified when the option was taken up and more powerful motors being fitted. Before 1918, the motor cars with the more powerful motors were used on the Circle with three trailers. The open lattice gates were seen as a problem when working above ground and all of the cars had gates replaced with vestibules by 1907. Having access only through the two end doors became a problem on the busy Circle and centre sliding doors were fitted from 1911.

From 1906, some of the Ashbury bogie stock was converted into multiple units by fitting cabs, control equipment and motors. In 1910, two motor cars were modified with driving cabs at both ends. They started work on the Uxbridge-South Harrow shuttle service, being transferred to the Addison Road shuttle in 1918. From 1925 to 1934 these vehicles were used between Watford and Rickmansworth.

In 1913, an order was placed for 23 motor cars and 20 trailers, saloon cars with sliding doors at the end and the middle. These started work on the Circle, including the new service to New Cross via the ELR. In 1921, 20 motor cars, 33 trailers and six first-class driving trailers were received with three pairs of double sliding doors on each side. These were introduced on the Circle.

Between 1927 and 1933, multiple unit compartment stock was built by the Metropolitan Carriage and Wagon and Birmingham Railway Carriage and Wagon Company for services from Baker Street and the City to Watford and Rickmansworth. The first order was only for motor cars; half had Westinghouse brakes, Metro-Vickers control systems and four MV153 motors; they replaced the motor cars working with bogie stock trailers. The rest of the motor cars had the same motor equipment but used vacuum brakes, and worked with converted 1920/23 Dreadnought carriages to form &#x27;MV&#x27; units. In 1929, &#x27;MW&#x27; stock was ordered, 30 motor coaches and 25 trailers similar to the &#x27;MV&#x27; units, but with Westinghouse brakes. A further batch of &#x27;MW&#x27; stock was ordered in 1931, this time from the Birmingham Railway Carriage &amp; Wagon Co. This was to make seven 8-coach trains, and included additional trailers to increase the length of the previous &#x27;MW&#x27; batch trains to eight coaches. These had GEC WT545 motors, and although designed to work in multiple with the MV153, this did not work well in practice. After the Met became part of London Underground, the MV stock was fitted with Westinghouse brakes and the cars with GEC motors were re-geared to allow them to work in multiple with the MV153-motored cars. In 1938, nine 8-coach and ten 6-coach MW units were re-designated T Stock. A trailer coach built in 1904/05 is stored at London Transport Museum&#x27;s Acton Depot; it has been badly damaged by fire, and the Spa Valley Railway is home to two T stock coaches.

== Notes ==
==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
Bibliography
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


Other publications
* 

==External links==

* A silent film &quot;A trip on the Metropolitan Railway&quot;, circa 1910 (Adobe Flash) London Transport Museum
* Metropolitan &amp; Great Central Railway Joint Committee Survey Created by the Metropolitan &amp; Great Central Joint Committee in 1907 for their own use, the ten hand-coloured station and crossover plans illustrate the line from Harrow-on-the-Hill Station to Amersham and Chesham.
* Metropolitan Line Clive&#x27;s UndergrounD Line Guides</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="4" end="24" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="Metropolitan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="44" end="47" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="Met"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="95" end="101" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="197" end="205" title="City of London" label="the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="233" end="242" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="291" end="306" title="Terminal train station" label="railway termini"/>
<link wikidata="Q219867" start="318" end="335" title="London King&amp;#x27;s Cross railway station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011271" start="389" end="397" title="New Road (London)" label="New Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="404" end="417" title="cut-and-cover" label="cut-and-cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436291" start="493" end="508" title="Farringdon Road" label="Farringdon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182018" start="540" end="550" title="Smithfield, London" label="Smithfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q616218" start="820" end="832" title="Baker Street tube station" label="Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762419" start="878" end="889" title="Hammersmith tube station (Circle and Hammersmith &amp;amp; City lines)" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q801366" start="899" end="907" title="Richmond station (London)" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="953" end="965" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Inner Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q654577" start="1096" end="1102" title="Harrow-on-the-Hill station" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264513" start="1182" end="1200" title="Duke of Buckingham" label="Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q944225" start="1219" end="1234" title="Waddesdon Manor" label="Waddesdon Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="1275" end="1290" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="1347" end="1369" title="electric multiple unit" label="electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q470522" start="1648" end="1658" title="Metro-land" label="Metro-land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502902" start="1721" end="1768" title="Underground Electric Railways Company of London" label="Underground Electric Railways Company of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583868" start="1830" end="1862" title="London Passenger Transport Board" label="London Passenger Transport Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="1912" end="1930" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891" start="1938" end="1950" title="Metropolitan line" label="Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="1952" end="1958" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="1960" end="1968" title="District line" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q211270" start="1970" end="1992" title="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line" label="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City"/>
<link wikidata="Q207689" start="1994" end="2004" title="Piccadilly line" label="Piccadilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="2006" end="2013" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q203030" start="2018" end="2026" title="Victoria line" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q567000" start="2041" end="2058" title="Chiltern Railways" label="Chiltern Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599682" start="2063" end="2077" title="Great Northern Route" label="Great Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="2505" end="2519" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="2637" end="2650" title="London Bridge station" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="2655" end="2663" title="London Waterloo station" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581586" start="2678" end="2688" title="Bishopsgate railway station" label="Shoreditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q800753" start="2693" end="2709" title="Fenchurch Street railway station" label="Fenchurch Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q800751" start="2723" end="2729" title="Euston railway station" label="Euston"/>
<link wikidata="Q219867" start="2734" end="2751" title="London King&amp;#x27;s Cross railway station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="2770" end="2780" title="London Paddington station" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q107360757" start="3067" end="3115" title="Royal Commission on Metropolitan Railway Termini" label="Royal Commission on Metropolitan Railway Termini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530652" start="3305" end="3320" title="Charles Pearson" label="Charles Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3822" end="3852" title="Holborn Bridge Railway Company" label="Holborn Bridge Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="3884" end="3905" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="3993" end="3997" title="bill (proposed law)" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700096" start="4102" end="4113" title="Sir John Fowler, 1st Baronet" label="John Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532114" start="4637" end="4656" title="General Post Office, London" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q68021561" start="4660" end="4686" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Le Grand" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Le Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486303" start="4829" end="4861" title="London and North Western Railway" label="London and North Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q181811" start="4890" end="4912" title="Great Northern Railway (Great Britain)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="5052" end="5064" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965390" start="5115" end="5132" title="17 &amp;amp; 18 Vict." label="17 &amp;amp; 18 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="5244" end="5255" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q120147450" start="5500" end="5517" title="18 &amp;amp; 19 Vict." label="18 &amp;amp; 19 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5643" end="5702" title="Metropolitan (Great Northern Branch and Amendment) Act 1856" label="Metropolitan (Great Northern Branch and Amendment) Act 1856"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5726" end="5783" title="Great Northern and Metropolitan Junction Railway Act 1860" label="Great Northern and Metropolitan Junction Railway Act 1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560563" start="5785" end="5802" title="23 &amp;amp; 24 Vict." label="23 &amp;amp; 24 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q1094147" start="6222" end="6248" title="City of London Corporation" label="City of London Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436291" start="6302" end="6317" title="Farringdon Road" label="Farringdon Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6845" end="6858" title="Tunnel#Cut-and-cover" label="cut-and-cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q124129" start="6971" end="6982" title="Clerkenwell" label="Clerkenwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422244" start="7011" end="7022" title="River Fleet" label="River Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182018" start="7081" end="7106" title="Smithfield market" label="meat market at Smithfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076291" start="7141" end="7155" title="retaining wall" label="retaining wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="7171" end="7181" title="ellipse" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779946" start="7341" end="7348" title="navvy" label="navvies"/>
<link wikidata="Q577998" start="7375" end="7383" title="conveyor" label="conveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="7519" end="7533" title="Standard-gauge railway" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q906942" start="7560" end="7571" title="Broad-gauge railway" label="broad gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138981" start="7616" end="7626" title="dual gauge" label="dual gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971266" start="7710" end="7724" title="absolute block" label="absolute block"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975249" start="7748" end="7759" title="Charles Spagnoletti" label="Spagnoletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417169" start="7952" end="7968" title="boiler explosion" label="boiler explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546743" start="8300" end="8327" title="Metropolitan Board of Works" label="Metropolitan Board of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="8564" end="8581" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q121815679" start="8679" end="8691" title="Myles Fenton" label="Myles Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779703" start="8734" end="8766" title="Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway" label="Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="8841" end="8855" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378866" start="9436" end="9446" title="Paddington tube station (Circle and Hammersmith &amp;amp; City lines)" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284426" start="9449" end="9461" title="Edgware Road tube station (Circle, District and Hammersmith &amp;amp; City lines)" label="Edgware Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q616218" start="9463" end="9475" title="Baker Street tube station" label="Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q946924" start="9496" end="9517" title="Great Portland Street tube station" label="Great Portland Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366453" start="9538" end="9551" title="Euston Square tube station" label="Euston Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q826120" start="9577" end="9605" title="King&amp;#x27;s Cross St Pancras tube station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross St Pancras"/>
<link wikidata="Q800754" start="9635" end="9645" title="Farringdon station" label="Farringdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="10245" end="10246" title="£sd" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515040" start="10302" end="10320" title="GWR Metropolitan Class" label="Metropolitan Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q853110" start="10659" end="10685" title="Beyer, Peacock and Company" label="Beyer, Peacock and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="11145" end="11161" title="District Railway" label="District Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="11313" end="11319" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932006" start="12596" end="12611" title="Midland Railway" label="Midland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826042" start="12616" end="12649" title="London, Chatham and Dover Railway" label="London, Chatham and Dover Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356445" start="12825" end="12833" title="Moorgate" label="Moorgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q284195" start="13372" end="13390" title="Blackfriars Bridge railway station" label="Blackfriars Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296005" start="13415" end="13431" title="Snow Hill Tunnel (London)" label="Snow Hill tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38876" start="13557" end="13565" title="Barbican tube station" label="Barbican"/>
<link wikidata="Q801210" start="13570" end="13578" title="Moorgate station" label="Moorgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026182" start="14274" end="14294" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q277162" start="14299" end="14310" title="Hammersmith" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020208" start="14337" end="14356" title="West London Railway" label="West London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q211270" start="14408" end="14445" title="Hammersmith and City Railway Act 1861" label="Hammersmith and City Railway Act 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q123983056" start="14447" end="14464" title="24 &amp;amp; 25 Vict." label="24 &amp;amp; 25 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q1411854" start="14704" end="14718" title="Ladbroke Grove tube station" label="Ladbroke Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857909" start="14767" end="14794" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush Market tube station" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762419" start="14808" end="14819" title="Hammersmith tube station (Circle and Hammersmith &amp;amp; City lines)" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q801002" start="14956" end="14981" title="Kensington (Olympia) station" label="Kensington (Addison Road)"/>
<link wikidata="Q334533" start="15527" end="15536" title="Flying junction" label="diveunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="15605" end="15621" title="District Railway" label="District Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477336" start="15647" end="15660" title="Mansion House tube station" label="Mansion House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841264" start="15687" end="15700" title="Middle Circle" label="Middle Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857925" start="15821" end="15836" title="Westbourne Park tube station" label="Westbourne Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q736375" start="15845" end="15857" title="Latimer Road tube station" label="Latimer Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757115" start="15866" end="15875" title="Royal Oak tube station" label="Royal Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593088" start="15884" end="15893" title="Wood Lane (Metropolitan line) tube station" label="Wood Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q301995" start="15905" end="15918" title="Goldhawk Road tube station" label="Goldhawk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q801366" start="16020" end="16028" title="Richmond station (London)" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130022" start="16038" end="16070" title="London and South Western Railway" label="London and South Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645735" start="16102" end="16126" title="Hammersmith (Grove Road) railway station" label="Hammersmith (Grove Road)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="16342" end="16356" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447672" start="16371" end="16387" title="Select committee (United Kingdom)" label="select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081496" start="16721" end="16776" title="Joint Committee of the Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Joint Committee of the Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045096" start="16870" end="16886" title="South Kensington" label="South Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q499565" start="16913" end="16923" title="Tower Hill" label="Tower Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q123983031" start="16995" end="17012" title="27 &amp;amp; 28 Vict." label="27 &amp;amp; 28 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q123983031" start="17039" end="17056" title="27 &amp;amp; 28 Vict." label="27 &amp;amp; 28 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="17256" end="17285" title="District Railway" label="Metropolitan District Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="17366" end="17405" title="Metropolitan District Railways Act 1864" label="Metropolitan District Railways Act 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q123983031" start="17407" end="17424" title="27 &amp;amp; 28 Vict." label="27 &amp;amp; 28 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q41890" start="18040" end="18049" title="Bayswater" label="Bayswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="18051" end="18063" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="18069" end="18079" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229195" start="18262" end="18278" title="Leinster Gardens" label="Leinster Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028240" start="18516" end="18528" title="Campden Hill" label="Campden Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="18783" end="18794" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926028" start="18929" end="18937" title="Brompton, London" label="Brompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431088" start="18961" end="18976" title="Gloucester Road tube station" label="Gloucester Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360320" start="19045" end="19055" title="Paddington tube station (Bakerloo, Circle and District lines)" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q812631" start="19058" end="19067" title="Bayswater tube station" label="Bayswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803672" start="19069" end="19086" title="Notting Hill Gate tube station" label="Notting Hill Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q634345" start="19122" end="19144" title="High Street Kensington tube station" label="High Street Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q976035" start="19238" end="19254" title="South Kensington tube station" label="South Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530578" start="19338" end="19351" title="Sloane Square tube station" label="Sloane Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="19353" end="19361" title="London Victoria station" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567095" start="19363" end="19383" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Park tube station" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135834" start="19413" end="19424" title="Westminster tube station" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q801595" start="19564" end="19577" title="West Brompton station" label="West Brompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187664" start="19929" end="19943" title="Cromwell curve" label="Cromwell curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070409" start="20076" end="20095" title="Victoria Embankment" label="Victoria Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546743" start="20109" end="20136" title="Metropolitan Board of Works" label="Metropolitan Board of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="20165" end="20177" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334978" start="20278" end="20288" title="Embankment tube station" label="Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431071" start="20307" end="20313" title="Temple tube station" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q284195" start="20319" end="20330" title="Blackfriars station" label="Blackfriars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477336" start="21142" end="21155" title="Mansion House tube station" label="Mansion House"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="21218" end="21232" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="21233" end="21250" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277562" start="21907" end="21924" title="Earl&amp;#x27;s Court tube station" label="Earl&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345819" start="22448" end="22461" title="Edward Watkin" label="Edward Watkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826415" start="22624" end="22645" title="South Eastern Railway (UK)" label="South Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356445" start="22819" end="22834" title="Moorgate Street" label="Moorgate Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544279" start="23144" end="23165" title="Great Eastern Railway" label="Great Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="23214" end="23230" title="Liverpool Street station" label="Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q782929" start="23508" end="23515" title="Aldgate tube station" label="Aldgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q831794" start="24296" end="24315" title="East London Railway" label="East London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24386" end="24457" title="Metropolitan and District Railways (City Lines and Extensions) Act 1879" label="Metropolitan and District Railways (City Lines and Extensions) Act 1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906373" start="24459" end="24476" title="42 &amp;amp; 43 Vict." label="42 &amp;amp; 43 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q1770524" start="24785" end="24800" title="Tower of London tube station" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324010" start="25049" end="25063" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s tube station" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q801253" start="25110" end="25127" title="New Cross railway station" label="New Cross station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431064" start="25367" end="25379" title="Aldgate East tube station" label="Aldgate East"/>
<link wikidata="Q800615" start="25444" end="25457" title="Cannon Street tube station" label="Cannon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q806704" start="25470" end="25478" title="Bank–Monument station" label="Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770259" start="25505" end="25514" title="Mark Lane tube station" label="Mark Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q486501" start="26196" end="26209" title="Swiss Cottage tube station (1868–1940)" label="Swiss Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q452178" start="26309" end="26333" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s tube station" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Wood Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q451981" start="26338" end="26354" title="Marlborough Road tube station" label="Marlborough Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486303" start="26613" end="26645" title="London and North Western Railway" label="London and North Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449845" start="26664" end="26677" title="Finchley Road &amp;amp; Frognal railway station" label="Finchley Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="26882" end="26899" title="Hampstead Village" label="Hampstead Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765591" start="26906" end="26917" title="Hampstead railway station (Metropolitan &amp;amp; St John&amp;#x27;s Wood Railway)" label="the station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373587" start="28022" end="28048" title="Royal Agricultural Society of England" label="Royal Agricultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857089" start="28095" end="28109" title="West Hampstead tube station" label="West Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300073" start="28162" end="28175" title="Finchley Road tube station" label="Finchley Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857104" start="28212" end="28227" title="Willesden Green tube station" label="Willesden Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741248" start="28305" end="28312" title="Kilburn tube station" label="Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q654577" start="28340" end="28346" title="Harrow-on-the-Hill tube station" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857076" start="28457" end="28464" title="Neasden tube station" label="Neasden"/>
<link wikidata="Q804402" start="28540" end="28552" title="Baker Street" label="Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q149590" start="28557" end="28570" title="Swiss Cottage" label="Swiss Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984057" start="28963" end="28978" title="Wesleyan Methodist Church (Great Britain)" label="Wesleyan Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701723" start="29119" end="29137" title="Richard Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville, 3rd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos" label="Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831382" start="29149" end="29181" title="Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway" label="Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983268" start="29241" end="29264" title="Buckinghamshire Railway" label="Buckinghamshire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039646" start="29505" end="29520" title="Wycombe Railway" label="Wycombe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974634" start="29829" end="29862" title="Watford and Rickmansworth Railway" label="Watford and Rickmansworth Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560564" start="30198" end="30215" title="43 &amp;amp; 44 Vict." label="43 &amp;amp; 44 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q123965302" start="30239" end="30256" title="44 &amp;amp; 45 Vict." label="44 &amp;amp; 45 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q1924802" start="30325" end="30331" title="Pinner station" label="Pinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q801365" start="30379" end="30392" title="Rickmansworth station" label="Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q631448" start="30397" end="30406" title="Northwood station" label="Northwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q138914" start="30552" end="30559" title="Chesham tube station" label="Chesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q800623" start="30683" end="30695" title="Chorley Wood station" label="Chorley Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q800618" start="30719" end="30741" title="Chalfont &amp;amp; Latimer station" label="Chalfont &amp;amp; Latimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338815" start="30937" end="30950" title="Aylesbury railway station" label="joint station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825217" start="31154" end="31161" title="Metropolitan Railway D Class" label="D Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822479" start="31455" end="31468" title="Brill Tramway" label="Brill Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825216" start="31781" end="31788" title="Metropolitan Railway A Class" label="A Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825217" start="31793" end="31800" title="Metropolitan Railway D Class" label="D Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q956849" start="31883" end="31895" title="Wembley Park tube station" label="Wembley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8992334" start="31930" end="31960" title="Old Westminsters F.C." label="Old Westminsters Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="32074" end="32086" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421279" start="32211" end="32230" title="Watkin&amp;#x27;s Tower" label="Watkin&amp;#x27;s Folly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857104" start="32359" end="32374" title="Willesden Green tube station" label="Willesden Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747236" start="32868" end="32914" title="Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway" label="Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600225" start="34498" end="34543" title="Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway" label="Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592734" start="34581" end="34598" title="Grendon Underwood" label="Grendon Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804810" start="34627" end="34635" title="Ashendon Junction" label="Ashendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q688684" start="35478" end="35499" title="Great Central Railway" label="Great Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598942" start="35522" end="35545" title="Great Central Main Line" label="Great Central Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825330" start="35839" end="35883" title="Metropolitan and Great Central Joint Railway" label="Metropolitan and Great Central Joint Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053892" start="36918" end="36940" title="Central London Railway" label="Central London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q369524" start="37785" end="37789" title="Ganz" label="Ganz"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="37802" end="37804" title="Alternating current" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502902" start="37877" end="37924" title="Underground Electric Railways Company of London" label="Underground Electric Railways Company of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066292" start="37995" end="38009" title="Charles Yerkes" label="Charles Yerkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="38067" end="38069" title="direct current" label="DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q748825" start="38077" end="38087" title="third rail" label="third rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094056" start="38111" end="38140" title="City and South London Railway" label="City and South London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="38194" end="38208" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="38226" end="38236" title="fourth rail" label="four rails"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984460" start="38390" end="38414" title="Neasden Power Station" label="coal-fired power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315832" start="38418" end="38425" title="Neasden" label="Neasden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370264" start="38522" end="38538" title="rotary converter" label="rotary converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757126" start="39322" end="39330" title="Uxbridge tube station" label="Uxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287877" start="39380" end="39387" title="Ruislip tube station" label="Ruislip"/>
<link wikidata="Q729399" start="39468" end="39476" title="Ickenham tube station" label="Ickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278097" start="39540" end="39548" title="Eastcote tube station" label="Eastcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120040" start="39553" end="39565" title="Rayners Lane tube station" label="Rayners Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q831794" start="40981" end="41000" title="East London Railway" label="East London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q605723" start="41049" end="41060" title="Whitechapel station" label="Whitechapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059297" start="41191" end="41212" title="GWR steam rail motors" label="GWR steam rail motors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41345" end="41364" title="London Underground electric locomotives#Metropolitan Railway" label="electric locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q269061" start="41398" end="41414" title="London Underground steam locomotives" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q956849" start="41473" end="41485" title="Wembley Park tube station" label="Wembley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826415" start="43372" end="43393" title="South Eastern Railway (UK)" label="South Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q489565" start="43399" end="43440" title="London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway" label="London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544279" start="43462" end="43483" title="Great Eastern Railway" label="Great Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q648558" start="43922" end="43939" title="New Cross Gate railway station" label="New Cross station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045096" start="43944" end="43960" title="South Kensington" label="South Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426090" start="44031" end="44041" title="Shoreditch tube station" label="Shoreditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q536796" start="44193" end="44206" title="Finsbury Park station" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053892" start="44358" end="44380" title="Central London Railway" label="Central London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q207699" start="44863" end="44887" title="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line" label="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055980" start="45218" end="45238" title="North London Railway" label="North London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284156" start="45459" end="45486" title="Railway Executive Committee" label="Railway Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453742" start="46654" end="46660" title="Pinner" label="Pinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889223" start="47036" end="47080" title="Metropolitan Railway Country Estates" label="Metropolitan Railway Country Estates Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q147127" start="47411" end="47435" title="Kingsbury, London" label="Kingsbury Garden Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315832" start="47441" end="47448" title="Neasden" label="Neasden"/>
<link wikidata="Q146294" start="47450" end="47462" title="Wembley Park" label="Wembley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453742" start="47496" end="47502" title="Pinner" label="Pinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9611" start="47529" end="47542" title="Rickmansworth" label="Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666536" start="47571" end="47592" title="Harrow Garden Village" label="Harrow Garden Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q470522" start="47604" end="47614" title="Metro-land" label="Metro-land"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="47774" end="47775" title="£sd" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q16067155" start="48701" end="48721" title="Charles Walter Clark" label="Charles Walter Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825222" start="48931" end="48938" title="Metropolitan Railway H Class" label="H Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q801365" start="49195" end="49208" title="Rickmansworth station" label="Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q695035" start="49288" end="49313" title="British Empire Exhibition" label="British Empire Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q956849" start="49367" end="49387" title="Wembley Park tube station" label="Wembley Park station"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="49676" end="49691" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345035" start="49802" end="49814" title="1923 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19819" start="50114" end="50121" title="Watford tube station" label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049457" start="50627" end="50642" title="Cassiobury Park" label="Cassiobury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636094" start="50955" end="50980" title="Trade Facilities Act 1921" label="Trade Facilities Act 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q123944586" start="50982" end="51000" title="11 &amp;amp; 12 Geo. 5" label="11 &amp;amp; 12 Geo. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q688985" start="51180" end="51197" title="Railways Act 1921" label="Railways Act 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q123944586" start="51199" end="51217" title="11 &amp;amp; 12 Geo. 5" label="11 &amp;amp; 12 Geo. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092839" start="51270" end="51302" title="London and North Eastern Railway" label="London and North Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q607324" start="51525" end="51532" title="Croxley tube station" label="Croxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447922" start="51613" end="51622" title="Moor Park tube station" label="Moor Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14660877" start="52003" end="52036" title="Watford Central tube station" label="a property on Watford High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741248" start="52486" end="52519" title="Kilburn tube station" label="Kilburn &amp;amp; Brondesbury station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="52717" end="52738" title="Department for Transport" label="Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757110" start="54215" end="54223" title="Stanmore tube station" label="Stanmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033406" start="54294" end="54305" title="Canons Park" label="Canons Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742147" start="54324" end="54333" title="Kingsbury tube station" label="Kingsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033599" start="54369" end="54380" title="Canons Park tube station" label="Canons Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="54883" end="54891" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="55489" end="55508" title="1926 General Strike" label="1926 General Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q688985" start="55711" end="55728" title="Railways Act 1921" label="Railways Act 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583868" start="56921" end="56953" title="London Passenger Transport Board" label="London Passenger Transport Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934097" start="57210" end="57226" title="London Transport (brand)" label="London Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826015" start="57464" end="57483" title="New Works Programme" label="New Works Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892" start="57507" end="57520" title="Bakerloo line" label="Bakerloo line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933886" start="57766" end="57797" title="Great Northern and City Railway" label="Great Northern and City Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="57852" end="57865" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="57892" end="57908" title="British Railways" label="British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q211270" start="58246" end="58273" title="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line" label="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line"/>
<link wikidata="Q831794" start="58342" end="58358" title="East London line" label="East London line"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891" start="58372" end="58389" title="Metropolitan line" label="Metropolitan line"/>
<link wikidata="Q962308" start="58622" end="58635" title="John Betjeman" label="John Betjeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126160" start="58844" end="58854" title="Metro-land (TV)" label="Metro-land"/>
<link wikidata="Q295431" start="58943" end="58956" title="Julian Barnes" label="Julian Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="58969" end="58982" title="Bildungsroman" label="Bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784" start="59001" end="59010" title="Metroland (novel)" label="Metroland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130297" start="59088" end="59097" title="Metroland (1997 film)" label="Metroland"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="59177" end="59188" title="goods train" label="goods train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932006" start="59332" end="59347" title="Midland Railway" label="Midland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315832" start="60600" end="60607" title="Neasden" label="Neasden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911699" start="60825" end="60844" title="Billingsgate Market" label="Billingsgate Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="61445" end="61463" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="61666" end="61682" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476391" start="61798" end="61817" title="Fowler&amp;#x27;s Ghost" label="Fowler&amp;#x27;s Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515040" start="61896" end="61918" title="GWR Metropolitan Class" label="GWR Metropolitan Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q352166" start="61919" end="61929" title="Condensing steam locomotive" label="condensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q785745" start="61936" end="61951" title="tank locomotive" label="tank locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q333815" start="61965" end="61977" title="Daniel Gooch" label="Daniel Gooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037045" start="62063" end="62068" title="4-4-0" label="4-4-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q853110" start="62096" end="62109" title="Beyer, Peacock and Company" label="Beyer Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700096" start="62190" end="62201" title="Sir John Fowler, 1st Baronet" label="John Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990404" start="62279" end="62303" title="Tudela to Bilbao Railway" label="Tudela to Bilbao Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="62536" end="62540" title="Coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="62571" end="62580" title="Anthracite" label="smokeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825216" start="63170" end="63177" title="Metropolitan Railway A Class" label="A Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922269" start="63314" end="63319" title="0-6-0" label="0-6-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674943" start="63472" end="63489" title="Taff Vale Railway" label="Taff Vale Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825218" start="63621" end="63628" title="Metropolitan Railway C Class" label="C Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077673" start="63630" end="63635" title="0-4-4" label="0-4-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389855" start="63696" end="63715" title="SER Q class" label="&amp;#x27;Q&amp;#x27; Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825217" start="63753" end="63760" title="Metropolitan Railway D Class" label="D Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825219" start="64049" end="64056" title="Metropolitan Railway E Class" label="E Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077673" start="64058" end="64064" title="0-4-4T" label="0-4-4T"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825220" start="64347" end="64354" title="Metropolitan Railway F Class" label="F Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806524" start="64356" end="64361" title="0-6-2" label="0-6-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922269" start="64503" end="64508" title="0-6-0" label="0-6-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q785745" start="64509" end="64520" title="Saddle tank (locomotive)" label="saddle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158740" start="64547" end="64554" title="Peckett and Sons" label="Peckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429051" start="64618" end="64626" title="Shunt (rail)" label="shunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="64724" end="64730" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822479" start="64950" end="64963" title="Brill Tramway" label="Brill Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825223" start="65070" end="65077" title="Metropolitan Railway G Class" label="G Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027927" start="65079" end="65084" title="0-6-4" label="0-6-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825222" start="65146" end="65153" title="Metropolitan Railway H Class" label="H Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421545" start="65155" end="65160" title="4-4-4" label="4-4-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825224" start="65318" end="65325" title="Metropolitan Railway K Class" label="K Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825087" start="65327" end="65332" title="2-6-4" label="2-6-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170996" start="65402" end="65418" title="Royal Arsenal" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541098" start="65556" end="65579" title="London Transport Museum" label="London Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983267" start="65615" end="65645" title="Buckinghamshire Railway Centre" label="Buckinghamshire Railway Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q753779" start="65883" end="65892" title="Passenger railroad car" label="carriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804686" start="65982" end="66027" title="Ashbury Railway Carriage and Iron Company Ltd" label="Ashbury Railway Carriage and Iron Company Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q471391" start="66514" end="66525" title="chain brake" label="chain brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182762" start="67076" end="67083" title="Cravens" label="Cravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187487" start="67794" end="67810" title="Bluebell Railway" label="Bluebell Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q688684" start="67947" end="67968" title="Great Central Railway" label="Great Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68563" end="68570" title="third rail#gapped" label="gapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259491" start="68601" end="68608" title="Pullman train (UK)" label="Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941001" start="68676" end="68699" title="Vintage Carriages Trust" label="Vintage Carriages Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971247" start="69318" end="69330" title="British Westinghouse" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q920249" start="69531" end="69554" title="British Thomson-Houston" label="British Thomson-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468032" start="69661" end="69681" title="Metropolitan-Vickers" label="Metropolitan-Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q671892" start="69685" end="69702" title="Barrow-in-Furness" label="Barrow-in-Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q329843" start="70116" end="70128" title="John Hampden" label="John Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q234746" start="70216" end="70229" title="Sarah Siddons" label="Sarah Siddons"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="70385" end="70407" title="electric multiple unit" label="electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q211270" start="70793" end="70820" title="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line" label="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112198" start="72429" end="72460" title="Metro Cammell" label="Metropolitan Carriage and Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904527" start="72465" end="72510" title="Birmingham Railway Carriage and Wagon Company" label="Birmingham Railway Carriage and Wagon Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="73373" end="73376" title="General Electric Company plc" label="GEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="73514" end="73532" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670945" start="73756" end="73763" title="London Underground T Stock" label="T Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572155" start="73898" end="73916" title="Spa Valley Railway" label="Spa Valley Railway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706499" wikidata="Q5163531" url="?curid=706499" title="Constance Ford">
<text>Constance Ford (born Cornelia M. Ford; July 1, 1923 – February 26, 1993) was an American actress and model. She portrayed Ada Lucas Hobson on the long-running daytime soap opera &quot;Another World&quot;, from 1967 until shortly before her death in 1993. She also appeared in nearly two dozen movies from 1956 to 1974, with her most noteworthy role being the matriarch Helen Jorgenson in &quot;A Summer Place&quot; (1959).

==Early years==
Constance Ford was born Cornelia M. Ford on July 1, 1923, in The Bronx, to parents Cornelia R. (née Smith) and Edwin J. Ford. Her siblings were Arthur, John, and Evelyn. Ford was a graduate of St. Barnabas Grammar and High School, and she attended Hunter College. She studied acting at HB Studio in New York City.

==Career==
Ford initially worked as a model for the Montgomery Ward catalog when she was 15 years old. Her face became famous in the Elizabeth Arden 1941 advertising campaign for &quot;Victory Red&quot; lipstick, which featured a Philippe Halsman photo showing her face against the American flag. She acted on Broadway from 1949, appearing in such productions as the musical &quot;Say Darling&quot; and &quot;Nobody Loves an Albatross&quot;. She also played the prostitute in the original Broadway production of &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot;.

She began her television career in 1950, with performances on live television dramas such as &quot;Studio One&quot;, &quot;Armstrong Circle Theatre&quot;, &quot;Goodyear Television Playhouse&quot;, and other acclaimed series. As a Warner Bros. contract player, she had her most famous role as Sandra Dee&#x27;s heartless mother in &quot;A Summer Place&quot; (1959), in which her abused husband Richard Egan had a memorable scene telling her off for her outdated prejudices, and Ford arranges for Dee to be tested for her virginity. Another shocking scene had Ford slapping Dee so hard that she fell into a Christmas tree, which toppled over on her. In &quot;Rome Adventure&quot; (1962), she played Daisy Bronson, owner of a bookstore in Rome, opposite Suzanne Pleshette and Troy Donahue, being kinder to him than she had been in &quot;A Summer Place&quot;. In &quot;House of Women&quot;, she played an aggressive but ultimately sympathetic female prisoner who gets into a catfight with prison matron Jeanne Cooper. She played the tough-as-nails nurse alongside Joan Crawford in &quot;The Caretakers&quot; (1963). She also had a memorable walk-on playing a flirtatious but bored society matron who makes a play for Warren Beatty in &quot;All Fall Down&quot;.

She made three memorable appearances on &quot;Perry Mason&quot;, including the role of a woman with split personality in the 1958 episode &quot;The Case of the Deadly Double&quot;, and as Frances Walden in &quot;The Case of the Potted Planter&quot; (1963) and defendant Sylvia Thompson in &quot;The Case of the Shifty Shoebox&quot; (also 1963). In 1960, she played heartless Connie Walworth (&quot;You haven&#x27;t got the flair, dear ...&quot;) for director Mitchell Leisen in the &quot;Worse Than Murder&quot; episode of &quot;Thriller&quot;. She was often featured in episodes of &quot;Kraft Television Theater&quot;, &quot;Appointment with Adventure&quot;, &quot;State Trooper&quot;, &quot;Dick Powell&#x27;s Zane Grey Theatre&quot; (as Laura Lovett, opposite Jack Palance in the 1956 episode, &quot;Lariat&quot;), &quot;Bat Masterson&quot;, &quot;The Phil Silvers Show&quot;, &quot;Have Gun – Will Travel&quot;, &quot;Rawhide&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Tombstone Territory&quot; (episode &quot;Silver Killers&quot;), &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; (in the episode &quot;Wagon Girls&quot; and as title character in the episode &quot;Poor Pearl&quot; in 1956), &quot;Alfred Hitchcock Presents&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; episode &quot;Uncle Simon&quot;. She also appeared on the NBC interview program &quot;Here&#x27;s Hollywood&quot;. 

In 1954, she made her soap-opera debut as Lynn Sherwood on &quot;Woman With A Past&quot; on CBS. On &quot;Search for Tomorrow&quot;, Ford was Rose Peterson, an employee of the mob, who was hired to discredit leading character Joanne Tate. Her on-screen brother was played by Don Knotts. On &quot;The Edge of Night&quot;, Ford played the murderous theatre owner Eve Morris. 

=== &quot;Another World&quot; ===
In 1967, she joined &quot;Another World&quot; as Ada, the strong-willed mother of Rachel (Robin Strasser and later Victoria Wyndham). While her mother character was a total contrast to her role of Helen in &quot;A Summer Place&quot;, she was brutally tough and honest, yet supportive and loving, first as a working-class mother to Rachel and later as a mentor to many of Bay City&#x27;s young characters. Her first line, responding to brother Sam Lucas&#x27;s inquiry, &quot;Ada, is that you?&quot; was a curt, &quot;No, it&#x27;s Princess Grace!&quot; 

Over the years, Ford played Ada&#x27;s trials - she was widowed three times and worked in a variety of professions, from hairdressing to police clerk to restaurant owner. In 1975, middle-aged Ada gave birth to a daughter, Nancy.

Ford left the show in 1992 due to declining health, and Ada was said to be out of town visiting Nancy. When Ford died, the character of Ada also died, and the show paid tribute to character and actress both.

==Recognition==
The National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences gave Ford a Certificate of Merit for Outstanding Contribution to Daytime Drama.

==Death==
Ford never publicly dated, married, or had children, which fueled rumors that she was a lesbian. Ford was romantically linked to children&#x27;s author Louise Fitzhugh in a biography of the latter, published in 2020.

Ford died in New York Hospital in Manhattan on February 26, 1993, from cancer, aged 69.

==Filmography and selected TV work==
==References==
==External links==

* 
*Her 1941 advertising image at Halsman retrospective at The Smithsonian NPG</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5163531" start="0" end="14" title="Constance Ford" label="Constance Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163531" start="21" end="37" title="Constance Ford" label="Cornelia M. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610556" start="101" end="106" title="Model (person)" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="184" end="197" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384579" start="394" end="408" title="A Summer Place (film)" label="A Summer Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="501" end="510" title="The Bronx" label="The Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629067" start="726" end="735" title="HB Studio" label="HB Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246929" start="807" end="822" title="Montgomery Ward" label="Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q235509" start="888" end="903" title="Elizabeth Arden" label="Elizabeth Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q704572" start="985" end="1001" title="Philippe Halsman" label="Philippe Halsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="1037" end="1050" title="American flag" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1065" end="1073" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428895" start="1136" end="1147" title="Say Darling" label="Say Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q820862" start="1273" end="1292" title="Death of a Salesman" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248101" start="1400" end="1410" title="Studio One (American TV series)" label="Studio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793921" start="1424" end="1448" title="Armstrong Circle Theatre" label="Armstrong Circle Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773414" start="1462" end="1491" title="Goodyear Television Playhouse" label="Goodyear Television Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q234875" start="1594" end="1604" title="Sandra Dee" label="Sandra Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384579" start="1638" end="1652" title="A Summer Place (film)" label="A Summer Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377107" start="1695" end="1707" title="Richard Egan (actor)" label="Richard Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319170" start="1959" end="1973" title="Rome Adventure" label="Rome Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q231224" start="2053" end="2070" title="Suzanne Pleshette" label="Suzanne Pleshette"/>
<link wikidata="Q516035" start="2075" end="2087" title="Troy Donahue" label="Troy Donahue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915537" start="2167" end="2181" title="House of Women" label="House of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q446937" start="2301" end="2314" title="Jeanne Cooper" label="Jeanne Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q40475" start="2362" end="2375" title="Joan Crawford" label="Joan Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q726634" start="2385" end="2399" title="The Caretakers" label="The Caretakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="2515" end="2528" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540966" start="2538" end="2551" title="All Fall Down (1962 film)" label="All Fall Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q165356" start="2606" end="2617" title="Perry Mason (1957 TV series)" label="Perry Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q276130" start="3019" end="3034" title="Mitchell Leisen" label="Mitchell Leisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990884" start="3089" end="3097" title="Thriller (U.S. TV series)" label="Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066092" start="3149" end="3173" title="Kraft Television Theater" label="Kraft Television Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968476" start="3227" end="3240" title="State Trooper (TV series)" label="State Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q130301699" start="3254" end="3290" title="Dick Powell&amp;#x27;s Zane Grey Theatre" label="Dick Powell&amp;#x27;s Zane Grey Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193653" start="3324" end="3336" title="Jack Palance" label="Jack Palance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887756" start="3385" end="3398" title="Bat Masterson (TV series)" label="Bat Masterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756888" start="3412" end="3433" title="The Phil Silvers Show" label="The Phil Silvers Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248082" start="3447" end="3469" title="Have Gun – Will Travel" label="Have Gun – Will Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247542" start="3483" end="3490" title="Rawhide (TV series)" label="Rawhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992646" start="3518" end="3537" title="Tombstone Territory" label="Tombstone Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="3588" end="3596" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="3720" end="3745" title="Alfred Hitchcock Presents" label="Alfred Hitchcock Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="3777" end="3794" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914844" start="3815" end="3826" title="Uncle Simon" label="Uncle Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="3859" end="3862" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736696" start="3887" end="3908" title="Here&amp;#x27;s Hollywood" label="Here&amp;#x27;s Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030761" start="3983" end="4000" title="Woman With A Past" label="Woman With A Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="4010" end="4013" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q588602" start="4024" end="4043" title="Search for Tomorrow" label="Search for Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q555236" start="4193" end="4203" title="Don Knotts" label="Don Knotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247581" start="4214" end="4231" title="The Edge of Night" label="The Edge of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112357" start="4417" end="4431" title="Robin Strasser" label="Robin Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927152" start="4442" end="4458" title="Victoria Wyndham" label="Victoria Wyndham"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="5569" end="5576" title="lesbianism" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q453427" start="5633" end="5648" title="Louise Fitzhugh" label="Louise Fitzhugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013596" start="5712" end="5729" title="Weill Cornell Medical Center" label="New York Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="5733" end="5742" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706507" wikidata="Q6179932" url="?curid=706507" title="Jensen Buchanan">
<text>Jensen Buchanan (born July 18, 1962, in Montgomery, Alabama) is an American soap opera actress, known for portraying Sarah Gordon on &quot;One Life to Live&quot; (1987–90) and twins Vicky Hudson and Marley Love on &quot;Another World&quot;.

==Early life==
Buchanan was born in Montgomery, Alabama, on July 18, 1962. She was the only child of William and Mary Buchanan, who divorced when she was a toddler. She was raised in Neenah, Wisconsin. She attended Boston University on scholarship from 1980 to 1984, eventually earning a degree in music theory.

==Career==
Buchanan originated the role of Sarah Gordon on the ABC soap opera &quot;One Life to Live&quot;, playing the character from 1987 to 1990. In 1991, she moved to the NBC soap opera &quot;Another World&quot;. She played Vicky Hudson from 1991 to 1999. She also played Vicky&#x27;s twin, Marley Love, from 1991 to 1994, with reappearances in 1997 and 1998. Buchanan was nominated for two Lead Actress Daytime Emmy Awards in 1996 and 1997. She moved to &quot;As the World Turns&quot; in a short term capacity to play the role of Vicky, who was killed in a plane crash in November 1999, but she continued to make appearances until 2001. In 2001, she started playing the role of Melissa Bedford, R. N. on &quot;General Hospital&quot;. She exited the role in 2002.

From 2015 to 2016, Buchanan appeared on the soap opera &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;, playing Elise Moxley, a member of the Genoa City social set.

==Personal life==
On December 28, 1991, Buchanan married Gray O&#x27;Brien. They had two sons, John Conor O&#x27;Brien (born April 22, 1994) and Angus O&#x27;Hagan O&#x27;Brien (born February 26, 1996). They divorced in the late 1990s.

In 2003, she married Sam Gores, Paradigm Talent &amp; Literary Agency, President and CEO. The couple separated in October 2013 and are now divorced .

In 2016, Buchanan was arrested for driving under the influence and colliding head on with another driver on California State Route 154. In October 2017, she was sentenced to one year in jail at Santa Barbara County Jail and five years&#x27; probation. In January 2018, Buchanan was once again arrested, this time for allegedly drinking while under felony probation. Following a court appearance, she was ordered to remain in jail pending another hearing. On April 6, 2018, Buchanan was acquitted of probation violation and released from jail.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6179932" start="0" end="15" title="Jensen Buchanan" label="Jensen Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="40" end="59" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="139" end="155" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925521" start="182" end="194" title="Vicky Hudson" label="Vicky Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771795" start="199" end="210" title="Marley Love" label="Marley Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="220" end="233" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570604" start="425" end="442" title="Neenah, Wisconsin" label="Neenah, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="457" end="474" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="639" end="655" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="751" end="764" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925521" start="783" end="795" title="Vicky Hudson" label="Vicky Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771795" start="850" end="861" title="Marley Love" label="Marley Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="963" end="981" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="1020" end="1038" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571678" start="1238" end="1253" title="Melissa Bedford" label="Melissa Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="1270" end="1286" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="1385" end="1411" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233406" start="1427" end="1439" title="Elise Moxley" label="Elise Moxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407536" start="1739" end="1748" title="Sam Gores" label="Sam Gores"/>
<link wikidata="Q805215" start="1977" end="2003" title="California State Route 154" label="California State Route 154"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706510" wikidata="Q3077490" url="?curid=706510" title="Frénicle standard form">
<text>A magic square is in the Frénicle standard form, named for Bernard Frénicle de Bessy, if the following two conditions hold:
# the element at position [1,1] (top left corner) is the smallest of the four corner elements; and
# the element at position [1,2] (top edge, second from left) is smaller than the element in [2,1].

In 1693, Frénicle described all the 880 essentially different order-4 magic squares.

==Properties==
This standard form was devised since a magic square remains &quot;essentially similar&quot; if it is rotated or transposed, or flipped so that the order of rows is reversed. There exist 8 different magic squares sharing one standard form. 
For example, the following magic squares are all essentially similar, with only the final square being in the Frénicle standard form:

 8 1 6 8 3 4 4 9 2 4 3 8 6 7 2 6 1 8 2 9 4 2 7 6
 3 5 7 1 5 9 3 5 7 9 5 1 1 5 9 7 5 3 7 5 3 9 5 1
 4 9 2 6 7 2 8 1 6 2 7 6 8 3 4 2 9 4 6 1 8 4 3 8

==Generalizations==

For each group of magic squares one might identify the corresponding group of automorphisms, the group of transformations preserving the special properties of this group of magic squares. This way one can identify the number of different magic square classes.

From the perspective of Galois theory, the most-perfect magic squares (enumerated in ) are not distinguishable since the size of the associated Galois group is 1.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192089" start="2" end="14" title="magic square" label="magic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077490" start="25" end="47" title="Frénicle standard form" label="Frénicle standard form"/>
<link wikidata="Q822441" start="59" end="84" title="Bernard Frénicle de Bessy" label="Bernard Frénicle de Bessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="536" end="545" title="transpose" label="transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q782566" start="1046" end="1058" title="automorphism" label="automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="1219" end="1226" title="class (set theory)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q92552" start="1253" end="1266" title="Galois theory" label="Galois theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q450098" start="1272" end="1297" title="most-perfect magic square" label="most-perfect magic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q730384" start="1373" end="1385" title="Galois group" label="Galois group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706511" wikidata="Q3471907" url="?curid=706511" title="Sandra Dee Robinson">
<text>Sandra Dee Robinson, also sometimes credited as Sandra Robinson (born March 23, 1967), is an American actress, former beauty pageant contestant, and founder of the media training and consulting firm Charisma On Camera.

==Early life and pageantry==
Robinson was born Sandra Ferguson in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and grew up in the nearby suburb of Jefferson Hills. She began her career as a model by participating in beauty pageants. In her second major competition, she was named Miss Pennsylvania USA in March 1985. She then competed in Miss USA, the pageant to select the American entrant for the Miss Universe pageant, later that year.

==Acting career==
After her yearlong reign, Robinson began actively pursuing a career as an actress with intent to work in daytime drama. Her first, and most notable soap opera credit is her portrayal of Amanda Cory on &quot;Another World&quot; starting in August 1987. She left in 1993, returning in 1998 and remaining until the show&#x27;s cancellation the following year.

In 1997, she temporarily replaced Katherine Kelly Lang as Brooke Logan on &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; while Lang was on maternity leave. Several months later, she played jewel thief, Jade Sheridan, on &quot;Sunset Beach&quot;.

In 2005, Robinson temporarily joined the cast of &quot;General Hospital&quot; as a recast Felicia Scorpio-Jones and 2008 saw her cast as Dr. Charlotte Taylor on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;.

Her projects away from daytime include episodes of the series &quot;Renegade&quot; and &quot;Silk Stalkings&quot; as well as an episode of the series &quot;Hot Line&quot;. Sandra has appeared in primetime shows such as &quot;Two and a Half Men&quot;, &quot;&quot;, among others. She also worked on the web series &quot;The Bay&quot;.

==Charisma On Camera==
Along with speaking engagements, she is the founder and owner of the media training and consulting firm Charisma On Camera.

==Personal life==
Robinson has been married twice. Her first marriage was to John Reinhardt, whom she married while starring on &quot;Another World&quot;. During that time, she was credited in her early acting roles as Sandra Reinhardt. She went back to using her maiden name after their divorce. She married her second husband, stunt coordinator Allen Robinson, in 2005 and took his surname professionally.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==References==
==External links==
*Amanda Cory profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3471907" start="0" end="19" title="Sandra Dee Robinson" label="Sandra Dee Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471907" start="48" end="63" title="Sandra Dee Robinson" label="Sandra Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q963319" start="347" end="362" title="Jefferson Hills, Pennsylvania" label="Jefferson Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877262" start="480" end="501" title="Miss Pennsylvania USA" label="Miss Pennsylvania USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q746813" start="538" end="546" title="Miss USA" label="Miss USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q161376" start="599" end="612" title="Miss Universe" label="Miss Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="806" end="816" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408379" start="844" end="855" title="Amanda Cory" label="Amanda Cory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="865" end="878" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q242664" start="1050" end="1070" title="Katherine Kelly Lang" label="Katherine Kelly Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273915" start="1074" end="1086" title="Brooke Logan" label="Brooke Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="1096" end="1122" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598593" start="1210" end="1223" title="List of Sunset Beach recurring characters" label="Jade Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030972" start="1234" end="1246" title="Sunset Beach (TV series)" label="Sunset Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="1310" end="1326" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571680" start="1345" end="1366" title="Felicia Scorpio-Jones" label="Felicia Scorpio-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1416" end="1419" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="1433" end="1450" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423145" start="1527" end="1535" title="Renegade (TV series)" label="Renegade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546341" start="1552" end="1566" title="Silk Stalkings" label="Silk Stalkings"/>
<link wikidata="Q189267" start="1684" end="1702" title="Two and a Half Men" label="Two and a Half Men"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706512" wikidata="Q1190007" url="?curid=706512" title="Denver and Salt Lake Railway">
<text>The Denver and Salt Lake Railway (D&amp;SL) was a U.S. railroad company located in Colorado. It was incorporated in 1902 as the Denver, Northwestern and Pacific (DN&amp;P) Railway with the goal of connecting Denver, Colorado with Salt Lake City, Utah. It underwent numerous reorganizations throughout its financially troubled history and, by the time it was acquired in 1931 by the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad (D&amp;RGW or Rio Grande), it had advanced only as far west as Craig, Colorado. After its acquisition, it was connected to the D&amp;RGW main. The eastern half of the line was used to give the D&amp;RGW a more direct route to Denver; the western half became a spur line. The portions of the D&amp;SL still in use today comprise the Moffat Tunnel Subdivision of Union Pacific Railroad&#x27;s Central Corridor, and Amtrak’s &quot;California Zephyr&quot; uses a portion of the former D&amp;SL between Denver and Bond.

== History ==


When the Denver, Northwestern and Pacific (DN&amp;P) Railway was first incorporated in July 1902 by David H. Moffat, Walter S. Cheesman, William Gray Evans, Charles J. Hughes, Jr., George E. Ross-Lewin, S.M. Perry and Frank P. Gibson, Denver had been bypassed by the Union Pacific Railroad which reached Salt Lake City, Utah, via Cheyenne, Wyoming, and by the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad (D&amp;RGW), which ran from Pueblo, Colorado, west through the Royal Gorge. The Denver business community wanted its own &quot;Air Line&quot; west of the city to connect directly with Salt Lake City, and the railway’s president, David Moffat, vigorously directed the DN&amp;P Railway efforts to that goal.

===Front Range===
Construction began in December 1902 as the line headed west out of Denver and then started north up the face of the Front Range of the Rockies towards Boulder before turning west when it reached South Boulder Canyon. Chief Engineer H.A. Sumner, needing to enter the canyon area as high as possible but still maintain a 2% grade, gained the necessary altitude via the Big Ten Curve and some eight tunnels. As a bonus, his routing scheme along the front range provided rail passengers majestic views of Denver and its surrounding countryside.

===Continental Divide===
By 1903, the tracks reached the Tolland area just east of the Continental Divide where Sumner’s second major engineering feat involved crossing Rollins Pass at an elevation of . Originally, Moffat had planned to build a tunnel underneath the pass but funding was not available at the time. The DN&amp;P climbed to Rollins Pass using a series of switchbacks with a 4% grade at many locations; tunnels at various places as well as huge loops were also needed so as to get over the pass. At the time, it was the highest mainline railroad ever constructed in North America; Rollins Pass was entered into the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 for its railroad related engineering feats. Small rail stops at Corona at the top of the pass and at Arrow, 11 miles to the west, had restaurants and lodging which housed workers keeping the rail line free of snow in winter. Despite this, trains were often stranded for several days during heavy winter snows.

===Middle Park===
In the spring of 1905, the tracks were completed on the western side of the divide to Fraser, and from there, the line went through Granby, Hot Sulphur Springs, and Byers Canyon to the last of Sumner’s railroad engineering masterpieces, the three mile long traverse of Gore Canyon. Built on the side of the canyon wall, the railroad track is the only way through the canyon (other than whitewater rafting the Colorado River), and was considered a &quot;monumental achievement&quot; in its day. The road then continued west to State Bridge, where it then turned north to Steamboat Springs in the winter of 1909. By 1913, it arrived at what would turn out to be its final destination, Craig in Moffat County, Colorado.

===Moffat Tunnel===
The trials and tribulations of railroading over Rollins Pass were solved in 1927 with the completion of the Moffat Tunnel, which cut through the Continental Divide under James Peak. This long bore is above sea level at its apex. Fifty miles west of Denver, the tunnel was &#x27;holed&#x27; through on July 7, 1927, and formally turned over to the railroad on February 26, 1928. Moffat unfortunately never saw the tunnel that was named in his honor, as he had died in 1911 while in New York City, trying unsuccessfully to raise money to continue railroad construction.
===Dotsero Cutoff===
One year after Moffat’s death, the railroad was placed in receivership, and in 1913 it was reformed as the Denver and Salt Lake Railroad. Reorganized as the Denver &amp; Salt Lake Railway in 1926, the DS&amp;L was acquired by the D&amp;RGW in 1931 along with the Denver &amp; Salt Lake Western Railroad (a company in name only), whose sole function was to acquire the rights to build a 40-mile (64-km) connection between the two railroads. In 1932, the D&amp;RGW began construction of the Dotsero Cutoff, from Dotsero (east of Glenwood Springs) to connect to the D&amp;SL at Bond on the Colorado River. This project, which was completed in 1934, finally gave Denver its direct rail line to Salt Lake City. In 1947, the D&amp;SL was completely absorbed into the D&amp;RGW, which in turn was taken over by the Southern Pacific in 1988 and finally the Union Pacific RR in 1996. Other than the Rollins Pass section, the entirety of the original DS&amp;L railroad route is still in use today.

==Unfinished route==
In Utah, the unfinished portion of the Denver and Salt Lake Railroad would have passed through the Uinta Basin en route to Salt Lake. The Uinta basin has extensive oil shale resources. To take better advantage of this oil shale, multiple proposals to build a Uinta Basin Rail line connecting the basin to the national rail network have been made by both public and private interests, including multiple proposals made during 1915–1920. Some of these proposals involve the constructing more of the proposed route of the former D&amp;SL into Utah.

In 1984, the Deseret Power Railroad was built to connect a coal mine in Colorado with a power plant in Utah. The line follows a small portion of the proposed D&amp;SL route, but is completely isolated from the national rail network.

In 2015, the Utah Department of Transportation (UDOT) completed a study on the state of Utah&#x27;s rail infrastructure that identified the Uinta Basin line as a top priority for a freight rail corridor. The study noted the strain the lack of rail access is placing on highways that serve the basin, and the price disadvantage caused by lack of rail access compared to other oil producing regions with rail. The study identified multiple possible rail corridors, including some similar to the originally proposed D&amp;SL route, but stated their preference as a route via Indian Canyon (which currently provides the route of U.S. Route 191 into the basin). This route would connect to the Central Corridor near Soldier Summit.

==References==
== External links ==

*Moffat Road Railroad Museum history 
*Museum of Northwest Colorado features Moffat Road memorabilia </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1190007" start="4" end="32" title="Denver and Salt Lake Railway" label="Denver and Salt Lake Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q680597" start="50" end="71" title="List of United States railroads" label="U.S. railroad company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="83" end="91" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="208" end="224" title="Denver" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="230" end="250" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190006" start="382" end="420" title="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad" label="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q989873" start="484" end="499" title="Craig, Colorado" label="Craig, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="782" end="804" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060657" start="812" end="828" title="Central Corridor (Union Pacific Railroad)" label="Central Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q373845" start="849" end="866" title="California Zephyr" label="California Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941261" start="930" end="934" title="Bond, Colorado" label="Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175717" start="1053" end="1068" title="David Moffat" label="David H. Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q55541775" start="1070" end="1088" title="Walter Cheesman" label="Walter S. Cheesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010132" start="1090" end="1108" title="William Gray Evans" label="William Gray Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="1188" end="1194" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="1220" end="1242" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="1257" end="1277" title="Salt Lake City, Utah" label="Salt Lake City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q39042" start="1283" end="1300" title="Cheyenne, Wyoming" label="Cheyenne, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190006" start="1313" end="1351" title="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad" label="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="1380" end="1396" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374226" start="1415" end="1426" title="Royal Gorge" label="Royal Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470027" start="1793" end="1804" title="Front Range" label="Front Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="1812" end="1819" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="1828" end="1835" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988082" start="2276" end="2283" title="Tolland, Colorado" label="Tolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="2306" end="2324" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981964" start="2388" end="2400" title="Rollins Pass" label="Rollins Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132840" start="2589" end="2599" title="Zig zag (railway)" label="switchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2799" end="2812" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2848" end="2884" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586097" start="3491" end="3502" title="Gore Canyon" label="Gore Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q984721" start="3792" end="3809" title="Steamboat Springs, Colorado" label="Steamboat Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q989873" start="3905" end="3910" title="Craig, Colorado" label="Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q63729" start="3914" end="3937" title="Moffat County, Colorado" label="Moffat County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318219" start="4068" end="4081" title="Moffat Tunnel" label="Moffat Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="4105" end="4123" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8527843" start="4130" end="4140" title="James Peak" label="James Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q590797" start="5038" end="5045" title="Dotsero, Colorado" label="Dotsero"/>
<link wikidata="Q927455" start="5076" end="5092" title="Glenwood Springs, Colorado" label="Glenwood Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941261" start="5124" end="5128" title="Bond, Colorado" label="Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="5136" end="5150" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335217" start="5357" end="5373" title="Rio Grande Industries" label="Southern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q20183163" start="5398" end="5414" title="Union Pacific Corporation" label="Union Pacific RR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981964" start="5439" end="5451" title="Rollins Pass" label="Rollins Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878106" start="5658" end="5669" title="Uinta Basin" label="Uinta Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q221378" start="5723" end="5732" title="oil shale" label="oil shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356076" start="5818" end="5834" title="Uinta Basin Rail" label="Uinta Basin Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979659" start="5868" end="5889" title="national rail network" label="national rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263875" start="6119" end="6141" title="Deseret Power Railroad" label="Deseret Power Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979659" start="6316" end="6337" title="national rail network" label="national rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506783" start="6353" end="6386" title="Utah Department of Transportation" label="Utah Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506821" start="6965" end="6979" title="U.S. Route 191 (Utah)" label="U.S. Route 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060657" start="7029" end="7045" title="Central Corridor (Union Pacific Railroad)" label="Central Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8557735" start="7051" end="7065" title="Soldier Summit" label="Soldier Summit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706513" wikidata="Q216441" url="?curid=706513" title="Arctic wolf">
<text>The Arctic wolf (Canis lupus arctos), also known as the white wolf, polar wolf, and the Arctic grey wolf, is a subspecies of grey wolf native to the High Arctic tundra of Canada&#x27;s Queen Elizabeth Islands, from Melville Island to Ellesmere Island. Unlike some populations that move between tundra and forest regions, Arctic wolves spend their entire lives north of the northern treeline. Their distribution to south is limited to the northern fringes of the Middle Arctic tundra on the southern half of Prince of Wales and Somerset Islands. It is a medium-sized subspecies, distinguished from the northwestern wolf by its smaller size, its whiter colouration, its narrower braincase, and larger carnassials. Since 1930, there has been a progressive reduction in size in Arctic wolf skulls, which is likely the result of wolf-dog hybridization.

==Taxonomy==

In 1935, the British zoologist Reginald Pocock attributed the subspecies name &quot;Canis lupus arctos&quot; (Arctic wolf) to a specimen from Melville Island in the Queen Elizabeth Islands, Canada. He wrote that similar wolves could be found on Ellesmere Island. He also attributed the name &quot;Canis lupus orion&quot; to a Greenland wolf specimen from Cape York, northwest Greenland. Both wolves are recognized as separate subspecies of &quot;Canis lupus&quot; in the taxonomic authority &quot;Mammal Species of the World&quot; (2005).

A study by Chambers &quot;et al&quot;. (2012) using autosomal microsatellite DNA and Mitochondrial DNA data indicate that the Arctic wolf has no unique haplotypes which suggests that its colonization of the Arctic Archipelago from the North American mainland was relatively recent, and thus not sufficient to warrant subspecies status. During a meeting assembled in 2014 by the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, one speaker, Robert K. Wayne, mentioned he disagreed with the conclusion that a subspecies had to be genetically distinct, believing that different subspecies could slowly grade into each other - suggesting that although it was impossible to determine if an individual wolf was one subspecies or the next using DNA, the population of Arctic wolves as a whole could be distinguished by the looking at the proportions of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP): i.e. Arctic wolves could be distinguished by having three wolves in the putative population with a specific SNP, whereas another subspecies could be distinguished by having 20 wolves with that SNP. Wayne furthermore stated that he believed the habitat in which the wolf happened to be found was a good enough characteristic to distinguish a subspecies.

==Behaviour==
The Arctic wolf is relatively unafraid of people, and can be coaxed to approach people in some areas. The wolves on Ellesmere Island do not fear humans, which is thought to be due to them seeing humans so little, and they will approach humans cautiously and curiously. Otto Sverdrup wrote that during the Fram expedition, a pair of wolves shadowed one of his teammates, who kept them at a distance by waving his ski pole. In 1977, a pair of scientists were approached by six wolves on Ellesmere Island, with one animal leaping at one of the scientists and grazing a cheek. A number of incidents involving aggressive wolves have occurred in Alert, Nunavut, where the wolves have lived in close proximity to the local weather station for decades and became habituated to humans. One of these wolves attacked 3 people, was shot, and tested positive for rabies.

Very little is known about the movement of the Arctic wolves, mainly due to climate. The only time at which the wolf migrates is during the wintertime when there is complete darkness for 24 hours. This makes Arctic wolf movement hard to research. About south of the High Arctic, a wolf movement study took place in the wintertime in complete darkness, when the temperature was as low as . The researchers found that wolves prey mainly on the muskoxen. There is no available information of the wolves&#x27; movements where the muskoxen were.

== Diet ==
In the wild, Arctic wolves primarily prey on muskoxen and Arctic hares. They have also been found to prey on lemmings, caribou, Arctic foxes, birds, and beetles. It has been also found that Arctic wolves scavenge through garbage. This sort of food source will not always be found in the Arctic wolf&#x27;s diet because of regional and seasonal availability. Sometimes there is debate whether the muskox or the Arctic hare is the primary prey for the hare-wolf-muskox predator-prey system. Studies provide evidence that the muskoxen are indeed their primary prey because wolf presence and reproduction seems to be higher when muskox is more available than higher hare availability. More supporting evidence suggests that muskoxen provide long-term viability and other ungulates do not appear in the wolf&#x27;s diet. Evidence suggesting that Arctic wolves depend more on hares claims that the mature wolf population paralleled the increase of hares rather than muskoxen availability. The study goes on to say that degree of reliance between the two sources of food is uncertain and that the amount of consumption between the two species depends on the season and year. Debate continues when seasonal and diet of young wolves is discussed. According to one study, muskox calves serve as a primary food source because the needs of pups are greater but another study suggests that &quot;when hares were much more plentiful (Mech, 2000), wolves commonly fed them to their pups during summer.&quot; These differences may be attributed to location as well. Polar bears are rarely encountered by wolves, though there are two records of wolf packs killing polar bear cubs.

==Conservation==
The Arctic wolf is least concern, but it does face threats. In 1997, there was a decline in the Arctic wolf population and its prey, muskoxen (&quot;Ovibos moschatus&quot;), and Arctic hares (&quot;Lepus arcticus&quot;). This was due to unfavourable weather conditions during the summers for four years. Arctic wolf populations recovered the next summer when weather conditions returned to normal.

==References==
==Further reading==
* L. David Mech (text), Jim Brandenburg (photos) (May 1987). &quot;At Home With the Arctic Wolf.&quot; National Geographic 171(5):562–593.
* L. David Mech (1997). &quot;The Arctic Wolf: 10 Years With the Pack&quot;, Voyageur Press, .

== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216441" start="4" end="15" title="Arctic wolf" label="Arctic wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q216441" start="56" end="66" title="Arctic wolf" label="white wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q216441" start="68" end="78" title="Arctic wolf" label="polar wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q216441" start="88" end="104" title="Arctic wolf" label="Arctic grey wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076098" start="111" end="134" title="Subspecies of Canis lupus" label="subspecies of grey wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532959" start="149" end="167" title="High Arctic tundra" label="High Arctic tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q216533" start="185" end="208" title="Queen Elizabeth Islands" label="Queen Elizabeth Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q134116" start="215" end="230" title="Melville Island (Northwest Territories and Nunavut)" label="Melville Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q146841" start="234" end="250" title="Ellesmere Island" label="Ellesmere Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="382" end="390" title="treeline" label="treeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532958" start="462" end="482" title="Middle Arctic tundra" label="Middle Arctic tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207925" start="507" end="522" title="Prince of Wales Island (Nunavut)" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q212219" start="527" end="543" title="Somerset Island (Nunavut)" label="Somerset Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116028" start="601" end="618" title="northwestern wolf" label="northwestern wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148039" start="677" end="686" title="Neurocranium" label="braincase"/>
<link wikidata="Q280781" start="699" end="709" title="carnassial" label="carnassial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068902" start="824" end="846" title="Wolfdog" label="wolf-dog hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q174664" start="894" end="909" title="Reginald Pocock" label="Reginald Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q216533" start="1028" end="1051" title="Queen Elizabeth Islands" label="Queen Elizabeth Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028402" start="1189" end="1203" title="Greenland wolf" label="Greenland wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636266" start="1218" end="1227" title="Cape York (Greenland)" label="Cape York"/>
<link wikidata="Q111172813" start="1360" end="1387" title="Mammal Species of the World" label="Mammal Species of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="1455" end="1464" title="Autosome" label="autosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q265193" start="1465" end="1479" title="microsatellite" label="microsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="1488" end="1505" title="Mitochondrial DNA" label="Mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q80711" start="1555" end="1564" title="haplotype" label="haplotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971323" start="1781" end="1834" title="National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis" label="National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="1842" end="1881" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q501128" start="2302" end="2332" title="single-nucleotide polymorphism" label="single-nucleotide polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="2585" end="2592" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q321261" start="2978" end="2991" title="Otto Sverdrup" label="Otto Sverdrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964751" start="3014" end="3029" title="Nansen&amp;#x27;s Fram expedition" label="Fram expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q501744" start="3349" end="3363" title="Alert, Nunavut" label="Alert, Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q184004" start="4010" end="4016" title="muskox" label="muskox"/>
<link wikidata="Q184004" start="4166" end="4172" title="muskox" label="muskox"/>
<link wikidata="Q231625" start="4179" end="4190" title="Arctic hare" label="Arctic hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q234150" start="4230" end="4237" title="lemming" label="lemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="4240" end="4247" title="reindeer" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="4249" end="4259" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="5671" end="5681" title="Polar bear" label="Polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="5822" end="5835" title="least concern" label="least concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q184004" start="5952" end="5968" title="Ovibos moschatus" label="Ovibos moschatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q231625" start="5981" end="5992" title="Arctic hare" label="Arctic hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="6340" end="6359" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706519" wikidata="Q2415488" url="?curid=706519" title="Ignacy Hryniewiecki">
<text>Ignacy Hryniewiecki or Ignaty Ioakhimovich Grinevitsky (, , ; — March 13, 1881) was a Polish member of the Russian revolutionary society Narodnaya Volya. He gained notoriety for participating in the bombing attack to which Tsar Alexander II of Russia succumbed. Hryniewiecki threw the bomb that fatally wounded the Tsar and himself. Having outlived his victim by a few hours, he died the same day.

Hryniewiecki and his accomplices believed that the assassination of Alexander II could provoke a political or social revolution to overthrow the tsarist autocracy. Many historians consider the assassination a Pyrrhic victory, since instead of ushering in a revolution, it strengthened the resolve of the state to crush the revolutionary movement, leading to the movement&#x27;s decline in the 1880s and setting Russia on a revitalized path of Tsarist autocracy which resulted in only incremental reforms after the Revolution of 1905 and, eventually, the Russian Revolution in 1917.

Hryniewiecki&#x27;s role in the assassination has sometimes been cited as the earliest occurrence of suicide terrorism.

==Life==
===Early life===
Ignacy Hryniewiecki was born in 1855–6, in Bobruysky Uyezd of Minsk Governorate (present-day Klichaw District, Mogilev Region), to a large family which hailed from Grodno Governorate. He was the son of a Catholic landowner who was of the Polish nobility. According to his former comrade Lev Tikhomirov, &quot;He (&quot;scil&quot;. Hryniewiecki) called himself a Litvin, and not a Pole.&quot; Tikhomirov considered him a Russified Pole, and further added that he was equally fluent in Russian and Polish. At one point when Hryniewiecki was reproached for not participating in the Polish movements, he replied: &quot;When you start partisan fighting, I will be with you. But for the moment, when you do nothing, I shall work for Russia&#x27;s freedom&quot;.

In 1875, Hryniewiecki graduated from a gymnasium in Białystok with the highest academic rank, and in autumn he left for Saint Petersburg to enroll in mechanical engineering at the Saint Petersburg State Institute of Technology. In 1879 he became involved with Narodnaya Volya (People&#x27;s Will), an underground Russian revolutionary movement to which he had contributed financial support, and within which he established a Belarusian faction. He was dismissed from the institute on June 1, 1880, for not attending lectures. In that year, working under the pseudonyms &quot;Kotik&quot; (Russian for &quot;Kitten&quot;) and &quot;Mikhail Ivanovich&quot;, Hryniewiecki was engaged in anti-Government activities and disseminated revolutionary propaganda among students and workers. He was also an organizer of the underground literature Rabochaya Gazeta at a clandestine printing establishment. According to contemporary descriptions, Hryniewiecki was of medium height, lightly bearded, possessed curly hair, and was good-natured and taciturn.

===Assassination of the Tsar===

In the fall of 1880, Hryniewiecki and five others were tasked with monitoring the various departure routes of the Tsar following his regular Sunday review of the troops at Mikhailovskii Riding School. On February 26, 1881, their observations were discussed in a meeting held at Hryniewiecki&#x27;s apartment at 59 Simbirskaya street, where he had been living under the surname &quot;Elnikov&quot;. They had observed that the Tsar frequently traveled through Malaya Sadovaya Street, so the executive committee decided to lay a mine there beneath the pavement. They however realized that he could also take a different route by turning into Italyanskaya Street and following the Catherine Canal, thus avoiding the underground mine. It was therefore necessary to have bomb-throwers that manned the canal.

Hryniewiecki volunteered and was designated a bomb-thrower (&quot;metal&#x27;shchik&quot;, in the parlance of revolutionary terrorism). The bombs, prepared by the chemist Nikolai Kibalchich, were specifically designed so that they could be hurled at moving objects. The bombs reportedly weighed 5–6 pounds and the explosive consisted of a mixture of nitroglycerine and pyroxylin. At a clandestine meeting, Hryniewiecki joined Kibalchich, Nikolai Rysakov and Timofei Mikhailov to test half-loaded bombs in an unfrequented suburban park beyond the Neva around Pargolovo.

The night before the assassination, Hryniewiecki wrote a letter to posterity, part of which reads:

On Sunday morning, 13 March [1 March, Old Style] 1881, Hryniewiecki and the three other bomb-throwers gathered at the group&#x27;s flat on Telezhnaya Street. At 9–10 AM, Sophia Perovskaya and Kibalchich each brought two missiles; the men would have one apiece. Perovskaya would later relate that, before heading to the Catherine Canal, she, Rysakov and Hryniewiecki sat in a confectionery store located opposite of the Gostiny Dvor, impatiently waiting for the right time to intercept Alexander II&#x27;s cavalcade. Only Hryniewiecki could calmly eat a portion served to him. From there they parted ways and converged on the canal. There, as he passed Perovskaya to take up his position on the quay, Hryniewiecki smiled at her and gave her a barely perceptible wink. He showed no signs of fear or anxiety and went to his death with an unflinching spirit.

At about 2:15 PM, the conspirators intercepted the imperial carriage as it approached a street corner near the Catherine Canal. Perovskaya waved her handkerchief as a predetermined signal to the bomb-throwers to proceed with the attack. Rysakov then hurled his bomb at the carriage, wounding several bystanders and members of Tsar&#x27;s equipage. Disregarding pleas for his own safety, Alexander insisted upon leaving his carriage to see his captured assailant. After inspecting Rysakov, instead of returning to the palace posthaste, the Tsar decided to survey the spot where the explosion had occurred. He said &quot;Thank God, I escaped injury,&quot; in answer to the anxious inquiries of his entourage. As his curiosity was satisfied, he decided to drive away and proceeded to walk back towards the carriage. At this point, Tsar had come to less than 1.5 meters from Hryniewiecki, who was leaning against the railing by the canal fence and carrying a bomb wrapped in a handkerchief. Hearing the Tsar&#x27;s expression of gratitude, according to some sources Hryniewiecki shouted: &quot;It is too soon to thank God yet&quot;. He turned to face the Tsar and raised both arms and threw a bomb at his feet. Alexander suffered severe wounds and died at 3:30 PM on that day. Reportedly, Hryniewiecki&#x27;s bomb claimed many more casualties than the first, with one bystander being fatally wounded.

Following the explosion, the third bomber Ivan Emelyanov rushed to the scene to see if Hryniewiecki could still be spirited away in the chaos, but found him lying gravely wounded and unconscious from the blast. Hryniewiecki was taken to the nearby infirmary attached to the Winter Palace. At 9 PM he regained consciousness before he drew his last breath. According to the medical examiner&#x27;s report he only once abruptly said &quot;I don&#x27;t know&quot; to the police at his bedside who had been questioning him about his name and rank. Refusing to disclose any information, he died from his wounds at 10:30 PM.

===Aftermath===
Hryniewiecki&#x27;s identity was established only posthumously in April 1881. During the trial of the tsaricides, he was simply referred to as &quot;the person who died on March 1, and lived under the false name of Elnikov.&quot; During his post-arrest confession, Andrei Zhelyabov refused to identify his body. Rysakov, the first bomb-thrower, had only known Hryniewiecki by his party pseudonyms, and was thus unable to reveal his true name. His surname was first revealed by the arrested member of People&#x27;s Will, Kolodkevich. This was further corroborated and supplemented by members of St. Petersburg Technological Institute, as well as by his relations in his hometown.

Hryniewiecki and his fellow conspirators had hoped that the assassination would precipitate a political or social revolution. However, it instead impelled Alexander III to step up state repression and abrogate many of his predecessor&#x27;s reforms. Numerous arrests depleted the executive committee, which together with the intensified police surveillance dealt serious blows to the movement. Many historians have therefore regarded the assassination as a Pyrrhic victory and a prelude to the decline of the revolutionary movement in the 1880s.

The role of a bomb-thrower was known to carry with it the likelihood of death, and the designated bomb-throwers such as Hryniewiecki took that role knowingly, and accepted a suicide mission. Hryniewiecki is therefore sometimes considered to be the first suicide bomber.

A chapel and later the Resurrection Cathedral (in popular parlance, &quot;the Savior on the Blood&quot;) was erected on the spot of Alexander&#x27;s assassination on Catherine Canal. In May 1975, the bridge near the scene of the incident was named after Hryniewiecki as the &quot;Grinevitsky Bridge&quot;, until it was renamed Novo-Konyushenny Bridge in 1998.

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2415488" start="0" end="19" title="Ignacy Hryniewiecki" label="Ignacy Hryniewiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415488" start="23" end="54" title="Ignacy Hryniewiecki" label="Ignaty Ioakhimovich Grinevitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="107" end="113" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q787001" start="137" end="152" title="Narodnaya Volya" label="Narodnaya Volya"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="223" end="227" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="228" end="250" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="544" end="561" title="tsarist autocracy" label="tsarist autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170765" start="608" end="623" title="Pyrrhic victory" label="Pyrrhic victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="913" end="931" title="Revolution of 1905" label="Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="953" end="971" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="1083" end="1100" title="suicide terrorism" label="suicide terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075259" start="1172" end="1187" title="Bobruysky Uyezd" label="Bobruysky Uyezd"/>
<link wikidata="Q593230" start="1191" end="1208" title="Minsk Governorate" label="Minsk Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q586238" start="1222" end="1238" title="Klichaw District" label="Klichaw District"/>
<link wikidata="Q189822" start="1240" end="1254" title="Mogilev Region" label="Mogilev Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294422" start="1293" end="1311" title="Grodno Governorate" label="Grodno Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1333" end="1341" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q961887" start="1416" end="1430" title="Lev Tikhomirov" label="Lev Tikhomirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997706" start="1491" end="1497" title="Litvin" label="Litvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="1549" end="1558" title="Russification" label="Russified"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1613" end="1620" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="1625" end="1631" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1925" end="1934" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="1938" end="1947" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="2006" end="2022" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654435" start="2066" end="2112" title="Saint Petersburg State Institute of Technology" label="Saint Petersburg State Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="2444" end="2453" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821764" start="2698" end="2720" title="clandestine literature" label="underground literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q86664605" start="2721" end="2737" title="Rabochaya Gazeta" label="Rabochaya Gazeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072178" start="3134" end="3161" title="Michael Manege" label="Mikhailovskii Riding School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4277303" start="3420" end="3442" title="Malaya Sadovaya Street" label="Malaya Sadovaya Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137992" start="3639" end="3654" title="Catherine Canal" label="Catherine Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q723519" start="3936" end="3954" title="Nikolai Kibalchich" label="Nikolai Kibalchich"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="4115" end="4129" title="nitroglycerine" label="nitroglycerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q143874" start="4134" end="4143" title="Nitrocellulose" label="pyroxylin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373762" start="4203" end="4218" title="Nikolai Rysakov" label="Nikolai Rysakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372358" start="4223" end="4240" title="Timofei Mikhailov" label="Timofei Mikhailov"/>
<link wikidata="Q645" start="4311" end="4315" title="Neva River" label="Neva"/>
<link wikidata="Q905431" start="4323" end="4332" title="Pargolovo" label="Pargolovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="4473" end="4482" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823663" start="4605" end="4622" title="Sophia Perovskaya" label="Sophia Perovskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052597" start="4854" end="4866" title="Great Gostiny Dvor" label="Gostiny Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175407" start="6731" end="6745" title="Ivan Emelyanov" label="Ivan Emelyanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="6963" end="6976" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628526" start="7413" end="7436" title="Pervomartovtsi" label="trial of the tsaricides"/>
<link wikidata="Q502130" start="7589" end="7605" title="Andrei Zhelyabov" label="Andrei Zhelyabov"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="8159" end="8172" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="8805" end="8819" title="suicide bomber" label="suicide bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q215208" start="8845" end="8867" title="Church of the Savior on Spilled Blood" label="Resurrection Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562116" start="9149" end="9172" title="Novo-Konyushenny Bridge" label="Novo-Konyushenny Bridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706520" wikidata="Q254950" url="?curid=706520" title="Elfdalian">
<text>Elfdalian or Övdalian ( or , ; or ) is a North Germanic language spoken by around 3,000 people who live or have grown up in the locality of Älvdalen (&quot;&quot;), in the south east of Älvdalen Municipality in northern Dalarna, Sweden.

Like all other modern North Germanic languages, Elfdalian developed from Old Norse, a North Germanic language spoken by inhabitants of Scandinavia and their overseas settlements during the Viking Age until about 1300. It has developed in relative isolation since the Middle Ages and is considered to have remained closer to Old Norse than the other Dalecarlian dialects.

Traditionally regarded as a Swedish dialect, but by several criteria closer to West Scandinavian dialects, Elfdalian is a separate language by the standard of mutual intelligibility. There is low mutual intelligibility between Swedish and Elfdalian, but, since education and public administration in Älvdalen are conducted in Swedish, native speakers are bilingual and speak Swedish at a native level. People who speak Swedish as their sole native language, neither speaking nor understanding Elfdalian, are also common in the area.

==Classification==
Elfdalian belongs to the Northern branch/Upper Siljan branch of the Dalecarlian dialects or vernaculars, which in their turn evolved from Old Norse, from which Dalecarlian vernaculars might have split as early as in the eighth or ninth century, i.e., approximately when the North Germanic languages split into Western and Eastern branches. 
Elfdalian (and other Dalecarlian language varieties) is traditionally placed among the East Scandinavian languages, together with Swedish and Danish, based on a number of features that Elfdalian has in common with them. According to Lars Levander, some of the West Scandinavian features that simultaneously do occur in Elfdalian are archaic traits that once were common in many Scandinavian dialects and have been preserved in the most conservative tongues east and west of Kölen. However, this is rebutted by Kroonen.

==Characteristics==
===Archaisms===
* Lack of syllable lengthening.
* Retention of voiced fricatives , and .
* Retention of nominative, accusative and dative cases.
* Retention of Proto-Germanic, Proto-Norse and Old Norse nasal vowels.
* Retention of Proto-Germanic voiced labio-velar approximant : (&#x27;water&#x27;), (&#x27;wants&#x27;), (&#x27;knows&#x27;): compare English &quot;water&quot;, &quot;will&quot;, and &quot;wit&quot; and Standard Swedish , and .
*Retention of consonant clusters ld, nd, mb, rg, gd and ng (with audible ), as in &quot;ungg&quot; (&#x27;young&#x27;), &quot;kweld&quot; (&#x27;evening&#x27;), &quot;warg&quot; (&#x27;wolf&#x27;) and &quot;lamb&quot; (&#x27;lamb&#x27;) from Old Norse ungʀ, kveld, vargʀ (both with represented by &#x27;v&#x27;) and lamb.

===Innovations and unique developments===
* More frequent assimilation of pre-Norse &quot;mp&quot;, &quot;nt&quot;, and &quot;nk&quot; to &quot;pp&quot;, &quot;tt&quot;, and &quot;kk&quot;, as in West Scandinavian dialects.
* Shift of &quot;a&quot; to &quot;o&quot; before Pre-Norse &quot;nk&quot; (but not &quot;kk&quot;).
* Shift of Old Norse &quot;ei&quot;, &quot;ey&quot;, and &quot;au&quot; to &quot;ie&quot;, &quot;ä&quot;, and &quot;o&quot;.
* Diphthongization of Old Norse long high vowels &quot;í&quot;, &quot;ý&quot;, &quot;ú&quot; to closing diphthongs &quot;ai&quot;, &quot;åy&quot;, &quot;au&quot;, and of long rounded mid vowels &quot;ó&quot;, &quot;œ&quot; to opening diphthongs &quot;uo&quot;, &quot;yö&quot;.
* Vowel harmony (present also in other dialects of Central Scandinavia).
* Loss of &quot;h&quot;: compare Elfdalian with Swedish (or English &quot;house&quot;) and Elfdalian with Swedish .

==Phonology==
Elfdalian is comparable to Swedish and Norwegian in the number and the quality of vowels but also has nasal vowels. It has retained the Old Norse dental, velar and labial voiced fricatives. Alveolo-palatal affricate consonants occur in all (Swedish &quot;&quot;, north of Siljan) dialects. The realization of is , an apical alveolar trill. Unlike many variants of Norwegian and Swedish, Elfdalian does not assimilate into retroflex consonants. The stress is generally on the first syllable of a word.

=== Consonants ===
* The voiceless plosives , , and are aspirated word-initially unless following .
* and , and and are allophones of and respectively in complementary distribution; the fricative allophones surface after vowels when short, and the plosive allophones surface elsewhere. can surface word-initially in some pronouns and adverbs by sandhi.
* and are allophones of in complementary distribution; the former surfaces when long, when adjacent to or and, for many speakers, before , and the latter allophone surfaces elsewhere.
* and are allophones of in complementary distribution; the former surfaces after a tautomorphemic vowel, and the latter surfaces before a tautomorphemic vowel. It is also sometimes realised as before . The fricative allophone was historically realised as .
* Sounds are released as apico-alveolar.

=== Vowels ===
* Sounds are heard as in some parts of Övdaln.

* Sounds are heard primarily in Övdaln, whereas are heard in other parts nearby.
* Sounds are heard as or in some parts of Övdaln.

The close vowel sounds or are not present in Elfdalian.

=== Diphthongs ===
* Sounds can be realized in some village dialects as .
* is realized in some village dialects .
* is realized in some dialects as .

* Sounds can be realized in some village dialects as .
* is realized in some dialects as .

===Nasal vowel sounds===
Elfdalian has nasal versions of most vowels. They have several origins, belonging to different layers of history, but most involve the loss of a nasal consonant, with lengthening and nasalisation of a preceding vowel. 
* Late Proto-Germanic loss of &quot;*n&quot; before &quot;*h&quot;, which was lost in early Norse, but the nasalisation remained: &#x27; &quot;doorway&quot; (Proto-Germanic &#x27;).
* Old Norse loss of nasal consonants before &quot;*s&quot;: &#x27; &quot;goose&quot; (Proto-Germanic &#x27;), &quot;&quot; &quot;lard&quot; ().
* Old Norse loss of &quot;*n&quot; before &quot;*l&quot; and &quot;*r&quot;: &#x27; &quot;our&quot; (Proto-Norse &#x27;).
* Old Norse loss of word-final &quot;*n&quot; but only monosyllables: &#x27; &quot;on&quot; (Proto-Germanic ), &#x27; &quot;to see&quot; (Proto-Germanic &#x27;), &#x27; &quot;two (accusative)&quot; (Proto-Germanic &#x27;) and the prefix &#x27; &quot;un-&quot; (Proto-Germanic &quot;&quot;).
* Central Scandinavian loss of word-final &quot;-n&quot; if it had been preserved in Old Norse generally; The change affected neither Standard Swedish, nor final geminate &quot;-nn&quot;. The shift occurred in primarily the definite noun suffix of feminine nouns but also &quot;&quot; &quot;she&quot; and a few other words.
* Secondary post-Norse loss of &quot;n&quot; before &quot;s&quot;: &#x27; &quot;to wash&quot; (), &#x27; &quot;left&quot; (Old Norse &quot;&quot; with /w/-sound)
* Spontaneous (non-etymological) nasality: &#x27; &quot;to travel&quot; (from ), &#x27; &quot;cheese&quot; (, from ).
* Before nasal consonants. This case of nasalisation is allophonic and is not indicated in the orthography.
Nasal vowels are quite rare in Nordic languages, and Elfdalian and a few other neighbouring Dalecarlian dialects are the only ones that preserve nasal vowels from Proto-Norse; all other Nordic dialects with nasal vowels have developed them later as a result of the loss of a nasal consonant: compare Kalix dialect hąt and gås with Elfdalian hand and gą̊s.

==Grammar==
===Morphology===
Elfdalian has a morphological structure inherited from its Old Norse ancestor. Verbs are conjugated according to person and number and nouns have four cases, like Modern Icelandic and German. The Old Norse three-gender system has been retained. Like the other North Germanic languages, nouns have definite and indefinite forms, rather than a separate definite article (as in English). The length of the root syllable plays a major role in the Elfdalian declensional and conjugational system. The declension of , &quot;wolf&quot; (long-syllabic, strong masculine noun) was as follows in what is sometimes called &quot;Classic Elfdalian&quot; (as described by Levander 1909):

Many speakers retain the distinct dative case, which is used especially after prepositions and also certain verbs (such as , &quot;help&quot;). The distinction between nominative and accusative has been lost in indefinite nouns, and the inherited genitive been replaced by new forms created by attaching to the dative (see Dahl &amp; Koptjevskaja-Tamm 2005), a trend that was well underway even in Classic Elfdalian.

===Syntax===
Unlike other Swedish vernaculars, the syntax of Elfdalian was investigated in the early 20th century (Levander 1909). Although Elfdalian syntax has attracted increased attention, a majority of its syntactic elements are still unresearched. In May–June 2007, a group of linguists from the pan-Scandinavian NORMS network conducted fieldwork in Älvdalen especially aimed at investigating the syntactic properties of the language.

Presented with the help of generative syntax, the following features have been identified:

* Only first- and second-person plural pronouns (Rosenkvist 2006, 2010) can be dropped grammatically.
* First-person plural pronouns may be dropped only if they appear directly in front of the finite verb. Verb raising occurs, but there is variation between generations (Garbacz 2006, 2010).
* Multiple subjects seem to occur in clauses with the adverbial &#x27;, &quot;actually&quot;, or the verb &#x27; &quot;is possible&quot; (Levander 1909:109).
: literally: &quot;You are you very good speak-Övdalian&quot;
: &quot;You are actually very good at speaking Övdalian&quot;

That has recently been studied more closely from a generative perspective by Rosenkvist (2007).

Other syntactic properties are negative concord, stylistic inversion, long distance reflexives, verb controlled datives, agent-verb word order in coordinated clauses with deleted subjects, etc. Some of the properties are archaic features that existed in Old Swedish, but others are innovations, but none of them has been studied in any detail.

==Writing systems==
In Älvdalen, Germanic runes survived in use longer than anywhere else. The last record of the Elfdalian Runes is from the early 20th century; they are a variant of the Dalecarlian runes. Älvdalen can be said to have had its own alphabet during the 17th and 18th century.

Due to the great phonetic differences between Swedish and Elfdalian, the use of Swedish orthography for Elfdalian has been unpredictable and varied, such as the one applied in the Prytz&#x27;s play from 1622, which contains long passages in Elfdalian, or in the Elfdalian material published in the periodical &quot;Skansvakten&quot;.

A first attempt to create a separate Elfdalian orthography was made in 1982 by Lars Steensland. Bengt Åkerberg elaborated it, and it was applied in some books and used in language courses and is based on Loka dialect and is highly phonetic. It has many diacritics (Sapir 2006).

===Råðdjärum&#x27;s orthography===
In March 2005, a uniform standard orthography for Elfdalian was presented by (lit. &quot;Let us confer&quot;), The Elfdalian Language Council, and accepted by &#x27; (lit. &quot;Let us speak Dalecarlian&quot;), The Organization for the Preservation of Elfdalian. The new orthography has already been applied by Björn Rehnström in his book &#x27; &#x27;Three Bears from Älvdalen&#x27; published in 2007. Råðdjärum&#x27;s orthography was also used in Bo Westling&#x27;s translation of &#x27;s &quot;The Little Prince&quot;, &quot;&quot;.

===Elfdalian alphabet===

The Elfdalian alphabet consists of the following letters


Other than the letters occurring in the Swedish alphabet, Elfdalian has letters with ogonek, denoting nasal vowels: Ąą, Ęę, Įį, Ųų, Y̨y̨ and Ą̊ą̊. Additionally, it uses the letter eth (, ) for the voiced dental fricative.

==Language status==

As of 2009, Elfdalian had around 2,000 speakers and is in danger of language death. However, it is possible that it will receive an official status as a minority language in Sweden, which would entail numerous protections and encourage its use in schools and by writers and artists. The Swedish Parliament was due to address the issue in 2007, but has not yet done so. The Council of Europe has urged the Swedish government to reconsider the status of Elfdalian on a total of five occasions. The Committee of Experts now encourages the Swedish authorities to investigate the status of Elfdalian through an independent scientific study. In 2020, the Committee of Experts concluded that Elfdalian fulfils the criteria of a Part II language, and asked the Swedish authorities to include reporting on Elfdalian in its next periodical report as the language covered by Part II of the Charter, which the Swedish Ministry of Culture has not done in its 8th periodical report to the Council of Europe.

===Preservation and standardization===
&#x27;, The Organization for the Preservation of Elfdalian, was established in 1984 with the aim of preserving and documenting the Elfdalian language. In 2005, &#x27; launched a process aimed at bringing about an official recognition of Elfdalian as a language by the Swedish authorities.

&#x27;, The Elfdalian Language Committee was established in August 2004 within &#x27;, its first task being to create a new standard orthography for Elfdalian. In March 2005, the new orthography created by &#x27; was accepted by the &#x27; at their annual meeting. &quot; consists of five permanent members: linguist Östen Dahl, dialectologist Gunnar Nyström, teacher Inga-Britt Petersson, linguist and coordinator of the committee Dr. Yair Sapir, and linguist Lars Steensland.

As an initiative from &quot; to encourage children to speak Elfdalian, all school children in Älvdalen who finish the ninth grade and can prove that they can speak Elfdalian receive a 6,000 Swedish krona stipend.

An online version of Lars Steensland&#x27;s 2010 Elfdalian dictionary was published in September 2015.

In March 2016, Swedish Radio reported that the Älvdalen City Council had decided that, starting in autumn 2016, the local kindergarten would operate solely through the medium of Elfdalian.

==New organisms named after Elfdalian==
In 2015, a new genus &quot;Elfdaliana&quot; of deep-sea nudibranch molluscs was named after the Elfdalian language in reference to evolutionary basal characters of the new genus never before reported for the family, just as Elfdalian preserves ancestral features of Old Norse.

==Notes==
==References==

*Dahl, Östen and Maria Koptjevskaja-Tamm. 2005. The resilient dative and other remarkable cases in Scandinavian vernaculars. Ms. University of Stockholm.
*Garbacz, Piotr (2008). Älvdalska – ett mindre känt nordiskt språk. s. 1. Oslo universitet
* Nationalencyklopedin, entry &quot;älvdalsmål&quot;, subentry &quot;Dalarna&quot;
* Sapir, Yair and Lundgren, Olof. 2024. A Grammar of Elfdalian. London: UCL Press.
*Sapir, Yair. 2006. Elfdalian, the Vernacular of Övdaln In: Rapport från första konferensen om älvdalska (Report from the First Conference about Elfdalian), Gunnar Nyström (ed.).
*Garbacz, Piotr. 2006.Verb movement and negation in Övdalian. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 78: 173–190. (PDF)
*Levander, Lars. 1925. Dalmålet. Beskrivning och historia.
*Levander, Lars. 1909. &quot;Älvdalsmålet i Dalarna&quot; (Doctoral thesis published in &quot;Svenska landsmål&quot;, 1909, (105).
*Rosenkvist, Henrik. 2006. Null Subjects in Övdalian. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 78:141–171.
*Rosenkvist, Henrik. 2007. Subject Doubling in Oevdalian. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 80:77–102.
*Rosenkvist, Henrik. 2010. Null referential subjects in Övdalian. Nordic Journal of Linguistics 33.3:231–267.
*Garbacz, Piotr. 2010. 2008a. Bisatsledföljden i älvdalska. In Jóhannesson, K. et al. (eds.) &quot;Nog ordat? Festskrift till Sven-Göran Malmgren den 25 April 2008.&quot; 105–112. Meijebergs institut för svensk etymologisk forskning.
*Garbacz, P. 2008b. Negationens syntax i älvdalskan. In Bukowski, P. et al. (eds.) &quot;Perspektiv på svenska språket och litteraturen&quot; 193–202. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Jagiellońskiego.
*Garbacz, Piotr. 2010. Word Order in Övdalian. A Study in Variation and Change. Lundastudier i nordisk språkvetenskap 70. Lund University. (PDF)
*Melerska, Dorota. 2010. Vem är ”en riktig älvdaling”? Identitetsmarkörer i dagens Älvdalen. &quot;Folia Scandinavica Posnaniensia&quot;, vol. 11, 2010, pp. 123–133 (PDF)
*Melerska, Dorota. 2011. Älvdalskan – mellan språkdöd och revitalisering. PhD-thesis. Adam Mickiewicz University (PDF)

===English===
* 
* Omniglot: Elfdalian alphabet
* Yair Sapir: Elfdalian, the Vernacular of Övdaln – an article with an outline of Elfdalian (history, background, linguistic features, present
* Guus Kroonen: Fight on to preserve Elfdalian
* The Last Elfdalians, BBC Sounds

===Swedish===
* Elfdalian-swedish dictionary
* Förslag till en enhetlig stavning för älvdalska (&quot;Project for a unified orthography for Elfdalian&quot;).
* Volume of The First Conference on Elfdalian / &quot;, with English summaries
* Volume of The Second Conference on Elfdalian / &quot;, with English summaries
* SOFI the Institute for Language and Folklore – Älvdalen
* Mikael Parkvall, &quot;Sveriges språk. Vem talar vad och var?&quot;. RAPPLING 1. Rapporter från Institutionen för lingvistik vid Stockholms universitet. 2009 , pp. 29–72</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q254950" start="0" end="9" title="Elfdalian" label="Elfdalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q254950" start="13" end="21" title="Elfdalian" label="Övdalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="41" end="55" title="North Germanic language" label="North Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="56" end="64" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453291" start="140" end="148" title="Älvdalen" label="Älvdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q123855" start="186" end="207" title="Älvdalen Municipality" label="Älvdalen Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q205218" start="220" end="227" title="Dalarna" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="229" end="235" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="311" end="320" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="427" end="437" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q33046" start="587" end="607" title="Dalecarlian language" label="Dalecarlian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="769" end="791" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="965" end="974" title="bilingual" label="bilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q33046" start="1231" end="1251" title="Dalecarlian dialects" label="Dalecarlian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1301" end="1310" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="1437" end="1461" title="North Germanic languages" label="North Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33046" start="1525" end="1555" title="Dalecarlian dialects" label="Dalecarlian language varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="1591" end="1608" title="East Scandinavian" label="East Scandinavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="1634" end="1641" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="1646" end="1652" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="1764" end="1781" title="West Scandinavian" label="West Scandinavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q186547" start="1978" end="1983" title="Skanderna" label="Kölen"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="2204" end="2218" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671294" start="2220" end="2231" title="Proto-Norse" label="Proto-Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2236" end="2245" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2730" end="2739" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q448789" start="3931" end="3946" title="Alveolo-palatal consonant" label="Alveolo-palatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="3947" end="3966" title="affricate consonant" label="affricate consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q217430" start="4013" end="4019" title="Siljan (lake)" label="Siljan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113159186" start="4058" end="4079" title="Voiced dental, alveolar and postalveolar trills" label="apical alveolar trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q267753" start="4163" end="4182" title="retroflex consonant" label="retroflex consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="4299" end="4308" title="aspirated consonant" label="aspirated"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="4363" end="4373" title="allophone" label="allophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321675" start="4397" end="4423" title="complementary distribution" label="complementary distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q206945" start="4588" end="4594" title="sandhi" label="sandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="4676" end="4680" title="gemination" label="long"/>
<link wikidata="Q618621" start="5062" end="5076" title="apico-alveolar consonant" label="apico-alveolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33046" start="7362" end="7373" title="Dalecarlian dialects" label="Dalecarlian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462392" start="7570" end="7583" title="Kalix dialect" label="Kalix dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="7807" end="7812" title="grammatical case" label="cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="7826" end="7835" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="7840" end="7846" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q62560064" start="8665" end="8682" title="Maria Koptjevskaja-Tamm" label="Koptjevskaja-Tamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204480" start="9488" end="9500" title="Raising (syntax)" label="Verb raising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417210" start="10208" end="10219" title="Old Swedish" label="Old Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453291" start="10322" end="10330" title="Älvdalen" label="Älvdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="10341" end="10346" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352035" start="10487" end="10504" title="Dalecarlian runes" label="Dalecarlian runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338" start="11737" end="11754" title="The Little Prince" label="The Little Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q684050" start="11947" end="11953" title="ogonek" label="ogonek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="11964" end="11975" title="nasal vowel" label="nasal vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9993" start="12042" end="12045" title="eth" label="eth"/>
<link wikidata="Q253756" start="12174" end="12188" title="language death" label="language death"/>
<link wikidata="Q61566" start="12259" end="12276" title="minority language" label="minority language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="12479" end="12496" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4154203" start="13747" end="13757" title="Östen Dahl" label="Östen Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="14099" end="14112" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish krona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968259" start="14113" end="14120" title="stipend" label="stipend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543058" start="14242" end="14255" title="Sveriges Radio" label="Swedish Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="14349" end="14361" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q733595" start="14513" end="14523" title="nudibranch" label="nudibranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q62560064" start="14778" end="14801" title="Maria Koptjevskaja-Tamm" label="Maria Koptjevskaja-Tamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165538" start="15008" end="15028" title="Nationalencyklopedin" label="Nationalencyklopedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956824" start="16044" end="16059" title="Kerstin Johannesson" label="Jóhannesson, K."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706522" wikidata="Q7610482" url="?curid=706522" title="Stephen Schnetzer">
<text>Stephen Paul Schnetzer (born June 11, 1948) is an American actor. He is best known for playing the role of Cass Winthrop on &quot;Another World&quot; from 1982 to 1986, returning in 1987 until the show&#x27;s cancellation in 1999. He won a Soap Opera Digest Award for Outstanding Comic Actor in 1989 for his role on &quot;Another World&quot; and received a Daytime Emmy Award nomination in 1990 for Outstanding Lead Actor.

==Early life==
Schnetzer was born in Canton, Massachusetts. His father was a postal worker and his mother was secretary to the superintendent of schools in Canton. His father had German and Irish ancestry. His mother was a war bride from Algeria. 

Schnetzer attended Catholic Memorial School and The University of Massachusetts, earning a degree in French, with a minor in Spanish. He studied acting at Juilliard and The American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco. While at Juilliard, he took circus classes and learned to juggle. Schnetzer trained with William Esper, using the Meisner technique.

== Career ==

Early in his career, he was sometimes billed under the names Steven Schnetzer, Stephen St. Paul, and Steven St. Paul. He made his film debut with a small role in &quot;Hail&quot; (credited as Steven Schnetzer)&quot;.&quot; In 1976, he played Lucentio in a TV movie production of &quot;The Taming of the Shrew&quot; and guest-starred on &quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot; (credited for both roles as Stephen St. Paul).

Schnetzer played the role of Julie Olson Williams&#x27; brother, Steven Olson, on the NBC soap opera &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; from 1978 to 1980. He guest-starred on &quot;The Love Boat&quot; and &quot;Fantasy Island.&quot;

In 1980, he made his Broadway debut in &quot;Filumena&quot;, playing the son of Joan Plowright. The play was directed by Laurence Olivier. Schnetzer joined the cast of the ABC soap opera &quot;One Life to Live,&quot; playing Marcello Salta from 1980 to 1982. Schnetzer returned to Broadway in 1981, playing Mark Harrison in &quot;A Talent For Murder&quot; at the Biltmore Theater. On television, he appeared in the 1983 TV movie &quot;Rage of Angels&quot;.

He landed the role of attorney Cass Winthrop on &quot;Another World&quot; in 1982 and stayed until 1986. He decided to leave to pursue other opportunities in Los Angeles, while also spending time with his newborn son. Schnetzer returned to &quot;Another World&quot; in 1987, continuing to play Cass until the show&#x27;s final episodes aired in June 1999. He won a Soap Opera Digest Award in 1989 for Outstanding Comic Actor for his work on the show. He also received Soap Opera Digest Award nominations in 1986, 1991, 1992, and 1999. He was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in 1990. 

During his time on &quot;Another World&quot;, Schnetzer appeared in the TV movie &quot;Shattered Innocence&quot;. He guest-starred on &quot;The Cosby Mysteries&quot; and &quot;Prince Street&quot;. After &quot;Another World&quot;&#x27;s cancellation, Schnetzer continued to appear as Cass Winthrop on the CBS soap operas &quot;As the World Turns&quot; (1999 to 2002; 2005 and 2006) and &quot;Guiding Light&quot; (2002). He made guest appearances on &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot; and &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit.&quot; He played Mr. Hammon in the 2005 drama film &quot;Brooklyn Lobster&quot;.

Schnetzer returned to Broadway in 2002, replacing Bill Pullman in the role of Ross in Edward Albee&#x27;s &quot;The Goat, or Who is Sylvia?&quot; He went on to play the role of Martin in a production of &quot;The Goat, or Who is Sylvia?&quot; at Lyric Stage in Boston, opening in February 2006. He starred as Garry Lejeune in &quot;Noises Off&quot; at Arena Stage in Washington, D.C. from December 2006 to 2007. He co-starred with his son, Ben Schnetzer, in the 2007 film &quot;Ben&#x27;s Plan&quot;. 

From 2008 to 2013, he had guest-starring roles on &quot;The Wire&quot;, &quot;Fringe&quot;, &quot;Damages&quot;, &quot;The Good Wife&quot;, &quot;Law &amp; Order: Criminal Intent&quot;, and &quot;Person of Interest&quot;. He appeared on &quot;Homeland,&quot; playing a character named Dr. Cass Winthrop.

From May to June 2009, Schnetzer played Voltaire in &quot;Legacy of Light&quot; at Arena Stage in Crystal City, Virginia. He returned to the same venue in September 2009, appearing in &quot;The Quality of Life,&quot; co-starring with Annette O&#x27;Toole and Kevin O&#x27;Rourke. In October 2015, he starred in Arthur Miller&#x27;s &quot;Broken Glass&quot; at the Westport Country Playhouse in Connecticut. 

Schnetzer became a prolific voiceover talent in English and French, advertising for many companies, such as Kellogg&#x27;s Frosted Flakes. He continued to land guest-starring roles, appearing from 2014 to 2018 on &quot;Forever&quot;, &quot;The Blacklist&quot;, &quot;Flesh and Bone&quot;, &quot;Blue Bloods, Billions,&quot; and &quot;Elementary.&quot; Schnetzer appeared in the 2017 film &quot;Aardvark&quot;. He starred as Richard in the independent film &quot;A Case of Blue&quot;. Since 2022, Schnetzer has appeared on the web series &quot;The Bay.&quot;

In 2024, it was announced that he would be returning to &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; as Steven Olson.

==Personal life==
Schnetzer married Amy Ingersoll at the Swedenborgian Church in San Francisco, on November 24, 1976. They later divorced.

He met actress Nancy Snyder while they were both on &quot;One Life to Live&quot; (she played Katrina Karr). They were married on March 18, 1982 and had two sons. They are now divorced. Their younger son, Ben Schnetzer, is also an actor.

==Filmography==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Video games ===
== Awards and nominations ==
==References==
==External links==
* Stephen Schnetzer at Playbill
* Stephen Schnetzer at IBDb
* Stephen Schnetzer at AllMovie</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7610482" start="0" end="22" title="Stephen Schnetzer" label="Stephen Paul Schnetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="124" end="149" title="Another World (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Another World&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141192" start="240" end="263" title="Soap Opera Digest Awards" label="Soap Opera Digest Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="357" end="375" title="Daytime Emmy Awards" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019364" start="399" end="421" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Lead Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429670" start="461" end="482" title="Canton, Massachusetts" label="Canton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="603" end="609" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="614" end="619" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968593" start="647" end="656" title="war bride" label="war bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="662" end="669" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053200" start="692" end="716" title="Catholic Memorial School" label="Catholic Memorial School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061122" start="721" end="752" title="University of Massachusetts" label="The University of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="828" end="837" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q463781" start="842" end="875" title="American Conservatory Theater" label="The American Conservatory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="879" end="892" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008661" start="983" end="996" title="William Esper Studio" label="William Esper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810330" start="1008" end="1025" title="Meisner technique" label="Meisner technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598450" start="1210" end="1214" title="Hail (1973 film)" label="Hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q332387" start="1327" end="1350" title="The Taming of the Shrew" label="The Taming of the Shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q697407" start="1384" end="1397" title="Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)" label="Hawaii Five-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145578" start="1481" end="1501" title="Julie Olson Williams" label="Julie Olson Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="1559" end="1576" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="1628" end="1641" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395913" start="1658" end="1672" title="Fantasy Island" label="Fantasy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246987" start="1720" end="1740" title="Filumena Marturano" label="&amp;quot;Filumena&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q230035" start="1761" end="1775" title="Joan Plowright" label="Joan Plowright"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="1802" end="1818" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="1874" end="1890" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2011" end="2030" title="A Talent For Murder (play)" label="A Talent For Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935075" start="2044" end="2060" title="Samuel J. Friedman Theatre" label="Biltmore Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937847" start="2116" end="2130" title="Rage of Angels" label="Rage of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145689" start="2170" end="2183" title="Cass Winthrop" label="Cass Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="2193" end="2206" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2297" end="2308" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141192" start="2504" end="2527" title="Soap Opera Digest Awards" label="Soap Opera Digest Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="2697" end="2715" title="Daytime Emmy Awards" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019364" start="2720" end="2742" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Lead Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q32868687" start="2841" end="2860" title="Shattered Innocence" label="Shattered Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063310" start="2894" end="2913" title="The Cosby Mysteries" label="The Cosby Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q54622119" start="2930" end="2943" title="Prince Street (TV series)" label="Prince Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="3080" end="3098" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="3145" end="3158" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="3208" end="3223" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3240" end="3277" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974871" start="3335" end="3351" title="Brooklyn Lobster" label="Brooklyn Lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q315763" start="3410" end="3422" title="Bill Pullman" label="Bill Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219420" start="3446" end="3458" title="Edward Albee" label="Edward Albee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10268314" start="3466" end="3505" title="The Goat, or Who Is Sylvia?" label="&amp;quot;The Goat, or Who is Sylvia?&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449198" start="3606" end="3617" title="The Lyric Stage Company of Boston" label="Lyric Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3621" end="3627" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335348" start="3692" end="3702" title="Noises Off" label="Noises Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788912" start="3712" end="3723" title="Arena Stage" label="Arena Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3727" end="3743" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q15725509" start="3800" end="3813" title="Ben Schnetzer" label="Ben Schnetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q478360" start="3919" end="3927" title="The Wire" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815" start="3941" end="3947" title="Fringe (TV series)" label="Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q912437" start="3961" end="3968" title="Damages (TV series)" label="Damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570" start="3982" end="3995" title="The Good Wife" label="The Good Wife"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4009" end="4041" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q564345" start="4059" end="4077" title="Person of Interest (TV series)" label="Person of Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23594" start="4106" end="4114" title="Homeland (TV series)" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="4208" end="4216" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996953" start="4226" end="4241" title="Legacy of Light" label="Legacy of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788912" start="4251" end="4262" title="Arena Stage" label="Arena Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820323" start="4266" end="4288" title="Crystal City, Virginia" label="Crystal City, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q231135" start="4402" end="4422" title="Annette O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Annette O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377862" start="4427" end="4446" title="Kevin O&amp;#x27;Rourke (actor)" label="Kevin O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="4479" end="4492" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973380" start="4500" end="4524" title="Broken Glass (play)" label="&amp;quot;Broken Glass&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989593" start="4532" end="4558" title="Westport Country Playhouse" label="Westport Country Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="4562" end="4573" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16888258" start="4796" end="4803" title="Forever (2014 TV series)" label="Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q13148212" start="4817" end="4830" title="The Blacklist" label="The Blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993471" start="4844" end="4858" title="Flesh and Bone (miniseries)" label="Flesh and Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q885643" start="4872" end="4883" title="Blue Bloods (TV series)" label="Blue Bloods"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656755" start="4885" end="4893" title="Billions (TV series)" label="Billions"/>
<link wikidata="Q247643" start="4911" end="4921" title="Elementary (TV series)" label="Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350702" start="4971" end="4979" title="Aardvark (2017 film)" label="Aardvark"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160980" start="5120" end="5127" title="The Bay (web series)" label="The Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="5198" end="5215" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q182435" start="5297" end="5317" title="Swedenborgian Church (San Francisco, California)" label="Swedenborgian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="5321" end="5334" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962998" start="5395" end="5407" title="Nancy Snyder" label="Nancy Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="5438" end="5454" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q15725509" start="5584" end="5597" title="Ben Schnetzer" label="Ben Schnetzer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706530" wikidata="Q2024119" url="?curid=706530" title="Anna Holbrook">
<text>Anna Kathryn Holbrook (née York; born April 18, 1957) is an American television actress, known for her role as Sharlene Frame Hudson on the NBC daytime soap opera &quot;Another World&quot;, for which she received Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 1996.

==Life and career==
Holbrook was born in Fairbanks, Alaska and grew up in Tucson, Arizona. Holbrook&#x27;s father, Don Joseph York (aged 29) was killed in South Vietnam during the Vietnamese War. Her mother, Johanna, later remarried. She began her career appearing in television series including &quot;Hart to Hart&quot; and &quot;Dallas&quot;. In 1988, she moved to New York City for performing on off-Broadway stage, and later was cast as Sharlene Frame Hudson on the NBC daytime soap opera, &quot;Another World&quot; a role she played until 1991 after her character was presumed dead in a boat explosion. Soap operas weren’t in Holbrook’s plans, but her agent offered some advice that would change her mind. She returned to soap in late 1993 and appeared until 1997, and again in 1999. The character Sharlene was a victim of sexual abuse and suffered from multiple personality disorder, and Holbrook won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress award for her portrayal in 1996.

Holbrook has appeared in numerous guest starring roles, including four different roles on &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot;, three on &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot; between 1993 and 2006, &quot;Spin City&quot;, &quot;The West Wing&quot;, &quot;Bull&quot;, &quot;Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt&quot;, &quot;Blue Bloods&quot;, &quot;Homeland&quot; (in the season eight episode &quot;Deception Indicated&quot;), &quot;Hunters&quot;, &quot;The Blacklist&quot;, &quot;Harlem&quot; and &quot;The Equalizer&quot;. She appeared in the 1994 comedy film &quot;I Love Trouble&quot; and in 2007 had a recurring role as Dr. Hannah Young on the ABC daytime soap opera &quot;One Life to Live&quot; for several episodes. In 2021, Holbrook played Debbie in the &quot;Sister Swap&quot; film franchise. She starred as the mother of real-life sisters Kimberly Williams-Paisley and Ashley Williams, who also happen to be the real-life daughters of Holbrook&#x27;s real-life best friend.

==Personal life==

Holbrook has been married to Bruce Holbrook since 1979, and they have two children. Anna is currently an acting teacher at the Performing Arts Conservatory in New Canaan, Connecticut.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Holbrook family info, legacy.com; accessed July 4, 2015.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2024119" start="0" end="21" title="Anna Holbrook" label="Anna Kathryn Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024119" start="27" end="31" title="Anna Holbrook" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="169" end="182" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243451" start="213" end="284" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series" label="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="336" end="353" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="369" end="384" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="450" end="463" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541739" start="597" end="609" title="Hart to Hart" label="Hart to Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q168708" start="626" end="632" title="Dallas (1978 TV series)" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="795" end="808" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="1154" end="1183" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="multiple personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="1204" end="1222" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="1388" end="1403" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1426" end="1463" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q256527" start="1499" end="1508" title="Spin City" label="Spin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577037" start="1522" end="1535" title="The West Wing" label="The West Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207659" start="1549" end="1553" title="Bull (2016 TV series)" label="Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889037" start="1567" end="1592" title="Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt" label="Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q885643" start="1606" end="1617" title="Blue Bloods (TV series)" label="Blue Bloods"/>
<link wikidata="Q23594" start="1631" end="1639" title="Homeland (TV series)" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q58962177" start="1654" end="1666" title="Homeland (season 8)" label="season eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756131" start="1681" end="1700" title="Deception Indicated" label="Deception Indicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635302" start="1715" end="1722" title="Hunters (2020 TV series)" label="Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13148212" start="1736" end="1749" title="The Blacklist" label="The Blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q109994496" start="1763" end="1769" title="Harlem (TV series)" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q96408666" start="1786" end="1799" title="The Equalizer (2021 TV series)" label="The Equalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481578" start="1850" end="1864" title="I Love Trouble (1994 film)" label="I Love Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="1960" end="1976" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q110252093" start="2050" end="2061" title="Sister Swap" label="Sister Swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q234967" start="2131" end="2156" title="Kimberly Williams-Paisley" label="Kimberly Williams-Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q435839" start="2161" end="2176" title="Ashley Williams (actress)" label="Ashley Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q754951" start="2445" end="2468" title="New Canaan, Connecticut" label="New Canaan, Connecticut"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706534" wikidata="Q5233760" url="?curid=706534" title="David Forsyth (actor)">
<text>David Forsyth is an American actor who was born September 18, 1947 in Long Beach, California.

Forsyth was born into a military family and served with the Marines from 1967 to 1971, during the Vietnam War. He served as a paramedic during the war and after the war worked as a paramedic and fireman in Florida.

Forsyth became interested in acting and was cast on several soap operas. He played T.J. Canfield on the short lived &quot;Texas&quot; (1981–1982), and Burke Donovan on &quot;As the World Turns&quot; in 1983. He played &quot;Henderson Herald&quot; reporter Hogan McCleary in &quot;Search for Tomorrow&quot;, a role he played until that show ended in 1986. He left the show in 1984, but returned seven months later in 1985.

Forsyth&#x27;s longest stint was as Vietnam vet and physician John Hudson on &quot;Another World&quot; from 1987 to 1997. Forsyth credited then-executive producer John Whitesell with the idea to bring his own Vietnam experiences to the role of John, which helped him process his own complicated experiences in the war. 

He was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series at the Daytime Emmy Awards for his role in &quot;Another World&quot;. He was nominated again in 1996 for the same role.

Forsyth replaced Roscoe Born in the role of Jim Thomasen on &quot;All My Children&quot; in 1997 to wrap up the story after Born abruptly left the show.

He also had a cameo in one episode of &quot;Sex and the City&quot; as Miranda&#x27;s boss.

On the April 30, 2020 episode of &quot;The Locher Room&quot;, a YouTube series interviewing actors and behind the scenes professionals who worked on soap operas, actress Anna Holbrook, a former acting partner of Forsyth, revealed that he had recent health struggles, including a stroke which necessitated a feeding tube for a time.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5233760" start="0" end="13" title="David Forsyth (actor)" label="David Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="70" end="92" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="155" end="162" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="193" end="204" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="301" end="308" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519335" start="433" end="438" title="Texas (TV series)" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="485" end="503" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q588602" start="591" end="610" title="Search for Tomorrow" label="Search for Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="817" end="830" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="1130" end="1148" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631619" start="1219" end="1223" title="23rd Daytime Emmy Awards" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288239" start="1261" end="1272" title="Roscoe Born" label="Roscoe Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q205474" start="1310" end="1325" title="All My Children" label="All My Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q35791" start="1441" end="1457" title="Sex and the City" label="Sex and the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024119" start="1659" end="1672" title="Anna Holbrook" label="Anna Holbrook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706538" wikidata="Q1185774" url="?curid=706538" title="Kale Browne">
<text>David Charles &quot;Kale&quot; Browne (born June 16, 1950) is an American actor.

==Biography==
He was born in San Rafael, California. Browne was the first to play the roles of Michael Hudson on &quot;Another World&quot; (1986–1993, 1995–1998) and Sam Rappaport on &quot;One Life to Live&quot; (1998–2001). 
==Personal life==
Browne has a son, Nicholas (b. 1990), with former wife Karen Allen, to whom he was married from 1988 to 1998. Their son is a personal chef, who won a competition on a 2016 episode of the reality tv series &quot;Chopped&quot;.

==Filmography==

=== Film ===

=== Television ===
=== Radio dramas ===
=== Video games ===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1185774" start="0" end="13" title="Kale Browne" label="David Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185774" start="20" end="24" title="Kale Browne" label="Kale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185774" start="31" end="37" title="Kale Browne" label="Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q631915" start="111" end="133" title="San Rafael, California" label="San Rafael, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="201" end="214" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q11822378" start="248" end="261" title="Sam Rappaport (One Life to Live)" label="Sam Rappaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="271" end="287" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q229137" start="381" end="392" title="Karen Allen" label="Karen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104849" start="537" end="544" title="Chopped (TV series)" label="Chopped"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706539" wikidata="Q410212" url="?curid=706539" title="Tropicana">
<text>Tropicana may refer to:
==Companies==
*Tropicana Entertainment, a former casino company that owned several Tropicana-branded casinos
*Tropicana Products, a Chicago-based food company known for orange juice

==Hotels and nightclubs==
*Tropicana Casino &amp; Resort Atlantic City, Atlantic City, New Jersey
*Tropicana Club, a nightclub in Havana, Cuba and New York City
*Tropicana Evansville, now Bally&#x27;s Evansville, a casino hotel in Evansville, Indiana
*Tropicana Laughlin, a casino hotel in Laughlin, Nevada
*Tropicana Las Vegas, a closed casino hotel on the Las Vegas Strip

==Music==
*&quot;Tropicana&quot;, a song by Gruppo Italiano 
*&quot;Club Tropicana&quot;, a song by Wham! from their album &quot;Fantastic&quot;

==Places==
*Tropicana, Weston-super-Mare, a now-derelict outdoor swimming pool in Somerset, England
*Tropicana Avenue, a street in Las Vegas, Nevada
*Tropicana Field, a stadium in St. Petersburg, Florida and the home of the Tampa Bay Rays Major League Baseball team
*Tropicana Gold Mine, a major gold mine in Western Australia
*Tropicana LRT station (LRT3), a transit station in Malaysia

==Sports==
*Tropicana 400, a NASCAR race, now known as the Camping World 400
*Tropicana Twister 300, a NASCAR race, now known as the Camping World 300</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q410212" start="0" end="9" title="Tropicana" label="Tropicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846199" start="39" end="62" title="Tropicana Entertainment" label="Tropicana Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846049" start="134" end="152" title="Tropicana Products" label="Tropicana Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540629" start="234" end="277" title="Tropicana Casino &amp;amp; Resort Atlantic City" label="Tropicana Casino &amp;amp; Resort Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783672" start="306" end="320" title="Tropicana Club" label="Tropicana Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048843" start="395" end="418" title="Bally&amp;#x27;s Evansville" label="Bally&amp;#x27;s Evansville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846200" start="459" end="477" title="Tropicana Laughlin" label="Tropicana Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q280339" start="515" end="534" title="Tropicana Las Vegas" label="Tropicana Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777374" start="626" end="641" title="Gruppo Italiano" label="Gruppo Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103155" start="650" end="664" title="Club Tropicana" label="Club Tropicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846196" start="740" end="768" title="Tropicana, Weston-super-Mare" label="Tropicana, Weston-super-Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q892706" start="829" end="845" title="Tropicana Avenue" label="Tropicana Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810119" start="878" end="893" title="Tropicana Field" label="Tropicana Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="952" end="966" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="967" end="988" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846201" start="995" end="1014" title="Tropicana Gold Mine" label="Tropicana Gold Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108794861" start="1056" end="1084" title="Tropicana LRT station (LRT3)" label="Tropicana LRT station (LRT3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485140" start="1129" end="1142" title="Tropicana 400" label="Tropicana 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235660" start="1195" end="1216" title="Tropicana Twister 300" label="Tropicana Twister 300"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706545" wikidata="Q15524928" url="?curid=706545" title="Laurence Lau">
<text>Laurence Henry Lau (born May 10, 1954) is an American television and stage actor, best known for his roles in several soap operas. He has also been credited in film.

== Early life and education ==
Lau was born in Long Beach, California, and raised in Lake Oswego, Oregon. He attended Columbia University and Brigham Young University.

== Career ==
One of his first roles was on the TV comedy/drama &quot;Eight Is Enough&quot; in 1980. He first became popular by playing the role of Greg Nelson on &quot;All My Children&quot; (1981–1986), in which his character got involved with a girl from the other side of the tracks, Jenny Gardner (Kim Delaney). Other notable soap roles include NBC&#x27;s &quot;Another World&quot; as Jamie Frame (1986–1990), and ABC&#x27;s &quot;One Life to Live&quot; as attorney Sam Rappaport (2001—2003), taking over from actor Kale Browne.

In 2007, Lau played Greeber in &quot;Scituate&quot;, a play written by Martin Casella and directed by David Hilder, at TBG Arts Mainstage in New York City. Soap opera critic for Atlantic Canada&#x27;s Breakfast Television Matthew Borden claimed that this role would solidify Laurence as a big time soap opera actor.
On May 20, 2008, Lau returned to &quot;All My Children&quot; as Greg Nelson to catch up with old pals Jesse and Angie Hubbard and brother-in-law Tad Martin.

On August 17, 2008, Lau joined the cast of &quot;As the World Turns&quot; in the recurring role of Brian Wheatley. Following the end of his stint on &quot;ATWT&quot;, Lau booked the pilot &quot;Upstate&quot;, which filmed on location in Syracuse, New York. However, the pilot was not picked up by a network in time for the next television season.

Lau also made appearances on primetime television shows including ABC&#x27;s &quot;The Love Boat&quot;, CBS&#x27; &quot;The Waltons&quot;, NBC&#x27;s &quot;Frasier&quot;, and CBS&#x27; &quot;JAG&quot; and &quot;&quot;.

Lau has also appeared on stage productions such as &quot;Arrivals&quot;, &quot;Spine&quot;, &quot;The Exonerated&quot;, &quot;The Goat&quot;, &quot;Becky&#x27;s New Car&quot;, &quot;Scituate&quot;, &quot;God of Carnage&quot;, and &quot;Psycho Therapy&quot;. On stage he has played Steve Heidebrecht in the national tour of &quot;&quot; starring Estelle Parsons, as well as numerous roles Off-Broadway and at regional theaters throughout the U.S.

== Filmography ==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
==References==
==External links==
*
*
*Sam Rappaport profile from OLTL Online
*Greg Nelson profile from The AMC Pages</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15524928" start="0" end="18" title="Laurence Lau" label="Laurence Henry Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="118" end="128" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="214" end="224" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="226" end="236" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q983805" start="252" end="271" title="Lake Oswego, Oregon" label="Lake Oswego, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="285" end="304" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="309" end="333" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093154" start="405" end="420" title="Eight Is Enough" label="Eight Is Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606057" start="483" end="494" title="Greg Nelson (All My Children)" label="Greg Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205474" start="504" end="519" title="All My Children" label="All My Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q231780" start="637" end="648" title="Kim Delaney" label="Kim Delaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="684" end="694" title="NBC" label="NBC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="701" end="714" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561767" start="724" end="735" title="Jamie Frame" label="Jamie Frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="770" end="786" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q11822378" start="805" end="818" title="Sam Rappaport (One Life to Live)" label="Sam Rappaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185774" start="855" end="866" title="Kale Browne" label="Kale Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715707" start="988" end="1006" title="The Barrow Group" label="TBG Arts Mainstage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959460" start="1070" end="1090" title="Breakfast Television" label="Breakfast Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186440" start="1297" end="1310" title="Angie Hubbard" label="Angie Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674240" start="1330" end="1340" title="Tad Martin (All My Children)" label="Tad Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="1392" end="1410" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965611" start="1442" end="1456" title="Brian Wheatley" label="Brian Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="1580" end="1598" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="1774" end="1787" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1795" end="1804" title="CBS" label="CBS&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48777" start="1811" end="1822" title="The Waltons" label="The Waltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1830" end="1840" title="NBC" label="NBC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="1847" end="1854" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q754197" start="1882" end="1885" title="JAG (TV series)" label="JAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193969" start="2115" end="2129" title="God of Carnage" label="God of Carnage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706551" wikidata="Q3543469" url="?curid=706551" title="Fury (DC Comics)">
<text>Fury is the codename shared by three DC Comics superheroes, two of whom are mother and daughter, both of whom are directly connected with the Furies of mythology, and the third who is an altogether different character.

Lyta Hall appears in the drama series &quot;The Sandman&quot; (2022), portrayed by Razane Jammal.

==Fictional character biography==
===Hippolyta &quot;Lyta&quot; Trevor===
====Pre-Crisis====
Originally Fury was Hippolyta &quot;Lyta&quot; Trevor, the daughter of the Golden Age Wonder Woman and Steve Trevor; Lyta inherited all her mother&#x27;s powers. She was introduced in &quot;Wonder Woman&quot; (vol. 1) #300. Like most Golden Age-related characters at the time, Lyta lived on the parallel world of &quot;Earth-Two&quot;.

Lyta later adopted the identity of &quot;The Fury&quot;, named after the Furies of mythology, and was one of the founding members of Infinity Inc., in the book of the same name written by Roy Thomas. She began a relationship with her teammate Hector Hall, the Silver Scarab, whom she had met as a child; they reunited as classmates at UCLA. Shortly after their decision to marry, Hector was possessed by an enemy of his father, Hawkman, and killed. Fury was pregnant with Hector&#x27;s child, and it was instrumental in the Silver Scarab&#x27;s defeat. In &quot;52&quot;, a new Earth-2 with a similar history is created, and Lyta Trevor serves as a member of the Justice Society Infinity.

Lyta, like all her Infinity Inc. counterparts, briefly made an appearance during the DC &quot;Convergence&quot; crossover. Powerless and trapped on Telos, Lyta Trevor became a police officer before regaining her powers and taking on a Post-Crisis version of Jonah Hex. Eventually, Lyta and all of Infinity Inc. take over for the Justice Society on a returned Earth-2.

====Post-&quot;Crisis&quot;====
Following the 1985 miniseries &quot;Crisis on Infinite Earths&quot;, the Golden Age Wonder Woman retroactively no longer existed, and Lyta was now the daughter of the newly created character Helena Kosmatos, the Golden Age Fury (a Greek superheroine and a member of the All-Star Squadron, and an avatar of the Fury Tisiphone) and had been raised by Joan Trevor (née Dale), the Quality Comics superheroine Miss America, and her husband, Derek. Lyta was told of her mother&#x27;s history by Alecto, and visited yearly by the time-travelling Hippolyta, who trained Lyta as a heroine.

For a while, Lyta served with Infinity, Inc., but eventually left the team to bear a child. At home, Lyta was visited by a resurrected Hector Hall. After his death, Hall mistakenly believed he had been chosen as the Guardian of Dreams, the Sandman, and joined the real Sandman in the Dream Dimension, where they had adventures masterminded by the two schemers Brute and Glob.
In Neil Gaiman&#x27;s &quot;The Sandman&quot;, it was revealed that the Dream Dimension was a portion of the Dreaming enclosed by Brute and Glob during Morpheus&#x27; imprisonment, as a domain of their own. Upon Morpheus&#x27; return, Hector&#x27;s soul was released and Lyta was sent back to Earth, where she gave birth to their son. Afterwards, Lyta blamed Morpheus for Hector&#x27;s death; but Morpheus visited the child, named him Daniel, and claimed him as an heir. When Daniel was later captured by Loki and Robin Goodfellow, Lyta invoked the Furies to destroy Morpheus, whereupon Daniel became the new Lord of the Dreaming.

At the wake held for Morpheus, Lyta met her son in his new role. He gave her his protection from the immortals offended by her, and returned her to the waking world.
Lyta&#x27;s story continued in the graphic novel &quot;Sandman Presents: The Furies&quot;. She appeared in &quot;JSA&quot; where she was reunited with Hector, now reincarnated as Doctor Fate. At some point between the graphic novel and her return in &quot;JSA&quot;, the evil wizard Mordru had captured Lyta and imprisoned her in Dr. Fate&#x27;s amulet. Once freed, she rejoined her husband and later regained her true memories of Daniel.

During the Spectre&#x27;s quest to destroy magic throughout the DC Universe, he banished Doctor Fate and Lyta to a freezing mountain, later identified as part of Hell. In &quot;JSA&quot; #80, Lyta recalls being visited by Daniel in a dream, where he offers to bring Lyta and Hector to the Dreaming for all eternity; because Hector is dying, Lyta accepts the offer.

===Helena Kosmatos===

Helena Kosmatos was a new character named &quot;Fury&quot;, created to replace the Golden Age Wonder Woman as Lyta Trevor&#x27;s biological mother. She began appearing in Thomas&#x27; &quot;Young All-Stars&quot;, a book set in World War II, and her backstory was revealed in &quot;Secret Origins&quot; #12. She was a Greek national who had learned her brother was co-operating with Italian Fascists who previously killed her father. When she confronted her brother with this revelation in front of their mother, it was too much for the widow to take and she died of an instant heart attack. Wishing revenge upon her brother, she was approached by Tisiphone, one of the Eumenides or Furies, who gave her a suit of magic armor, which increased her strength, speed and stamina. When angered, she became an avatar of Tisiphone, and it was in this state that she killed her brother.

She was later briefly released from this possession, and retained the other powers, but is once again acting as Tisiphone&#x27;s avatar.

At one point, the Amazon Queen Hippolyta took over the role of Wonder Woman and traveled back in time to aid the JSA against the Nazis. During this time, Helena began to look to Hippolyta as a mother figure and believed that she was indeed the daughter of the Amazon queen, despite the knowledge that her true parents were killed during the war. When Queen Hippolyta returned to her own time, Helena sought a magical means to gain eternal youth; this was accomplished via a magical document that, if destroyed, would revert Helena to her true age and possible death. After this was done, Helena met Hippolyta&#x27;s true daughter Diana and took an immediate dislike to her. By this point, Helena&#x27;s mental state was near collapse, as she began to behave irrationally. Diana took her to Themyscira, where Hippolyta addressed Helena as a daughter to support her fragile psyche. After Hippolyta&#x27;s death during the &quot;Our Worlds At War&quot; saga, Helena went into mourning and much of her mental imbalance was resolved. Thereafter she served Artemis and Philippus as a trusted aide. Her powers were briefly stolen from her by Barbara Ann Minerva whose role as the Cheetah had been usurped by Sebastian Ballestros. Minerva used the power of Tisiphone to kill Ballestros, regaining her Cheetah form, and restored Helena&#x27;s powers.

During the events of &quot;Infinite Crisis&quot;, OMACs engaged the Amazons of Themyscira in battle, and the Amazons relocated their island home to another plane of existence. Helena Kosmatos is shown leaving with the other Amazons. A year after their departure, the Amazons return to wage war on the U.S., which takes place in the &quot;Amazons Attack&quot; storyline. Helena is never shown as part of this return.

===Erik Storn===
In &quot;52&quot; Week 21, a new Infinity Inc. created by Lex Luthor was introduced, with a male hero going by the name of Fury. The newest Fury had been given blackened skin and razor-sharp claws from submitting to Luthor&#x27;s Everyman Project. &quot;Infinity Inc.&quot; #1 (Sept. 2007) reveals that, after Luthor&#x27;s arrest and after the project was shut down, Erik has become depressed when his powers were shut down and has developed a stuttering problem. He is also suffering from hot flashes and mistakenly took his mother&#x27;s clothes from the laundry one day. In &quot;Infinity Inc.&quot; #3, Erik reveals that the stutter is a defense mechanism to hide his desire for self-castration. He also transforms into a fighting woman named &quot;Erika&quot;. In #8, Erik/Erika is given a costume and the superhero name &quot;Amazing Woman&quot;.

Erik is later found and tortured by , having discovered, and shared with Jimmy Olsen, precious information about &quot;Project 7734&quot;, the secret agenda of General Sam Lane for Kryptonians. Shifting one last time to the all-powerful Erika body, Erik is able to put Jimmy in contact with Natasha Irons before dying.

== Powers and abilities ==
Fury has superhuman strength, speed and endurance, enhanced senses and durability, animal empathy, and regenerative healing factor. She is also invulnerable to magic.

== Other versions ==
An alternate universe variant of Fury from Earth-2 appears in &quot;&quot;&quot;The New 52&quot;. This version is the daughter of Wonder Woman and Steppenwolf and the last living Amazon after the others were killed during an Apokoliptian invasion.

== In other media ==

* A character inspired by the Lyta Trevor and Helena Kosmatos incarnations of Fury called Aresia appears in the &quot;Justice League&quot; episode &quot;Fury&quot;, voiced by Julie Bowen. She is a refugee who was adopted by the Amazons after washing up on Themyscira. As an adult, she leaves Themyscira and allies with Lex Luthor&#x27;s Injustice Gang to kill all men using an artificial magic virus. While battling the Justice League, Aresia is killed when her plane crashes, after which the League creates an antidote for her virus.
* An original incarnation of Fury inspired by the Erik Storn incarnation named Rosa appears in &quot;Young Justice&quot;, voiced by Quei Tann. Similarly to Storn, Rosa is a member of Lex Luthor&#x27;s Infinity Inc., which is later reworked into the Infinitors. While not stated in the series, series developer Greg Weisman confirmed Rosa to be a transgender woman when he retweeted a question from a Twitter user. 
* Lyta Hall appears in &quot;The Sandman&quot;, portrayed by Razane Jammal.

==References==

==External links==
* The Furies (article by Bob Rozakis)
* Bio on dcdatabaseproject</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3543469" start="0" end="4" title="Fury (DC Comics)" label="Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="37" end="46" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="47" end="56" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="142" end="148" title="Erinyes" label="Furies"/>
<link wikidata="Q92590789" start="264" end="275" title="The Sandman (TV series)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581466" start="303" end="316" title="Razane Jammal" label="Razane Jammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q784877" start="487" end="497" title="Golden Age of Comic Books" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782438" start="498" end="510" title="Wonder Woman (Earth-Two)" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437734" start="515" end="527" title="Steve Trevor" label="Steve Trevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752718" start="731" end="740" title="Earth-Two" label="Earth-Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="832" end="841" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748105" start="882" end="895" title="Infinity Inc." label="Infinity Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q981976" start="937" end="947" title="Roy Thomas" label="Roy Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784082" start="992" end="1003" title="Hector Hall" label="Hector Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="1084" end="1088" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359610" start="1177" end="1184" title="Hawkman" label="Hawkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634704" start="1311" end="1313" title="52 (comics)" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702054" start="1533" end="1544" title="Convergence (comics)" label="Convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q522623" start="1876" end="1901" title="Crisis on Infinite Earths" label="Crisis on Infinite Earths"/>
<link wikidata="Q780667" start="2110" end="2127" title="All-Star Squadron" label="All-Star Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="2136" end="2142" title="avatar" label="avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="2150" end="2154" title="Erinyes" label="Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991817" start="2155" end="2164" title="Tisiphone" label="Tisiphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648355" start="2217" end="2231" title="Quality Comics" label="Quality Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q735193" start="2245" end="2257" title="Miss America (DC Comics)" label="Miss America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643451" start="2329" end="2335" title="Alecto" label="Alecto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801710" start="2379" end="2388" title="Hippolyta (DC Comics)" label="Hippolyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748105" start="2452" end="2466" title="Infinity, Inc." label="Infinity, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q72512" start="2662" end="2669" title="Sandman (DC Comics)" label="Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="2801" end="2812" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="2826" end="2837" title="The Sandman (comic book series)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964090" start="2907" end="2915" title="Dreaming (comics)" label="Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528136" start="2950" end="2958" title="Dream (DC Comics)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528136" start="3233" end="3239" title="Daniel Hall (comics)" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="3303" end="3307" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q14126754" start="3312" end="3328" title="Robin Goodfellow" label="Robin Goodfellow"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3433" end="3441" title="The Sandman: The Wake" label="the wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536659" start="3709" end="3712" title="Justice Society of America" label="JSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233853" start="3775" end="3786" title="Doctor Fate" label="Doctor Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862892" start="3879" end="3885" title="Mordru" label="Mordru"/>
<link wikidata="Q496879" start="4047" end="4054" title="Spectre (DC Comics character)" label="Spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798506" start="4198" end="4202" title="Hell (DC Comics)" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528136" start="4258" end="4264" title="Daniel Hall (comics)" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747473" start="4615" end="4630" title="Young All-Stars" label="Young All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4652" end="4664" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444066" start="4706" end="4720" title="Secret Origins" label="Secret Origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991817" start="5072" end="5081" title="Tisiphone" label="Tisiphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="5094" end="5103" title="Erinyes" label="Eumenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="5144" end="5149" title="armor" label="armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="5228" end="5234" title="avatar" label="avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805205" start="5460" end="5466" title="Amazons (DC Comics)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801710" start="5467" end="5482" title="Hippolyta (DC Comics)" label="Queen Hippolyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="5505" end="5517" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536659" start="5555" end="5558" title="Justice Society of America" label="JSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809472" start="6232" end="6242" title="Themyscira (DC Comics)" label="Themyscira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147981" start="6368" end="6385" title="Our Worlds At War" label="Our Worlds At War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822884" start="6493" end="6500" title="Artemis of Bana-Mighdall" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185497" start="6505" end="6514" title="Philippus (fictional character)" label="Philippus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6577" end="6596" title="Cheetah (comics)#Barbara Ann Minerva" label="Barbara Ann Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620997" start="6643" end="6663" title="Sebastian Ballesteros" label="Sebastian Ballestros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414145" start="6812" end="6827" title="Infinite Crisis" label="Infinite Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072685" start="6835" end="6840" title="OMACs" label="OMACs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740912" start="7123" end="7137" title="Amazons Attack" label="Amazons Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634704" start="7228" end="7230" title="52 (comics)" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748105" start="7252" end="7265" title="Infinity Inc." label="Infinity Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q694790" start="7277" end="7287" title="Lex Luthor" label="Lex Luthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866472" start="7862" end="7879" title="defense mechanism" label="defense mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="7908" end="7918" title="castration" label="castration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689418" start="8147" end="8158" title="Jimmy Olsen" label="Jimmy Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703510" start="8242" end="8250" title="Sam Lane (comics)" label="Sam Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="8690" end="8700" title="The New 52" label="The New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973228" start="8757" end="8768" title="Steppenwolf (character)" label="Steppenwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411016" start="8835" end="8847" title="Apokolips" label="Apokoliptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q250036" start="8999" end="9013" title="Justice League (TV series)" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q40248" start="9056" end="9067" title="Julie Bowen" label="Julie Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805205" start="9109" end="9116" title="Amazons (DC Comics)" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q694790" start="9200" end="9210" title="Lex Luthor" label="Lex Luthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880064" start="9218" end="9232" title="Injustice Gang" label="Injustice Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="9301" end="9315" title="Justice League" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q785430" start="9517" end="9530" title="Young Justice (TV series)" label="Young Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748105" start="9617" end="9630" title="Infinity Inc." label="Infinity Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1544996" start="9726" end="9738" title="Greg Weisman" label="Greg Weisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q92590789" start="9860" end="9871" title="The Sandman (TV series)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581466" start="9892" end="9905" title="Razane Jammal" label="Razane Jammal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706566" wikidata="Q1265451" url="?curid=706566" title="Duncan Sheik">
<text>Duncan Sheik (born November 18, 1969) is an American singer-songwriter, composer, and actor. Sheik is known for his 1996 debut single &quot;Barely Breathing&quot;, which earned him a Grammy Award nomination for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance. He has composed music for motion pictures and Broadway musicals, winning the 2007 Tony Awards for Best Original Score and Best Orchestrations for his work on the musical &quot;Spring Awakening&quot;.

==Early life==
Sheik is a native of Montclair, New Jersey. Following his parents&#x27; divorce, he split time between his father&#x27;s house in New Jersey and his mother&#x27;s home in South Carolina. He is the half-brother of Broadway actress Kacie Sheik. Sheik&#x27;s Juilliard-trained grandmother introduced him to the piano, and he later took up the electric guitar. By age 12, he was playing guitar with high school students in a cover band. After graduating from Phillips Academy, Andover in 1988, Sheik studied semiotics at Brown University; while at Brown, he played guitar in a band with fellow Brown student Lisa Loeb. Following his graduation from Brown in 1992, he moved to Los Angeles.

==Career==
Early in his musical career, Sheik played guitar for other artists, including Liz and Lisa (with Elizabeth Mitchell and Lisa Loeb). Sheik also played on His Boy Elroy&#x27;s 1993 album through his connections from a fellow Brown alum, Tracee Ellis Ross.

===Singer-songwriter===
In 1996, Sheik released his self-titled debut album, which was certified gold. The album featured the hit single &quot;Barely Breathing&quot;, which peaked at number 16 and remained on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 for 55 consecutive weeks. &quot;Barely Breathing&quot; also enjoyed Top 20 success on Adult Contemporary radio, reached No. 2 on the Adult Top 40 charts, and garnered Sheik a Grammy Award nomination for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance.

In 1998, Sheik recorded &quot;Embraceable You&quot; for &quot;Red Hot + Rhapsody&quot;, a George Gershwin tribute to increase AIDS awareness, and also recorded &quot;Songbird&quot; for another tribute, &quot;Legacy: A Tribute to Fleetwood Mac&#x27;s Rumours&quot;. Also in 1998, Sheik released &quot;Humming&quot;, an experimental follow-up with string arrangements.

Sheik sang a duet with singer Howard Jones on Jones&#x27; 2000 single entitled &quot;Someone You Need&quot;.

Sheik released &quot;Phantom Moon&quot;, a Nick Drake-influenced album on which he collaborated with poet and writer Steven Sater, in 2001. The following year, Sheik released &quot;Daylight&quot;, a brighter, more modern-sounding album which included the singles, &quot;On A High&quot; and &quot;Half-Life&quot;. After a four-year recording break, Sheik released &quot;White Limousine&quot; (2006), an album which included companion software on a DVD-ROM to remix individual tracks. In 2008, Sheik was a judge at the 7th annual Independent Music Awards.

In 2009 he released &quot;Whisper House&quot;, a concept album which provided the score for the musical of the same name. The stage musical premiered at The Old Globe Theatre in San Diego in January 2010, after a workshop at Vassar College, produced by New York Stage and Film in 2009.

In 2011, Sheik released &quot;Covers 80&#x27;s&quot;, an album including covers of popular 1980s songs. Concert dates in support of the album were later canceled due to Sheik seeking treatment for alcohol addiction. A remixed version of the album was released the following year. Sheik released a new studio album entitled &quot;Legerdemain&quot; in October 2015.

===Composer===
In addition to being a singer-songwriter, Sheik has also composed music for plays, musicals, and movie soundtracks. He composed original music for the 2002 New York Shakespeare Festival production of &quot;Twelfth Night&quot;.

In 2004, he composed the score for the film &quot;A Home at the End of the World&quot;. The &quot;AllMusic&quot; reviewer wrote: &quot;...takes the sensitivity and tension of the film&#x27;s plot and crafts incidental music and new songs that complement the movie well.&quot; He composed the score for the 2005 film &quot;Through the Fire&quot; with Pete Miser.

Sheik wrote the music for &quot;Spring Awakening&quot; (2006) in collaboration with Steven Sater. Written over a period of eight years, the musical, which premiered off-Broadway during the summer, opened on Broadway to critical acclaim later in the fall. The musical was based on the controversial German expressionist play &quot;The Awakening of Spring&quot;, written by Frank Wedekind. Sheik won the 2006 Tony Award for Best Orchestrations for his work on &quot;Spring Awakening&quot;, and he and Sater won a Tony Award for Best Original Score. In addition, &quot;Spring Awakening&quot; won the Tony Award for Best Musical and a Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album. The guitar that Sheik used to compose songs for &quot;Spring Awakening&quot; was displayed at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center. As of 2012, Sheik was composing music for a feature-film adaptation of &quot;Spring Awakening&quot;, an adaptation almost a decade in the making.

In 2012, Sheik wrote &quot;Alice By Heart&quot;, an adaptation of Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;, along with collaborator Sater. Directed by Jessie Nelson with musical direction by Lance Horne, the musical was workshopped at the Royal National Theatre and commissioned by the National Theatre Connections.

Sheik wrote the music and lyrics to the 2013 musical adaptation of &quot;American Psycho&quot;, which opened at the Almeida Theatre in London, and was later staged on Broadway in 2016.

In 2013, Sheik wrote the music for the musical adaptation of the novel &quot;Because of Winn-Dixie&quot;, which premiered at the Arkansas Repertory Theatre. &quot;Dixie&quot; was a collaboration with then-director John Tartaglia and Nell Benjamin, who wrote the book and lyrics. The musical ran at the Goodspeed Opera House, East Haddam, Connecticut from July 2019 to September 2019, directed by John Rando.

In 2015, Sheik wrote the musical thriller &quot;Noir&quot; with Kyle Jarrow. It premiered as part of New York Stage and Film&#x27;s season in July to August 2015 at the Powerhouse Theater at Vassar College. Inspired by live radio plays and classic film noir, the musical was directed by Rachel Chavkin.

In 2016 he prepared the music for the Shakespeare Theatre Company (Washington, D.C.) production of &quot;The Taming of the Shrew&quot;, described in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; as &quot;an assortment of preexisting songs by singer-songwriter Duncan Sheik&quot;.

===Other work===
Sheik produced singer-songwriter Micah Green&#x27;s 2000 debut album as well as his 2012 follow-up.

In 2000, Sheik wrote the foreword to &quot;The Way of Youth: Buddhist Common Sense for Handling Life&#x27;s Questions&quot;, by Soka Gakkai International leader Daisaku Ikeda.

In 2006, Sheik recorded the song &quot;A Purple Trail&quot; for &quot;Other Songs and Dances, Vol. 1&quot;. In 2008, Sheik participated in &quot;Songs for Tibet: The Art of Peace&quot;, an initiative to support Tibet, Dalai Lama, and Tenzin Gyatso.

==Personal life==
Concert dates in support of Sheik&#x27;s 2011 album &quot;Covers 80&#x27;s&quot; were canceled when Sheik sought treatment for alcohol use disorder. In a message to fans on his tumblr blog, Sheik noted that he had entered a treatment center on the same day his latest album was released and had told his staff, &quot;My record is coming &quot;out&quot; and I’m checking &quot;in&quot;.&quot;

Sheik has a daughter with his girlfriend, model Nora Ariffin.

Sheik practices Nichiren Buddhism and is a member of the US branch of the worldwide Buddhist association Soka Gakkai International.

==Awards and nominations==
==See also==
*List of number-one dance hits (United States)
*List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Duncan Sheik at Rounder Records</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1265451" start="0" end="12" title="Duncan Sheik" label="Duncan Sheik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634951" start="140" end="156" title="Barely Breathing" label="Barely Breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="183" end="195" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q947090" start="211" end="242" title="Best Male Pop Vocal Performance" label="Best Male Pop Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="326" end="337" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q579927" start="420" end="436" title="Spring Awakening (musical)" label="Spring Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q678437" start="481" end="502" title="Montclair, New Jersey" label="Montclair, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="716" end="725" title="Juilliard" label="Juilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="915" end="940" title="Phillips Academy" label="Phillips Academy, Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="964" end="973" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="977" end="993" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q237654" start="1064" end="1073" title="Lisa Loeb" label="Lisa Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660341" start="1235" end="1247" title="Liz and Lisa" label="Liz and Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363226" start="1254" end="1272" title="Elizabeth Mitchell (musician)" label="Elizabeth Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q237654" start="1277" end="1286" title="Lisa Loeb" label="Lisa Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q15044561" start="1310" end="1323" title="His Boy Elroy" label="His Boy Elroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q534371" start="1392" end="1409" title="Tracee Ellis Ross" label="Tracee Ellis Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3716243" start="1476" end="1487" title="Duncan Sheik (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634951" start="1555" end="1571" title="Barely Breathing" label="Barely Breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1625" end="1654" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1830" end="1842" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q947090" start="1858" end="1889" title="Best Male Pop Vocal Performance" label="Best Male Pop Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304337" start="1954" end="1972" title="Red Hot + Rhapsody" label="Red Hot + Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="1982" end="1997" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787602" start="2192" end="2199" title="Humming (album)" label="Humming"/>
<link wikidata="Q712820" start="2290" end="2302" title="Howard Jones (British musician)" label="Howard Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901268" start="2391" end="2403" title="Phantom Moon" label="Phantom Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211588" start="2413" end="2423" title="Nick Drake" label="Nick Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973444" start="2487" end="2499" title="Steven Sater" label="Steven Sater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703823" start="2551" end="2559" title="Daylight (Duncan Sheik album)" label="Daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091237" start="2640" end="2649" title="On A High" label="On A High"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019537" start="2739" end="2754" title="White Limousine" label="White Limousine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="2817" end="2824" title="DVD-ROM" label="DVD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019496" start="2951" end="2964" title="Whisper House" label="Whisper House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084094" start="3078" end="3099" title="Old Globe Theatre" label="The Old Globe Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093794" start="3150" end="3164" title="Vassar College" label="Vassar College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878403" start="3178" end="3201" title="New York Stage and Film" label="New York Stage and Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179278" start="3242" end="3258" title="Covers 80&amp;#x27;s" label="Covers 80&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q123459449" start="3541" end="3552" title="Legerdemain (album)" label="Legerdemain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013975" start="3748" end="3777" title="New York Shakespeare Festival" label="New York Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="3798" end="3811" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q954703" start="3870" end="3900" title="A Home at the End of the World (film)" label="A Home at the End of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798454" start="4142" end="4158" title="Through the Fire (2005 film)" label="Through the Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q579927" start="4215" end="4231" title="Spring Awakening (Musical)" label="Spring Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973444" start="4267" end="4279" title="Steven Sater" label="Steven Sater"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="4488" end="4501" title="expressionism" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549073" start="4513" end="4536" title="Spring Awakening (play)" label="The Awakening of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q57619" start="4555" end="4569" title="Frank Wedekind" label="Frank Wedekind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821797" start="4590" end="4624" title="Tony Award for Best Orchestrations" label="Tony Award for Best Orchestrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478089" start="4694" end="4728" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score" label="Tony Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="4780" end="4807" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="4814" end="4826" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="4954" end="4977" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="5005" end="5019" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117256" start="5195" end="5209" title="Alice by Heart" label="Alice By Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="5234" end="5247" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="5261" end="5298" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177700" start="5349" end="5362" title="Jessie Nelson (filmmaker)" label="Jessie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="5437" end="5459" title="Royal National Theatre" label="Royal National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978928" start="5484" end="5512" title="National Theatre Connections" label="National Theatre Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961329" start="5588" end="5603" title="American Psycho (musical)" label="American Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839111" start="5631" end="5646" title="Almeida Theatre" label="Almeida Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q454163" start="5778" end="5799" title="Because of Winn-Dixie" label="Because of Winn-Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791857" start="5830" end="5856" title="Arkansas Repertory Theatre" label="Arkansas Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260257" start="5915" end="5929" title="John Tartaglia" label="John Tartaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61902700" start="5934" end="5947" title="Nell Benjamin" label="Nell Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583618" start="6003" end="6024" title="Goodspeed Opera House" label="Goodspeed Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204162" start="6097" end="6107" title="John Rando" label="John Rando"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451207" start="6174" end="6185" title="Kyle Jarrow" label="Kyle Jarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206632" start="6279" end="6297" title="Powerhouse Theater" label="Powerhouse Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462820" start="6452" end="6479" title="Shakespeare Theatre Company" label="Shakespeare Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q332387" start="6519" end="6542" title="The Taming of the Shrew" label="The Taming of the Shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q11398042" start="6927" end="6952" title="Soka Gakkai International" label="Soka Gakkai International"/>
<link wikidata="Q467395" start="6960" end="6973" title="Daisaku Ikeda" label="Daisaku Ikeda"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7121" end="7154" title="Songs for Tibet: The Art of Peace" label="Songs for Tibet: The Art of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="7187" end="7192" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="7194" end="7204" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="7210" end="7223" title="Tenzin Gyatso" label="Tenzin Gyatso"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="7421" end="7427" title="tumblr" label="tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q52584997" start="7685" end="7697" title="Nora Ariffin" label="Nora Ariffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q871371" start="7716" end="7733" title="Nichiren Buddhism" label="Nichiren Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11398042" start="7805" end="7830" title="Soka Gakkai International" label="Soka Gakkai International"/>
<link wikidata="Q105771390" start="7874" end="7919" title="List of number-one dance hits (United States)" label="List of number-one dance hits (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606235" start="7921" end="7981" title="List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart" label="List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164531" start="8038" end="8053" title="Rounder Records" label="Rounder Records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706576" wikidata="Q595456" url="?curid=706576" title="Suffixaufnahme">
<text>Suffixaufnahme (, &quot;suffix resumption&quot;), also known as case stacking, is a linguistic phenomenon used in forming a genitive construction, whereby prototypically a genitive noun agrees with its head noun. The term Suffixaufnahme itself is literally translated as &quot;taking up of suffixes&quot;, which can be interpreted as the identical case marking of different but referentially-related phrases, with the presumption that nominal phrases possess a flat or non-configurational syntax. Across syntactic theories, case is seen as a bundle of features, and case agreement as the identity of case features. It was first recognized in Old Georgian and some other Caucasian and ancient Middle Eastern languages as well as many Australian languages, and almost invariably coincides with agglutinativity.

The usage of case stacking is not limited to genitive constructions, although the genitive case is involved in the majority of occurrences across languages. Cross-linguistic variations in case stacking representation and functions can be found. In general, case-stacking describes the phenomenon whereby a single word may bear multiple cases reflecting its relation to a number of different syntactic elements. It is important in the development of theories of inflectional morphology and the establishment of the relation between morphology and syntax.

== Examples of case-stacking ==

=== Kayardild ===
In Kayardild, the combination of adnominal cases (ablative and genitive) in possessor-like functions, and various relational and adverbial (e.g., spatial) cases is common. Case functions may be combined where ablative functions similar to a genitive adnominal case, and the instrumental case is applied to the entire NP, as seen in the following example :

From this example, all words of the relevant phrase share the case marking which is assigned to the phrase as a whole, namely, the instrumental case. This follows Evans&#x27;s (1995) total concord principle, which states that case inflections are distributed over all sub-constituents regardless of the level they are originated from (i.e., the head or its dependents).

A similar example can be illustrated:

In this example, every item is marked by the oblique case (OBL), which indicates the non–indicative mood. The object is marked with the modal ablative case (MABL) and the instrumental adjunct by the instrumental (INST), and the possessor phrase by an additional genitive (GEN) as well.

In addition, Kayardild also has a system of modal (i.e., aspect-mood) cases, which involves the use of the same case suffixes found in the adnominal and adverbial systems. Non-subject NPs are marked for a case category that is determined by the aspect-mood domain they are in. For example, if the verb has the past suffixal inflection, all non-subject nouns will then bear the modal ablative case (MABL).

The modal locative (MLOC) marks two constituents as being in the scope of the (unmarked) &quot;instantiated&quot; verb category, whereas the utilitive case (UTIL) expresses an expected use.

Case-stacking and concord

One of the functions of the modal cases proposed by Heath (2010) is that, such internal operation of case-stacking may mark the limits of the domain through the repetition of all nouns in the scopal domain of a clause-level inflectional category. The modal cases is used to define the boundaries of clauses.

Case-stacking is closely relevant to the concept of concord, which has also been studied in other case-stacking languages such as Lardil and Australian languages in general. The term &quot;concord&quot; is defined as &quot;&quot;the morphological realization, on multiple words dominated by a syntactic node n, of a morphosyntactic feature value associated with n&quot;.&quot;

In this example, all three words are dominated by the matrix DP node, and all three bear a proprietive case (PROP). The words within the subordinate DP [&quot;balarrinabawu dangkanabawu&quot;] (&#x27;white man&#x27;) are dominated by both the matrix and the subordinate node, so both bear the inflectional ablative case (ABL) and proprietive case (PROP). This clearly illustrates the relationship of concord, where the sub-constituents of a syntactic node (i.e., matrix DP, in this example) carry the associating morphosyntactic features.

Syntactic structure in Kayardild case-stacking

The height of the syntactic nodes where features and cases attach to within the tree can vary by the relative positions of their domains. When a word carries more than one feature, its relative syntactic height generally corresponds to the linear order of its morphological realization.

=== Lardil ===
Lardil is an Australian language that allows case-stacking where nominals may surface with multiple case affixes. When new morphology is added to a nominal with a semantically uninterpretable case (e.g., accusative), the uninterpretable case is eliminated; however, when a semantically interpretable case is added (e.g., instrumental), the new morphology may be stacked outside the case morpheme. Richards (2013) argues that such uninterpretable cases are first assigned, then dropped.

From this example, the possessor of the direct object is marked with the genitive suffix &quot;‐ngan&quot; first, then with another suffix -&quot;i&quot; to indicate accusative. It is presumed that the genitive case is assigned by DP internal structures, i.e., the determiner itself; whereas the subsequent cases and features are assigned by higher heads, i.e., the verb, in the above example. This example illustrates the two different sources for the cases involved in stacking, as the genitive case morpheme and the accusative case morpheme are c-commanded and assigned by different constituents.

The order of case is also important in Lardil. In the following example (a), the direct object, &quot;wangalkuru&quot; [boomerang‐FUT-ACC], bears future case determined by tense concord within its own clause, and then followed by a subsequent accusative suffix determined by case concord with the subject &quot;maruni&quot; [boy‐ACC]. These affixes are arranged in this order, and the opposite order of affixation would yield an unattested form in (b).

It is suggested that the affixation order is determined by the order of their assignment. In (a), the future case is assigned by the T of the embedded control clause, and the accusative suffix by the case concord with the subject. This results in the order of &#x27;FUT-ACC&#x27; in the stacking of cases.

=== Korean ===
Korean is a language that exhibits the patterns of case stacking. In general, Korean prohibits a nominal from bearing both the nominative and the accusative case at the same time. However, the nominal can appear in either the dative case, the nominative case, or the accusative case, or in multiple cases where one is stacked on top of the other.

In this example, the nominative case morpheme -&quot;ka&quot; is optionally suffixed to the subject (i.e., &quot;Chulsoo&quot;) in addition to the dative suffix -&quot;eykey&quot;. The nature and assignment of -&quot;ka&quot; in the context of case-stacking is an ongoing debate. In addition, the acceptance of case-stacking in Korean speakers may vary upon context. Some speakers may need to consider case stacking in particular contexts in order to accept it (e.g., spoken context). However, judgment studies also show that Korean speakers judge double accusative ditransitives as unacceptable yet they are not completely avoided when completing sentences. In fact, case stacking is difficult for speakers to accept in most situations unless a particle such as &quot;man&quot; &#x27;only&#x27; or &quot;kkaci&quot; &#x27;even&#x27; intervenes between the dative and nominative case markers, such as the following example:

Although case-stacking has been used in various inflectional suffixes in other languages, in Korean, it is ungrammatical to stack the negator before a predicate. This is different from the restrictions on multiple occurrences of the negative prefixes in Korean, which states that a predicate can have only one of these prefixes, resulting in ungrammaticality in forms such as *&quot;pul-pul&quot;-A, *&quot;pi-pi&quot;-A, etc. However, the short-form negation &quot;an(i)&quot; can precede a negative prefix such as &quot;pu(l)&quot;-, &quot;pi&quot;-, and &quot;mi&quot;-, but not before another short-form negation of &quot;an(i)&quot; itself. This results in attested forms such &quot;an(i) pul-kanungha&quot;- &#x27;impossible&#x27;, and &quot;an(i) pi-kwahakceki-&quot; &#x27;unscientific&#x27;, as well as unattested forms like *&quot;an(i) an(i) kanungha-&quot;, and *&quot;an(i) an(i) kwahakceki-&quot;.

=== Sumerian ===
In Sumerian, affixes are arranged in a specific order in the noun phrase, such that affixes may not necessarily be directly attached to nouns. The phenomenon is known as double case marking or case displacement.

In the above example, the genitive NP [&quot;kalam&quot;] (&quot;homeland&quot;) has been assigned multiple markers in reference to the head noun &quot;sons&quot;, namely, the genitive marker -&quot;ak&quot;, the plural -&quot;ene&quot;, and the dative case -&quot;ra&quot;. Sumerian nouns may be marked for case, therefore, possessive relationships (e.g., genitive), plurals, and case marking were expressed by suffixed morphemes that stacked onto one another within the noun phrase.

=== Old Georgian ===
A subject, for instance, would be marked with a subjective affix as well as a genitive affix. So, for example, in Old Georgian

the genitival noun phrase agrees in case (nominative) and number (plural) with the head noun. However, while such a possessive construction is most frequently found in Suffixaufnahme, other nominal constructions may also show similar behavior. In Old Georgian, a postpositional phrase modifying a noun could take on that noun&#x27;s case and number features:

has the ergative (also called narrative) case &quot;-ma&quot; on &quot;ertma&quot; repeated in the modifying postpositional phrase, headed by &quot;-gan&quot;.

=== Kashmiri===
Case-stacking in Kashmiri mostly occurs to genitive construction. By adding the suffix -&quot;hund&quot; or -&quot;sund&quot; to the noun, they indicate the gender and number of their modifier. The genitive takes the case marker of the argument&#x27;s function, such that the genitive is marked with the ablative case before a postposition.

In the above example, the suffixes -&quot;en&quot;, -&quot;hind&quot;, and -&quot;is&quot; are stacked onto each other after the stem [kor] (&quot;girl&quot;) to indicate the respective genitive and ablative cases involved.

== Distribution of case-stacking ==

=== Living languages ===
* Awngi (one of the Cushitic languages, which are a primary branch of the Afro-Asiatic languages)
* Basque
* Bats (one of the Nakh languages, which are a primary branch of the Northeast Caucasian languages)
* Chukchi (Chukchi–Kamchatkan languages)
* Dyirbal (one of the Dyirbalic languages, which are a primary branch of the Pama-Nyungan languages)
* Guugu Yalandji a.k.a. Gugu-Yalanji (one of the Yalanjic languages, which are a primary branch of Pama-Nyungan)
* Kanyara-Mantharta languages (a primary branch of Pama-Nyungan)
** Kanyara languages, e.g.
*** Thalanyji a.k.a. Dhalandji
** Mantharta
* Kayardild (one of the Tangkic languages)
* Korean
* Romani
* Tsakhur (one of the Lezgic languages – a primary branch of Northeast Caucasian)
* Yidiny (a primary branch of Pama-Nyungan)
*Tsez

=== Dead languages ===
* Jiwarli
* Martuthunira

=== Ancient languages ===
* Old Georgian
* Elamite
* Hurrian
* Urartian
* Lycian
* Etruscan
* Lemnian
* Sumerian

== Significance and debates on case-stacking ==

=== Theoretical issues in morphology and syntax ===
Regarding the phenomenon of Suffixaufnahme, Frans Plank (1995) has proposed several theoretical issues in morphology and syntax in his influential work as following:

* Suffixaufnahme represents an oddity in case and agreement that challenges previous theories of both. Such oddity partly originates from parts of speech and inflection patterns that have been influenced by Suffixaufnahme. For example, case-agreeing words serving as nouns rather than adjectives, and the genitive case being involved as an inflection rather than derivational, etc. Suffixaufnahme also emphasizes more on case-agreeing inflected nouns than case-agreeing derived adjectives.
* There are implications on grammatical relations since case agreement have been assumed to encode attribution, apposition, or predication.
* Noun phrase constituency and the &quot;depth&quot; or &quot;flatness&quot; of syntax are seen as a core parameter of typological variation, which may be relevant to agglutinative versus flective morphology. The contribution of morphological typology to the linguistic environment can be conducive or hostile to Suffixaufnahme itself.

=== The nature of case marking ===
==== Case for Korean case-stacking ====

One of the studied phenomena is when the &quot;nominative&quot; particle -&quot;ka&quot; can be optionally suffixed to the subject in addition to the dative particle -&quot;eykey&quot;. However, there is an ongoing debate between the cases for and against case-stacking. Traditionally, it has been assumed that &quot;ka&quot; is a case morpheme independent of the inherent dative case and is used to license NPs in the structure. It is claimed that the case of the dative subject itself is inherently insufficient to license its appearance in subject position, therefore, it must receive an additional case in its structure (e.g., the nominative case &quot;ka&quot;). By this, the nominative case itself can also be overtly realized.

This view contradicts the claim that nominative/accusative cases behave genuinely as case-markers. Instead, it suggests that case alternations and grammatical subjecthood do not require nominals to exhibit nominative stacking. However, nominative stacked nominals behave similarly like major subjects, where nominative stacking reflect their status as non-nominative major subjects.

==== Case against Korean case-stacking ====

Against the traditional approach, one of the hypotheses is made by Carson Schütze (2001) states that: &quot;&quot;Despite the initial plausibility, stacked case particles are not genuine case-markers. Even unstacked Nominative and Accusative case-markers are ambiguous between marking case and discourse functions like Topic and Focus&quot;.&quot; It is proposed that the stacked &quot;ka&quot; is not a reflection of case. Instead, it should be treated as a focus particle rather than a case morpheme. Moreover, NP subjects do not require additional morphological nominative case features to be licensed. In fact, the NP that is lexically marked as dative by its predicate is not even eligible for an additional structural case (e.g., nominative or accusative).

The evidence against traditional claims proposed by Schütze are as follows:

# Case-stacked sentences require a specific prosody to sound felicitous, e.g., an intonation phrase boundary is required after the subject. If ka were a nominative case marker, additional theories would be needed to account for this prosodic effect.
# &quot;ka&quot;-stacking is completely optional. However, when the case particle is present on the object, the nominative case on the subject of a transitive clause becomes obligatory.
# Stacked and unstacked &quot;ka&quot; can affect the distribution of subject honorification differently. Nominative subjects must trigger honorific agreement on the predicate but dative subjects cannot. If stacked &quot;ka&quot; were a nominative case, it should require honorific agreement, but it is actually disallowed.
# &quot;ka&quot;-stacking is not limited to subjects, but also occurs on locative, directional, and temporal adjuncts, etc., where structural nominative case is not assignable.
# Stacked and unstacked &quot;ka&quot; behave differently with respect to a particular kind of quantifier floating. In Korean, floated numeral quantifiers agree with their head noun in case. If stacked &quot;ka&quot; reflected morphological nominative case features, then one should allow a nominative quantifier to agree with a stacked &quot;ka&quot; subject.
# Stacking can be applied to nominative subjects and not only to the nominative case. The nominative markers can appear on the nominative subject in honorifics.
Evidence of &quot;ka&quot; as a focus marker
# Stacking can occur in wh-phrases.
# Stacking is possible on the answer to a subject wh-question.
# Stacking can occur in correction contexts.
# Stacking is compatible with overt focus markers such as &#x27;only&#x27; or honorific dative markers.
# Korean as a multiple focus language allows a double focus reading.
# &quot;ka&quot;-stacking is obligatory on the complement to the negated copula &quot;anila&quot;.
# With an indefinite dative subject, it is ambiguous between existential and specific readings; but when &quot;ka&quot; is stacked on the subject, it can only be specific.

=== Competing models in case assignment ===
One of more common models in case assignment is the Agree model, which states that structural case features are assigned to nominals by functional heads. Given a head that can assign case and a nominal that is c-commanded by the head, the case-marking associated with the head will be assigned to the nominal. Another competing model is the Dependent model, which proposes that the case that a nominal receives is dependent on the presence of other nominals in a local domain. In an ergative language (i.e., downwards), the c-commanding nominal receives dependent case; in an accusative language (i.e., upwards), the c-commanded nominal receives the dependent case. Every nominal that is not assigned a dependent case will then bear an unmarked case (i.e., &#x27;nominative&#x27; or &#x27;absolutive&#x27;). However, within the nominal domain, the unmarked case is represented as the &#x27;genitive&#x27; case. In this model, the role of individual functional heads is less direct.

The Dependent model may be applied to Korean case-stacking. The direct object is c-commanded by the subject within vP phrase.

In this example, neither the direct object &quot;John&quot; nor the subject &quot;Mary&quot; receives lexical case. The direct object &quot;John&quot; receives the dependent accusative case. However, the subject &quot;Mary&quot; receives an unmarked nominative case since it is not assigned a dependent case and its structural position does not satisfy the requirements on the realization of either the lexical or dependent case.

==See also==
* Grammar
* Genitive
* Declension

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q595456" start="0" end="14" title="Suffixaufnahme" label="Suffixaufnahme"/>
<link wikidata="Q595456" start="64" end="77" title="Suffixaufnahme" label="case stacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="84" end="94" title="linguistics" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990588" start="124" end="145" title="genitive construction" label="genitive construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="172" end="180" title="genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="186" end="192" title="Agreement (linguistics)" label="agrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277394" start="202" end="206" title="head (linguistics)" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q34834" start="642" end="654" title="Old Georgian language" label="Old Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="670" end="679" title="Caucasian language" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="692" end="703" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="733" end="753" title="Australian languages" label="Australian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q171263" start="792" end="807" title="agglutinative languages" label="agglutinativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913770" start="1419" end="1428" title="Kayardild language" label="Kayardild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915688" start="4672" end="4678" title="Lardil language" label="Lardil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="6536" end="6542" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="8742" end="8750" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="9461" end="9468" title="subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="9518" end="9523" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34834" start="9573" end="9585" title="Old Georgian" label="Old Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33552" start="10141" end="10149" title="Kashmiri language" label="Kashmiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34934" start="10755" end="10760" title="Awngi language" label="Awngi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33248" start="10773" end="10791" title="Cushitic languages" label="Cushitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="10827" end="10849" title="Afro-Asiatic languages" label="Afro-Asiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="10853" end="10859" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q33259" start="10862" end="10866" title="Bats language" label="Bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q24441" start="10879" end="10893" title="Nakh languages" label="Nakh languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27387" start="10929" end="10958" title="Northeast Caucasian languages" label="Northeast Caucasian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33170" start="10962" end="10969" title="Chukchi language" label="Chukchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33255" start="10971" end="10999" title="Chukchi–Kamchatkan languages" label="Chukchi–Kamchatkan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35465" start="11003" end="11010" title="Dyirbal language" label="Dyirbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850666" start="11023" end="11042" title="Dyirbalic languages" label="Dyirbalic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33942" start="11078" end="11100" title="Pama-Nyungan languages" label="Pama-Nyungan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621973" start="11104" end="11118" title="Guugu Yalandji language" label="Guugu Yalandji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640654" start="11151" end="11169" title="Yalanjic languages" label="Yalanjic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365841" start="11217" end="11244" title="Kanyara-Mantharta languages" label="Kanyara-Mantharta languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365836" start="11283" end="11300" title="Kanyara languages" label="Kanyara languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268787" start="11311" end="11320" title="Thalanyji language" label="Thalanyji"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752063" start="11341" end="11350" title="Mantharta language" label="Mantharta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913770" start="11353" end="11362" title="Kayardild language" label="Kayardild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823065" start="11375" end="11392" title="Tangkic languages" label="Tangkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="11396" end="11402" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="11405" end="11411" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q36853" start="11414" end="11421" title="Tsakhur language" label="Tsakhur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144370" start="11434" end="11450" title="Lezgic languages" label="Lezgic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053283" start="11496" end="11502" title="Yidiny language" label="Yidiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q34033" start="11539" end="11543" title="Tsez language" label="Tsez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669569" start="11570" end="11577" title="Jiwarli language" label="Jiwarli"/>
<link wikidata="Q975399" start="11580" end="11592" title="Martuthunira language" label="Martuthunira"/>
<link wikidata="Q34834" start="11622" end="11634" title="Old Georgian" label="Old Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35470" start="11637" end="11644" title="Elamite language" label="Elamite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11647" end="11654" title="Hurrian#Language" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36934" start="11657" end="11665" title="Urartian" label="Urartian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35969" start="11668" end="11674" title="Lycian language" label="Lycian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="11677" end="11685" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36203" start="11688" end="11695" title="Lemnian language" label="Lemnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="11698" end="11706" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="18717" end="18724" title="Grammar" label="Grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="18727" end="18735" title="Genitive" label="Genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="18738" end="18748" title="Declension" label="Declension"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706577" wikidata="Q40442" url="?curid=706577" title=".se">
<text>.se, formerly branded as .SE, is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Sweden. It is operated by The Swedish Internet Foundation (), but domains must be registered through one of the approved registrars. The Internet Foundation in Sweden is managed on the basis of its charter of foundation and its statutes. The Foundation is managed by a board of directors, whose decisions are executed by the executive management.

==Pre 2003 system==
Prior to April 2003, the rules governing domains under the .se top domain were highly restrictive. Only companies, associations and authorities registered nationwide were allowed to register a domain, and it had to be very similar to the registered name. Individual products were not eligible for separate second-level domain names, even if they were registered trademarks. (Trademarks could register under tm.se but that was not considered satisfactory. Several companies formed daughter companies named after products to circumvent this rule and protect the trademark.) Individuals could register one (and only one) domain with the suffix .pp.se (&quot;pp&quot; is an abbreviation for &quot;private person&quot;), and companies and organizations registered in just a single county were eligible for domains with a &lt;county letter&gt;.se suffix. Non-profit organisation names are registered on county level in Sweden. Sports clubs do not need to register their name, but that was needed in order to register a &quot;county.se&quot; name, which made it complicated. Many who could not register directly under .se instead registered under .com or .nu. These rules were introduced in 1996. Before that there were unofficial rules that were even more restrictive, where private people and sports clubs could not register a domain.

The former Second Level Domains were:

Only a few of these second level domains are still (2021) used as in active web addresses.

Since å, ä, ö were not available for technical reasons, organisations could register the name with a and o instead if available, sometimes causing trouble. The Habo and Håbo municipalities had a legal battle about the name habo.se which Håbo won since they registered first. After many years, in 2011, they agreed to make habo.se link to both municipalities&#x27; websites. From 2003 Sweden allowed registering å, ä, ö in web addresses.

==Post 2003 system==
With the new rules, any entity or person may register any number of domains, subject to few restrictions. Individuals may register whatever .se domain, as long as it is available, not in .SE&#x27;s Blocked or Reserved list. At the same time, the rules for domain name allocation were changed to the principle of first-come, first-served, and simpler rules for dispute resolution were created.

As of October 2003, .SE started accepting registrations of internationalized domain names, containing the letters &quot;å&quot;, &quot;ä&quot;, &quot;ö&quot;, &quot;ü&quot; and &quot;é&quot;. On 6 September 2007, a total of 250 characters became available, supporting names in all of the legally recognized minority languages of Sweden: Finnish, Meänkieli (Tornedalsfinska), Sami, Romani and Yiddish.

Domain names with å, ä, ö have not seen much use, partly since browsers on the user&#x27;s side must have special support. As of 2013, organisations having å, ä, ö in their name (like Skåne) mainly use domains without these letters (e.g. skane.se), and redirect from their proper name (e.g. skåne.se). Many organisations have however not registered their proper name with å, ä or ö.

There are some second-level TLDs still in use under .se, for example .domstol.se reserved for Swedish courts. These might not be recognized by the NIC as second-level TLDs, though in practice they are.

.se is the first TLD to offer DNSSEC services. It does so using OpenDNSSEC.

The entire .se domain was unavailable for 58 minutes on 12 October 2009, when an error during routine maintenance by .SE corrupted all names in the domain name registry.

==Known hacks==

Many Swedish domains were reserved for English words that end with &quot;se&quot;. As of today, there are practically no such domain names left available on the domain prime market as the result of domain name speculation. Most of them can be bought on the domain secondary market. Only a few domains were developed.

==References==
==External links==
* IANA .se whois information
* iis.se, .SE (The Internet Infrastructure Foundation)
* List of approved registrars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40442" start="0" end="3" title=".se" label=".se"/>
<link wikidata="Q40442" start="25" end="28" title=".se" label=".SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="37" end="66" title="country code top-level domain" label="country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="79" end="85" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10679862" start="105" end="136" title="The Swedish Internet Foundation" label="The Swedish Internet Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="798" end="818" title="registered trademark" label="registered trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q200547" start="1223" end="1229" title="Counties of Sweden" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q159371" start="1587" end="1591" title=".com" label=".com"/>
<link wikidata="Q44921" start="1595" end="1598" title=".nu" label=".nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q503198" start="2069" end="2073" title="Habo Municipality" label="Habo"/>
<link wikidata="Q511253" start="2078" end="2082" title="Håbo Municipality" label="Håbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q756903" start="2821" end="2851" title="internationalized domain names" label="internationalized domain names"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869253" start="3069" end="3097" title="minority languages of Sweden" label="minority languages of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="3348" end="3353" title="Skåne" label="Skåne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3617" end="3628" title=".domstol.se" label=".domstol.se"/>
<link wikidata="Q41609" start="3781" end="3787" title="DNSSEC" label="DNSSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095766" start="3815" end="3825" title="OpenDNSSEC" label="OpenDNSSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067653" start="3976" end="3996" title="domain name registry" label="domain name registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="4029" end="4036" title="domain name" label="domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4055" end="4062" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="4142" end="4153" title="domain name" label="domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066668" start="4214" end="4237" title="domain name speculation" label="domain name speculation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706580" wikidata="Q533367" url="?curid=706580" title="S.H.E">
<text>S.H.E is a Taiwanese girl group whose members are Selina Jen, Hebe Tien, and Ella Chen. They formed in 2001 and are managed by HIM International Music but decided not to renew their contract in 2019 due to having their own management company.

Since releasing their debut album &quot;Girls&#x27; Dorm&quot; (2001), S.H.E has recorded 13 albums with sales totaling more than 10 million, and set ticketing records in each of their two concert tours. Widely regarded as the most successful and enduring Mandopop group, S.H.E has also acted in seven drama series, hosted two variety shows, and contributed ten songs to six drama soundtracks.

== Career ==

=== 2001–2003: Pre-debut, &quot;Girls Dorm&quot;, &quot;Youth Co., Ltd.&quot;, &quot;Genesis&quot;, &quot;Together&quot; and &quot;Super Star&quot; ===

Before releasing S.H.E&#x27;s first album, HIM International focused on the group&#x27;s chemistry, and assigned the three girls to live together in a dormitory room. Selina revealed in 2009 that their English names were also changed to fit the group name. Selina named herself Cola, while Hebe was called Anita, while Ella called herself Water pre-debut.

S.H.E released their debut album &quot;Girls&#x27; Dorm&quot; on September 11, 2001; the album title stems from the memories of the group members of their prior living quarters. The album experienced commercial success despite being released on the same day as the September 11 attacks, selling 150,000 copies in Taiwan and 750,000 copies throughout Asia. On January 29, 2002, S.H.E&#x27;s second album, &quot;Youth Society&quot;, was released and went on to sell more than 250,000 copies and over 1.25 million in Asia. With the release of this album, &quot;S.H.E Girl Friends&quot; underwent a name change and became simply &quot;S.H.E&quot;.
The trio&#x27;s third album, &quot;Genesis&quot;, was released on August 5, 2002, approximately six months after &quot;Youth Society&quot;. Continuing the successes of the group&#x27;s previous albums, 20,000 copies of &quot;Genesis&quot; were ordered in advance of the release date. The album would go on to sell 180,000 copies and over 1.75 million in Asia. S.H.E later signed an endorsement deal with N-age, a South Korean online game company. Not only did N-age appear in a couple of music videos, but they also sponsored S.H.E&#x27;s first major concert in Tainan City, the N-age Genesis Concert, which attracted over 20,000 fans. On January 23, 2003, S.H.E released &quot;Together&quot;, their first compilation album which sold over 2 million copies.

S.H.E&#x27;s fourth album was intended for release on August 6, but due to an injury to Ella, &quot;Super Star&quot; arrived in stores on August 22, 2003. The album featured the group&#x27;s first pop/rock song, &quot;Super Star&quot;, which, for ten consecutive weeks, placed no lower than fourth on Singapore&#x27;s YES 933 music charts selling more than 2.75 million copies. To date, &quot;Together&quot; and &quot;Super Star&quot; have combined to sell 580,000 copies; 250,000 copies of &quot;Super Star&quot; were sold in Taiwan alone.

=== 2004–2005: &quot;Magical Journey&quot;, Fantasy Land World Tour and &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot; ===

On February 6, 2004, S.H.E released their fifth album, &quot;Magical Journey&quot;, in two different versions: a Magical Version and a Journey Version. The two versions combined to sell 2.5 million copies in Asia, including 160,000 copies in Taiwan alone. On June 2, S.H.E and HIM International agreed to extend the trio&#x27;s contract, which would have expired in October 2005. Later that year, on September 4, 2004, S.H.E began their first major tour, the Fantasy Land Tour. The tour started in Taipei, where more than 25,000 attendees were present, and ended in Genting Highlands, Malaysia. During their concert at the Shanghai Stadium, the trio set an attendance record. The tour raked in NT$22.4 million in gate receipts. The release of S.H.E&#x27;s sixth album, &quot;Encore&quot;, was pushed to November 12, 2004, to accommodate Selina&#x27;s graduation from university in late November. &quot;Encore&quot; sold two million units in Asia within one week of its release; since then, that number has surpassed 2 million. By the time &quot;Encore&quot; was due for release, media outlets had already begun labelling S.H.E as &quot;The Number One Girl Group&quot; ().

S.H.E had released albums every few months until the end of 2004. However, due to their busy concert schedule, it was over a year until their next album appeared. After releasing &quot;Encore&quot;, they contributed to the &quot;Reaching for the Stars&quot; soundtrack, which sold only 50,000 copies. That same year, the girl group Twins released their first Mandarin album, &quot;Trainee Cupid&quot;, in the Taiwanese market. That album would sell 800,000 copies in two months. The poor sales of the soundtrack and the success of the Twins album led to this period being described as one of the lowest times of S.H.E&#x27;s career. On November 25, 2005, the trio finally released their seventh album, &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot;. The album not only set a record with 50,000 pre-orders, but it sold more than two million copies, overshadowing &quot;Trainee Cupid&quot;. &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot; debuted on the G-music Chinese language album charts at #1, retained that position for four consecutive weeks, and stayed on the charts for a total of 13 weeks. The album&#x27;s title track, &quot;Don&#x27;t Wanna Grow Up&quot; (), won Song of the Year at Hong Kong’s TVB8 Awards.

=== 2006–2007: &quot;Forever&quot;, The Moving Castle World Tour and &quot;Play&quot; ===

On July 21, 2006, S.H.E released a second compilation album, &quot;Forever&quot;, which sold over 150,000 copies within a week. The album featured five new songs, a compilation of older works, and three songs from older drama soundtracks. &quot;Forever&quot; included many collaborative works with other artists in the Taiwanese pop music industry. C-pop megastar Jay Chou composed &quot;Electric Shock&quot; () for the album. The song &quot;Solo Madrigal&quot; () was a duet between Selina and Tank, the latter of whom had originally recorded the song for his debut album. For the &quot;Tokyo Juliet&quot; soundtrack, Hebe and boyband Fahrenheit sang &quot;Only Have Feelings for You&quot; (), which won several awards including Taiwan&#x27;s Best Duet Song at the 2006 Sprite China Music Awards.

S.H.E&#x27;s second major concert tour, The Moving Castle world tour, commenced on July 8, 2006, in Shanghai. After their The Moving Castle world tour in Hong Kong, which was recorded and released as the group&#x27;s second live album, S.H.E was commended for their perseverance, amount of dance preparation, and ability to hit their notes. Within the tour&#x27;s first five months, the group attracted over 200,000 fans, and collected NT$200 million in gate receipts. On April 18, S.H.E signed on with WOW Music to improve their presence in Hong Kong. &quot;Play&quot;, the trio&#x27;s eighth album, was released on May 11, 2007, and was the first S.H.E album released under the new distribution label. &quot;Play&quot; went double gold within the first four days of the album&#x27;s pre-order period; by June 5, more than 150,000 copies were sold. A month after &quot;Play&quot;&#x27;s release, S.H.E was nominated for the Most Popular Female Artist award at the 18th Golden Melody Awards but lost to pop diva Jolin Tsai.

=== 2008–2009: &quot;FM S.H.E&quot;, &quot;Map of Love&quot;, S.H.E is the One concert and &quot;Shero&quot; ===

On 23 September 2008, S.H.E released their ninth album, &quot;FM S.H.E&quot;. On this album, members of the band take on the role of radio hosts, and the album itself is interspersed with radio station-esque snippets. The album had a pre-order sale of 42,000 copies in Taiwan and over 1.2 million in asia. An online radio station, FM S.H.E, was also set up for a month in line with the album where there will be different programs being broadcast every day. The viewership of the online radio hit a record high of 100,000 views.

In June 2009, S.H.E released their first digital album, &quot;Map of Love&quot; in China, where this album will only be digitally release on internet music stores. The album consist of 10 songs of which 8 songs are from their previous albums and 2 new songs, 鎖住時間 &quot;(Lock Up the Time)&quot; and 可愛萬歲 &quot;(Long Live Adorableness)&quot;. On 16 October 2009, S.H.E commenced their third world tour, S.H.E is the One concert, with Hong Kong being their first stop. The tickets to the Hong Kong concert were sold out within a few days and this concert had received positive reviews. As of 2010, the concert is still ongoing with more stops to be made. On 26 March 2010, S.H.E released their tenth album, &quot;SHERO&quot;. The album received positive reviews, with 50,000 copies being pre-ordered in Taiwan before it was released.

=== 2010–2018: Selina&#x27;s injury, &quot;Blossomy&quot; and second hiatus ===

On October 22, 2010, Selina suffered third degree burns on 54% of her body, mostly her back and legs, during an indoor film shooting in Shanghai for musical movie &quot;I have a date with Spring (我和春天有个约会)&quot;. On January 19, 2011, after Selina was hospitalized for two months and discharged, the trio held a press conference to formally address their fans about Selina&#x27;s injury and her recovery. In May 2011, &quot;SHERO&quot;, nominated the 22nd Golden Melody Awards&#x27;s &quot;Top vocal group award&quot;. In June 2012, S.H.E performed on the 23rd Golden Melody Awards and declared regression. On October 11, 2012, S.H.E declared renewal and became one of the main shareholders of HIM International Music. &quot;Blossomy&quot;, their eleventh album, was released on November 16, 2012.

Since 2014, the group entered their second hiatus. In 2016, they were immortalized with wax figures in Shanghai&#x27;s Madame Tussands, and then on August 26, issued an extended play &quot;Irreplaceable&quot;, and one of the songs &quot;Irreplaceable&quot; in the EP was commemorating for 15th anniversary of S.H.E&#x27;s debut, after that held &quot;S.H.E 15th Anniversary Exhibition&quot; at Songshan Cultural and Creative Park in Taipei from August 26 to September 19, 2016. In 2017, S.H.E. returned with a full 16-cassette set of all albums (including 12 full albums and 2 compilation mini-albums) called &quot;S.H.E&#x27;s in style&quot; on their 16th anniversary.

As of April 2018, Ella is the vocal instructor for Produce 101 China. Ella’s contract has ended with the record label and announced to be not re-contracting on July 10, 2018, with plans of creating her own management company with her husband, however, the group will not disband and continue doing projects as the management will still cooperate with Ella. On August 30, 2018, a digital single &quot;&quot;Seventeen&quot; was released by S.H.E, it was commemorating for 17th anniversary of S.H.E&#x27;s debut, and the single was issued by form of digital music download, after that held &quot;S.H.E 17th Anniversary Concert&quot;&quot; to celebrate the 17th anniversary of S.H.E&#x27;s debut at Liberty Square in Taipei on September 11, 2018. On September 30, 2018, HIM International Music officially announce that S.H.E will no longer be managed by them. After ending the 17 years collaboration with HIM International Music, three of them had come up with their management agencies individually.

=== 2019-present: Various reunions ===
In January 2019, they reunited for child philanthropic feast and made donations to the child poverty charity before Lunar New Year. On June 29, 2019, they reunited again for The 30th Golden Melody Awards as guests and presented awards for Best Group and Best Band. On September 28, 2020, they made a surprising reunion during the Taipei leg of Hebe&#x27;s individual &quot;One After Another Tour.&quot; On August 11, 2023, Selina and Ella as Hebe&#x27;s One After Another Tour guests. On September 11, 2023, celebrating S.H.E 22nd anniversary through Selina&#x27;s podcast (Episode 46).

== Musical style ==
S.H.E has released eleven studio albums to date, including three compilation albums and one which is only digitally released. All of S.H.E&#x27;s album covers display an oxalis, the symbol for the group. On some covers, the clover is easy to spot on the front (&quot;Girls Dorm&quot;, &quot;Together&quot;, &quot;Encore&quot;, &quot;Forever&quot;, &quot;Play&quot;) or on the back (&quot;FM S.H.E&quot;); on other covers, its appearance is more subtle (&quot;Super Star&quot;, &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot;). S.H.E&#x27;s other contributions include songs in the soundtracks of &quot;Magical Love&quot;, &quot;The Rose&quot;, &quot;Reaching for the Stars&quot;, &quot;Tokyo Juliet&quot;, &quot;The Little Fairy&quot;, &quot;Hanazakarino Kimitachihe&quot;, and &quot;Bull Fighting&quot;. In 2008, they sang the ending theme for the film &quot;CJ7&quot;.

The group is also known for harmonizing between each other, but has no designated lead singer and has no leader. All three members have different vocal ranges to complement each other. Ella sings within the alto to mezzo-soprano range, while Hebe and Selina sing within the mezzo-soprano to soprano range, with Ella having the widest vocal range of the three.

Most S.H.E songs fall into the category of pop music. Songs from this genre consist of light melodies, simple drum beats, and the occasional piano or synthesizer accompaniment. In &quot;Girls Dorm&quot; and &quot;Youth Society&quot;, acoustic guitar melody lines were used as well. While some slower songs, particularly those in &quot;Genesis&quot;, fall into the genre of R&amp;B, high-tempo songs, such as &quot;Beauty Up My Life&quot;, focus more on techno. S.H.E has also sung a few pop/rock songs, including &quot;Piquancy&quot; (), &quot;Super Star&quot;, and &quot;Star Light&quot; (). As their career progressed, S.H.E began mixing light-hearted pop ballads with elements of hip hop and dance. Attempts to fuse these genres started with songs such as &quot;If You&#x27;re Happy, Then I&#x27;ll Be Pleased&quot; (), which contained a short rap segment, and evolved into songs such as &quot;Listen to Yuan Wei Jen Play Guitar&quot; (), which is composed entirely of rap with the exception of the chorus.

=== Lyrics ===
Shi Rencheng () serves as the group&#x27;s main lyricist since the group&#x27;s debut. Between the releases of &quot;Magical Journey&quot; and &quot;Forever&quot;, Daryl Yao () was a regular contributor as well. The lyrics of Jay Chou&#x27;s main lyricist, Vincent Fang, have also made numerous appearances. On some occasions, S.H.E members even contributed their own lyrics. Hebe wrote the words for &quot;Say You Love Me&quot; () and &quot;Too Late&quot; (), and penned the rap portion of &quot;So Long as You&#x27;re Happy&quot;. Selina was responsible for the lyrics of &quot;Silenced&quot; (). Ella wrote the lyrics &quot;Wife&quot;(Chinese:老婆). They wrote the lyrics &quot;Don&#x27;t say goodbye&quot;(Chinese:不说再见)

=== Covers ===
S.H.E&#x27;s albums contain quite a number of cover songs. Among the group&#x27;s 90 songs, 28 are covers. Earlier albums often included cover songs; however, since 2004, the group has recorded no more than two covers per album. In most covers, the songs&#x27; original titles were kept. Other songs, such as Westlife&#x27;s &quot;Soledad&quot;, were simply given new Chinese titles. The lyrics are usually rewritten, but some songs, such as Charlene&#x27;s &quot;I&#x27;ve Never Been To Me&quot;, are sung in their original English. While the musical style is usually maintained, some covers, such as &quot;Only Lonely&quot; and &quot;I.O.I.O&quot;, have a lighter, bubblegum pop feel.

Older pieces and nursery rhymes are occasionally parodied. &quot;Don&#x27;t Wanna Grow Up&quot; is a parody of Mozart&#x27;s 40th Symphony, and &quot;London Bridge is Falling Down&quot; () is based on the children&#x27;s song of the same name. The verses of &quot;Thanks for Your Gentleness&quot; () are original compositions, but the chorus is borrowed from Mayday&#x27;s &quot;Gentle and Soft&quot;. S.H.E&#x27;s covers have received less critical acclaim than their original works. During the group&#x27;s career, original compositions have combined for nearly 20 awards, whereas covers have been lauded only twice.

== Television and film career ==

From late 2001 to early 2002, Hebe and Ella acted in the drama, &quot;Magical Love&quot;. Ella starred as Juliet, a recent high school graduate who is constantly looking for her Romeo. Hebe portrayed the secondary role of Sha Sha, Juliet&#x27;s self-conscious and assertive friend. Selina was absent because she was studying at the National Taiwan Normal University. The songs &quot;Remember&quot; and &quot;Belief&quot; was used as the drama&#x27;s opening and ending themes, respectively. In February, S.H.E signed on to be co-hosts on Jacky Wu&#x27;s show, &quot;Guess Guess Guess&quot;. During S.H.E&#x27;s tenure on the show, ratings averaged over 3.5, regularly putting the show in the top 10 for weekend shows. S.H.E stopped hosting &quot;Guess Guess Guess&quot; in July. In April 2003, the trio guest-hosted two episodes of the Taiwanese variety show, &quot;Happy Sunday&quot;, before signing on as co-hosts in May. However, during S.H.E&#x27;s &quot;Happy Sunday&quot; tenure, at the height of the SARS epidemic, Hebe exhibited fever-like symptoms while coming home from Singapore. Since Ella was living with Hebe at the time, both were forced into quarantine for 10 days, leaving Selina as the only one in the group who could host the television show &quot;Happy Sunday&quot;.

All three S.H.E members appeared in the drama, &quot;The Rose&quot;, where Ella starred as Zheng Bai He, a girl suffering from low self-esteem. Selina played two secondary roles: her first character, Zhuang Zhe Qin, was a beautiful yet frail girl with a heartwarming personality. Her second character, Di Ya Man, is Qin&#x27;s doppelganger with an arrogant and domineering personality. Hebe portrayed Xiao Feng, a girl who quietly pursues Han Kui but Kui is infatuated with Bai He. In spite of the high costs, &quot;The Rose&quot; was the highest rated television drama in its time slot. At the 2004 Golden Bell Awards, which are presented by the GIO to honour the year&#x27;s best television programs, &quot;The Rose&quot; was crowned Most Popular Drama. S.H.E sang &quot;Flowers Have Blossomed&quot; () for the drama&#x27;s soundtrack. The song not only debuted at #1 on the UFO Music Charts, but it also stayed on the YES 93.3 charts for ten weeks, holding the #1 position for two consecutive weeks.

On July 29, 2003, Ella performed a stunt as part of S.H.E&#x27;s &quot;Happy Sunday&quot; segment. The stunt, which involved jumping off different floors of a building, was part of a public service video that explained proper fire escape procedures. On her first attempt, Ella followed protocol, jumped off the second floor of a building, and landed safely. On her second attempt, she was asked to jump off the third floor. However, as she jumped off, Ella became nervous and failed to follow the safety procedures correctly, leading to her falling on a fire escape from twenty feet and shattering her hip. Paramedics transported her to the Neihu Tri-Service General Hospital before being redirected to the National Taiwan University Hospital. Ella was released from the hospital after a 23-day stay, but she went home to Pingtung for five months in order to recuperate. In spite of this incident, the Japan National Tourist Organization, who had admired S.H.E&#x27;s hosting abilities, asked &quot;Happy Sunday&quot; to promote Japanese tourism. As a result, Selina and Hebe hosted &quot;Yokoso! Japan&quot;, a special &quot;Happy Sunday&quot; segment that explored numerous facets of Japanese culture. In January 2004, Ella appeared in the final two episodes of &quot;Yokoso! Japan&quot;. However, during the segment&#x27;s four-episode run, producers were already searching for S.H.E&#x27;s replacements, and ultimately chose Taiwanese singer Phil Chang. S.H.E discontinued hosting &quot;Happy Sunday&quot; once they began promoting the album &quot;Magical Journey&quot;.

Selina and Hebe, along with 28 other celebrities, were cast for the three-episode drama series &quot;Happy New Year 2004&quot;. In February, both S.H.E members co-starred in the movie, &quot;A Disguised Superstar&quot; (), with Miriam Yeung; in April, Hebe acted as the female love interest in the first episode of &quot;Say Yes Enterprise&quot; (). The episode would earn a rating of 1.93, placing third behind &quot;My Secret Garden II&quot; () and &quot;Snow Angel&quot; (). In October 2005, all three members of S.H.E starred in the drama, &quot;Reaching for the Stars&quot;, and sang its opening theme, &quot;Star Light&quot;. The drama focused on the fate of an electronics company whose chairman had just died. Selina played the role of Zhou Xinlei, the chairman&#x27;s spoiled but good-natured daughter. Ella starred as Ren Jie, a clever girl who assumed the identity of the company&#x27;s heiress to save her brother. Hebe portrayed Shen Xiaorou, a strong-willed policewoman who lives with her ailing grandmother. &quot;Reaching for the Stars&quot; had the misfortune of airing its pilot episode during the final episode of &quot;The Prince Who Turns into a Frog&quot;. While the average rating for the pilot episode of &quot;Reaching for the Stars&quot; was 1.17, the final episode of &quot;The Prince Who Turns into a Frog&quot; set a 2005 record for highest average episode rating (6.93) and highest episode rating (11.35). In the end, despite heavy investment in the series&#x27; production, &quot;Reaching for the Stars&quot; had only achieved mediocre television ratings. Nevertheless, Ella was nominated for Best Actress at the 2006 Golden Bell Awards.

In the spring of 2006, Ella pursued her own on-screen interests and was cast for the lead female role of a Taiwanese idol drama, which was scheduled to air later that year. In January 2007, Selina and Hebe signed half-year contracts to be the co-hosts of &quot;Guess Guess Guess&quot;, the show that they had hosted five years earlier. The drama starring Ella, &quot;Hanazakarino Kimitachihe&quot;, finally began airing in November, and continued until its finale on March 4, 2007. Ella was featured as Lu Ruixi, an American tomboy who transfers schools so she can see her high jump idol every day. During its 15-episode run, the drama never relinquished its ratings crown. S.H.E sang the song, &quot;What to Do?&quot; () as the drama&#x27;s opening theme. In June 2007, SET TV selected Hebe to star in &quot;Bull Fighting&quot; as the daughter of the man who owns 13th Street. S.H.E sang &quot;How Have You Been Lately?&quot; () as the drama&#x27;s ending theme.

In the movie CJ7, S.H.E sang one of its OST entitled &quot;Qi Zai&quot;. In May 2009, Ella was cast for the lead female role for the Taiwanese idol drama, Down With Love (就想賴著妳). The drama was aired on January 31, 2010. In the drama, Ella was featured as Yang Guo, kind-natured and innocent. When met with any kind of unlucky circumstances, she would always find a way to encourage and spur herself on, adopting a bright and optimistic outlook. S.H.E sang the song, &quot;Loving You&quot; (traditional Chinese: 愛上你) as the drama&#x27;s ending theme. In May 2010, Selina was invited as a guest host for the 700th episode of &#x27;Guess Guess Guess&#x27; special edition, along with Jacky Wu. From July 24, 2010, onwards, Selina would be co-hosting &#x27;Guess Guess Guess&#x27; with Halem Yu, with changes made to the television programme.

On October 22, 2010. Selina was seriously injured during an accident on the set of her new drama, I have a date with spring (我和春天有個約會) in Shanghai. She suffered from third-degree burns in 54% of her body. Her co-star Yu Haoming (俞灏明) was also seriously injured. On January 19, 2011, Selina had finally made her first appearance in the press conference at the hospital. Selina was thankful for the concern, care, and blessings from the public she was also grateful to the nurses who took care of her saying that they were like angels, and was happy that she finally got to leave the hospital and go back home.

== Influence and impact ==
=== Musical ===
By 2001, the vast majority of notable singing groups in Taiwan were male. When S.H.E was formed, other girl groups were only beginning to earn their fame in the Taiwanese music industry, but few would last more than two years. Formed in 2000, 4 in Love had similar success to S.H.E during their first year in the entertainment business, but broke up less than two years later. Among the former members of 4 in Love, Rainie Yang is the only member to have continued her singing career. Other groups, such as Walkie Talkie (), were formed as a result of talent competitions, but were less notable during the course of their careers. Over a year after S.H.E&#x27;s formation, the state of girl groups in Taiwan had changed little. In January 2003, radio station UFM1003 released a list of its Top 10 Taiwanese Pop Groups for the year 2002. Although S.H.E was ranked first, they were the only all-female group on the list.

During the course of S.H.E&#x27;s career, a significant number of musical groups were introduced by their companies as &quot;the next S.H.E&quot; with hopes of emulating their success. When Warner Music Taiwan wanted to form a three-person boy band, they planned on marketing them as &quot;the male version of S.H.E&quot; before coming up with the name &quot;G-Boys&quot;. Some groups were formed to topple S.H.E&#x27;s standing as Taiwan&#x27;s premier pop group. Jungiery Star manager Sun Derong stated that 7 Flowers was formed just to provide competition for S.H.E. Despite the increase in competition, S.H.E maintains a definitive stranglehold on the Mandopop group awards, suggesting that the formation of these new groups has done little to ruffle the trio&#x27;s feathers.

=== Endorsements ===
In 2001, S.H.E began promoting the first of many products, including those of Digimaster and beverage chain Fuzion Smoothie. Since then, the group has endorsed numerous companies, including Bausch &amp; Lomb (2002–present), Coca-Cola (2004–present), and China Mobile (2006–present). One of S.H.E&#x27;s more notable commercials was for &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, where the girls were put into the context of a fantasy gaming world.

S.H.E regularly contributes songs for endorsement campaigns. The songs &quot;Too Much&quot; and &quot;Beauty Up My Life&quot;, from their debut album &quot;Girls Dorm&quot;, were used in commercials for Sogo and Wacoal, respectively. &quot;Genesis&quot; () and &quot;Watch Me Shine&quot;, from the 2002 album &quot;Genesis&quot;, were used for N-age, a South Korean online game. &quot;Piquancy&quot;, from 2004 album &quot;Encore&quot;, was used to promote the online game &quot;New Legendary Twins&quot; (). In collaboration with Fahrenheit, S.H.E sang &quot;Always Open&quot; for 7-Eleven.

Companies frequently use S.H.E&#x27;s music videos as advertising tools. The videos for &quot;Genesis&quot; and &quot;Watch Me Shine&quot; featured gameplay in N-age; &quot;Excuse&quot; () showed flashes of Inventec&#x27;s OKWAP phones. Daphne (), a Chinese shoe company, used the songs &quot;Super Model&quot;, &quot;Laurel Tree Goddess&quot; (), &quot;Good Mood Just Be Yourself&quot; (), and &quot;Miss Universe&quot; () for their promotional campaigns. Top Girl, a Taiwan clothing company, had also used the song, &quot;Girls&#x27; Be Strong&quot; () from FM S.H.E for their promotional campaigns.

=== Other ===
According to Baidu&#x27;s year-end Top Search Terms survey, the most-searched movie of 2004 was &quot;House of Flying Daggers&quot; (). The phrase logged more than 1.2 million searches, which was nearly twice as many as second place (&quot;Kung Fu Hustle&quot;). Baidu attributed this difference to the fact that S.H.E had released a song with the same name earlier that year. As a result, searches for the song were lumped together with the movie, thereby inflating the latter&#x27;s search totals.

S.H.E has also influenced television dramas, education systems, and even business operations. In the &quot;I Not Stupid Too&quot; television series, Chengcai, the wushu-practicing protagonist, was courted by three members of the school&#x27;s chess society: Shirley, Helen, and Elaine, who were collectively known as S.H.E. On a 2005 secondary school English examination, S.H.E was the subject of a reading comprehension passage that mentioned their involvement with CCTV&#x27;s annual Spring Festival Evening show. Cliff Wu, the president of Teradata&#x27;s Greater China operations, was so amazed at how S.H.E affected his teenage daughters that he borrowed the group&#x27;s name and transformed it into an acronym, summarizing the three main elements of Teradata&#x27;s plan for entering the Chinese market. S represents &quot;Strategy&quot;, while H and E represent &quot;Human&quot; and &quot;Execution&quot;.

== Discography ==
* &quot;Girls&#x27; Dorm&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Youth Society&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Genesis&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Together&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Super Star&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Magical Journey&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Encore&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Forever&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Play&quot; (2007)
* &quot;FM S.H.E&quot; (2008)
* &quot;SHERO&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Blossomy&quot; (2012)

== Concerts ==
* Fantasy Land World Tour (2004–2006)
* Perfect 3 World Tour (2006–2009)
* S.H.E is the One World Tour (2009–2010)
* 2gether 4ever World Tour (2013-2014)
* To Continue...

== Filmography ==
== Biography ==
* Photographer.
== Awards and nominations ==
== Further reading ==

* Jiaozi (角子). &quot;The Girls Dormitory&quot; (半熟卵女生宿舍). Republic of China: Linking Books. 2001. 


== Notes ==

* a. See Television and film career.
* b. Searching &quot;女子第一天團&quot; with &quot;S.H.E&quot; on Chinese search engines yields only results written after the release of &quot;Encore&quot;.
* c. Although the English translations of the song and album are different, the Chinese names are the same ().
* d. The article states that Ella is an alto, but there have been instances when Ella sings slightly above the alto range (&quot;i.e.&quot; into the mezzo soprano range) in songs such as &quot;What to Do?&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Wanna Grow Up&quot;. Similarly, Hebe and Selina are listed in the article as sopranos, but there have been songs, such as &quot;Persian Cat&quot;, where they sang notes more fitting for a mezzo-soprano.
* e. Yao wrote the lyrics for &quot;Wisteria&quot; (紫藤花), &quot;A Vision Of Eternity&quot; (一眼萬年), &quot;I Love You&quot; (我愛你) and &quot;The Story of Romeo and Juliet&quot; (茱羅記).
* f. Fang&#x27;s lyrics are found in five songs: &quot;Riverside Park&quot; (河濱公園), &quot;Norse Mythology&quot; (北歐神話), &quot;Laurel Goddess&quot; (月桂女神), &quot;Tropical Rainforest&quot; (熱帶雨林), and &quot;Migratory Bird&quot; (侯鳥). The last two songs, which Fang co-produced with Jay Chou, are both Annual Best Singles (2002 and 2004, respectively).
* g. See List of awards and nominations received by S.H.E.
* h. The Chinese name for &quot;Reaching for the Stars&quot;, Zhen Ming Tian Nü (真命天女), is derived from the Chinese name for the group Destiny&#x27;s Child, Tian Ming Zhen Nü (天命真女). Coincidentally, the plot of the drama revolves around three girls who seemed destined to meet each other.
* i. The magazine article refers to artists like Richie Ren (also mentioned in the article) as &quot;talented types&quot;, while S.H.E qualified as an &quot;idol type&quot;.
* j. The usage of &quot;Taiwan&quot; in this article, unless otherwise specified, refers to the Taiwanese music industry (as opposed to the music industries of China and Hong Kong).
* k. HIM announced the Xuite blog on April 20, 2007, initially as a countdown for the album &quot;Play&quot;.
== References ==
== External links ==

* 
* Official website @ HIM International
* Official website @ WOW Music
* Official blog @ HIM International</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q533367" start="0" end="5" title="S.H.E" label="S.H.E"/>
<link wikidata="Q641066" start="21" end="31" title="girl group" label="girl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q702539" start="50" end="60" title="Selina Jen" label="Selina Jen"/>
<link wikidata="Q289808" start="62" end="71" title="Hebe Tien" label="Hebe Tien"/>
<link wikidata="Q699768" start="77" end="86" title="Ella Chen" label="Ella Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q711447" start="127" end="150" title="HIM International Music" label="HIM International Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232999" start="284" end="300" title="Girls&amp;#x27; Dorm" label="Girls&amp;#x27; Dorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q973150" start="500" end="508" title="Mandopop" label="Mandopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074644" start="546" end="558" title="Taiwanese drama" label="drama series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232999" start="1202" end="1218" title="Girls&amp;#x27; Dorm" label="Girls&amp;#x27; Dorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1428" end="1448" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059260" start="1573" end="1586" title="Youth Society" label="Youth Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532781" start="1842" end="1849" title="Genesis (S.H.E album)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q140631" start="2369" end="2380" title="Tainan City" label="Tainan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813074" start="2485" end="2493" title="Together (S.H.E album)" label="Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642809" start="2666" end="2676" title="Super Star (S.H.E album)" label="Super Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045724" start="2884" end="2891" title="YES 933" label="YES 933"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642809" start="2984" end="2994" title="Super Star (S.H.E album)" label="Super Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q10942152" start="3275" end="3290" title="Magical Journey" label="Magical Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="3712" end="3718" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144734" start="3780" end="3797" title="Genting Highlands" label="Genting Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="3799" end="3807" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q739528" start="3837" end="3853" title="Shanghai Stadium" label="Shanghai Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q208526" start="3908" end="3911" title="New Taiwan dollar" label="NT$"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375534" start="3989" end="3995" title="Encore (S.H.E album)" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300229" start="4610" end="4655" title="Reaching for the Stars (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Reaching for the Stars&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q706202" start="4719" end="4724" title="Twins (band)" label="Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832919" start="4768" end="4781" title="Trainee Cupid" label="Trainee Cupid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091850" start="5095" end="5111" title="Once Upon a Time (S.H.E album)" label="Once Upon a Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5302" end="5309" title=":zh:G-music" label="G-music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195543" start="5555" end="5559" title="Television Broadcasts Limited" label="TVB8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469357" start="5727" end="5734" title="Forever (S.H.E album)" label="Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192110" start="6009" end="6014" title="C-pop" label="C-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q238819" start="6024" end="6032" title="Jay Chou" label="Jay Chou"/>
<link wikidata="Q848765" start="6155" end="6159" title="Tank (Taiwanese singer)" label="Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q713435" start="6296" end="6306" title="Fahrenheit (Taiwanese band)" label="Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017042" start="6962" end="6971" title="WOW Music" label="WOW Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977711" start="7018" end="7022" title="Play (S.H.E album)" label="Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q13624311" start="7424" end="7449" title="18th Golden Melody Awards" label="18th Golden Melody Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q51101" start="7471" end="7481" title="Jolin Tsai" label="Jolin Tsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426748" start="7660" end="7668" title="FM S.H.E" label="FM S.H.E"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753762" start="8190" end="8201" title="Map of Love" label="Map of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390201" start="8839" end="8844" title="SHERO" label="SHERO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390201" start="9465" end="9470" title="SHERO" label="SHERO"/>
<link wikidata="Q715608" start="9497" end="9517" title="Golden Melody Awards" label="Golden Melody Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q715608" start="9602" end="9622" title="Golden Melody Awards" label="Golden Melody Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="9719" end="9730" title="shareholder" label="shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q711447" start="9735" end="9758" title="HIM International Music" label="HIM International Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656395" start="9766" end="9774" title="Blossomy" label="Blossomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948372" start="9959" end="9974" title="Madame Tussauds Shanghai" label="Madame Tussands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28410869" start="10029" end="10042" title="Irreplaceable (S.H.E album)" label="Irreplaceable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104372" start="10234" end="10269" title="Songshan Cultural and Creative Park" label="Songshan Cultural and Creative Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q510176" start="10358" end="10366" title="Cassette deck" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q51815917" start="10562" end="10579" title="Produce 101 (Chinese TV series)" label="Produce 101 China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473564" start="11058" end="11080" title="music download" label="digital music download"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541958" start="11206" end="11220" title="Liberty Square (Taipei)" label="Liberty Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q711447" start="11277" end="11300" title="HIM International Music" label="HIM International Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q63859201" start="11722" end="11751" title="30th Golden Melody Awards" label="The 30th Golden Melody Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q289808" start="11892" end="11903" title="Hebe Tien" label="Hebe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="12182" end="12194" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="12221" end="12238" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q157378" start="12326" end="12332" title="oxalis" label="oxalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731000" start="12739" end="12751" title="Magical Love" label="Magical Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q936309" start="12765" end="12773" title="The Rose (Taiwanese TV series)" label="The Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300229" start="12787" end="12809" title="Reaching for the Stars (soundtrack)" label="Reaching for the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q715408" start="12823" end="12835" title="Tokyo Juliet (TV series)" label="Tokyo Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q428375" start="12879" end="12903" title="Hanazakarino Kimitachihe" label="Hanazakarino Kimitachihe"/>
<link wikidata="Q702440" start="12921" end="12934" title="Bull Fighting (TV series)" label="Bull Fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q609170" start="12997" end="13000" title="CJ7" label="CJ7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659376" start="13037" end="13048" title="Harmonization" label="harmonizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="13413" end="13422" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="13743" end="13750" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="13823" end="13829" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="13857" end="13865" title="pop rock" label="pop/rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="14053" end="14060" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="14065" end="14070" title="Dance music" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9340858" start="14277" end="14289" title="Yuan Wei Jen" label="Yuan Wei Jen"/>
<link wikidata="Q699613" start="14653" end="14665" title="Vincent Fang (lyricist)" label="Vincent Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="15180" end="15185" title="cover version" label="cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="15443" end="15451" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q843292" start="15576" end="15584" title="Charlene (singer)" label="Charlene"/>
<link wikidata="Q997481" start="15801" end="15814" title="bubblegum pop" label="bubblegum pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q231390" start="15933" end="15960" title="Symphony No. 40 (Mozart)" label="Mozart&amp;#x27;s 40th Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q141433" start="16027" end="16064" title="London Bridge is Falling Down" label="children&amp;#x27;s song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q51731" start="16181" end="16187" title="Wu Yue Tian" label="Mayday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731000" start="16546" end="16558" title="Magical Love" label="Magical Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q15156906" start="17042" end="17059" title="Guess Guess Guess" label="Guess Guess Guess"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="17483" end="17496" title="Severe acute respiratory syndrome" label="SARS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q936309" start="17817" end="17825" title="The Rose (Taiwanese TV series)" label="The Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q461363" start="18091" end="18103" title="doppelganger" label="doppelganger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063040" start="18411" end="18414" title="Government Information Office" label="GIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q271094" start="19409" end="19414" title="Neihu" label="Neihu"/>
<link wikidata="Q713377" start="19590" end="19598" title="Pingtung City" label="Pingtung"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086315" start="19670" end="19705" title="Japan National Tourist Organization" label="Japan National Tourist Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q709162" start="20214" end="20224" title="Phil Chang" label="Phil Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174226" start="20572" end="20584" title="Miriam Yeung" label="Miriam Yeung"/>
<link wikidata="Q700343" start="20894" end="20916" title="Reaching for the Stars (TV series)" label="Reaching for the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758255" start="21483" end="21515" title="The Prince Who Turns into a Frog" label="The Prince Who Turns into a Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q428375" start="22381" end="22405" title="Hanazakarino Kimitachihe" label="Hanazakarino Kimitachihe"/>
<link wikidata="Q703248" start="22785" end="22791" title="Sanlih E-Television" label="SET TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q702440" start="22823" end="22836" title="Bull Fighting (TV series)" label="Bull Fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q528244" start="23134" end="23148" title="Down With Love (TV Series)" label="Down With Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170436" start="24036" end="24052" title="Yu Haoming" label="Yu Haoming (俞灏明)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187895" start="24715" end="24724" title="4 in Love (group)" label="4 in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q253702" start="24888" end="24899" title="Rainie Yang" label="Rainie Yang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25902" end="25911" title="7 Flowers" label="7 Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q973150" start="26048" end="26056" title="Mandopop" label="Mandopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q811857" start="26385" end="26402" title="Bausch &amp;amp; Lomb" label="Bausch &amp;amp; Lomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="26419" end="26428" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q741618" start="26449" end="26461" title="China Mobile" label="China Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="26537" end="26554" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761653" start="26835" end="26839" title="Sogo" label="Sogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q909522" start="26844" end="26850" title="Wacoal" label="Wacoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q713435" start="27163" end="27173" title="Fahrenheit (Taiwanese band)" label="Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q259340" start="27214" end="27222" title="7-Eleven" label="7-Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059838" start="27432" end="27440" title="Inventec" label="Inventec"/>
<link wikidata="Q14772" start="27855" end="27860" title="Baidu" label="Baidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q369388" start="27944" end="27967" title="House of Flying Daggers" label="House of Flying Daggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q470759" start="28082" end="28096" title="Kung Fu Hustle" label="Kung Fu Hustle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184264" start="28450" end="28466" title="I Not Stupid Too" label="I Not Stupid Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="28506" end="28511" title="Chinese martial arts" label="wushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207936" start="28810" end="28814" title="China Central Television" label="CCTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q430745" start="28886" end="28894" title="Teradata" label="Teradata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232999" start="29285" end="29301" title="Girls&amp;#x27; Dorm" label="Girls&amp;#x27; Dorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059260" start="29323" end="29336" title="Youth Society" label="Youth Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532781" start="29358" end="29365" title="Genesis (S.H.E album)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813074" start="29387" end="29395" title="Together (S.H.E album)" label="Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642809" start="29417" end="29427" title="Super Star (S.H.E album)" label="Super Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q10942152" start="29449" end="29464" title="Magical Journey" label="Magical Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375534" start="29486" end="29492" title="Encore (S.H.E album)" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091850" start="29514" end="29530" title="Once Upon a Time (S.H.E album)" label="Once Upon a Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469357" start="29552" end="29559" title="Forever (S.H.E album)" label="Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977711" start="29581" end="29585" title="Play (S.H.E album)" label="Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426748" start="29607" end="29615" title="FM S.H.E" label="FM S.H.E"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390201" start="29637" end="29642" title="SHERO" label="SHERO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656395" start="29664" end="29672" title="Blossomy" label="Blossomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30099" end="30125" title="#Television and film career" label="Television and film career"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606844" start="31365" end="31413" title="List of awards and nominations received by S.H.E" label="List of awards and nominations received by S.H.E"/>
<link wikidata="Q153056" start="31550" end="31570" title="Destiny&amp;#x27;s Child" label="Destiny&amp;#x27;s Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200110" start="31753" end="31763" title="Richie Ren" label="Richie Ren"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706590" wikidata="Q615892" url="?curid=706590" title="Dala horse">
<text>A Dala horse or Dalecarlian horse is a traditional carved, painted wooden statue of a horse originating in the Swedish province of Dalarna (Dalecarlia). In the old days, the Dala horse was mostly used as a toy for children; in modern times it has become a symbol of Dalarna, as well as of Sweden in general.

Several types of Dala horses are made with distinguishing features common to the locality of the site where they are produced. One particular style has, however, become much more common and widespread than others. It is stoutly carved and was traditionally painted Iron oxide red at first. Now it is usually reddish orange with details and a harness in white, green, yellow and blue.

==History==
The carving of Dala horses as a livelihood is thought to have started in the village of in central Sweden, though the nearby &quot;horse&quot; villages of , Vattnäs, and Nusnäs were also centres of horse-making. The villages were involved in the art of furniture and clock-making, and it is likely the leftover scraps of wood were put to use in the production of Dala horses. Many early Dala horses were not painted at all, but in the beginning of the 19th century painting them in a single color, white or red, became common practice. The decoration of the Dala horse has its roots in furniture painting and was perfected over the years. According to a local tale, a wandering painter in the style of &quot;kurbits&quot; came across one of these Dala horses in a farm he was decorating. When asked by one of the children why that horse was not as beautifully painted as the ones in the decorations, he painted the Dala horse in the same style. This tradition was then carried on in order to raise the market value of the Dala horses.

The earliest references to wooden horses for sale are from 1623. In the 19th century, from the village Risa in the parish of Mora introduced the technique of painting with two colours on the same brush, still used today. In the book &quot;The Wooden Horses of Sweden,&quot; the author mentions that this famous Dala painter is buried in a small churchyard in Nebraska after having immigrated to the Midwest in 1887 at the age of 64. He changed his name to Erik Erikson upon coming to America and is buried at Bega Cemetery in Stanton County Nebraska, outside of Norfolk.

While there were many horse whittlers in the early production of Dala horses, there were comparatively few horse painters. The large number of whittlers and a lack of distinguishing features makes it difficult to distinguish between different whittlers. Early painters very rarely signed their work, but they did have their own distinct pattern from which it is often possible to identify who painted a particular horse. In the 1930s, (especially after the World&#x27;s Expo in Paris 1937 and World&#x27;s Fair in New York 1939 in which Dala horses were shown) mass production of Dala horses started. This marks the beginning of a new era for the Dala horse, transitioning from toy to a national symbol and popular souvenir.

The Dala horse of today is still a handcrafted article, made of pine, and its pattern is about 150 years old. At least nine different people contribute their skills to create each horse. The distinctive shape of the horse is due to the usage of flat-plane style carving.

===Folklore and popular culture===
An apocryphal legend of the Dala horse is that they became the national toy in 1716. According to the legend, soldiers loyal to King Charles XII were quartered in Dalarna and carved the toys as gifts for their hosts.

In the 2003 Norwegian film &quot;Kitchen Stories&quot;, a small Dala horse is part of a joke when a character expected a real horse as a reward.

==Geographical differences==

Early production of Dala horses was concentrated to four villages: Bergkarlås, Risa, Vattnäs, and Nusnäs, all in the parish of Mora. Production is believed to have started in
Bergkarlås and later spread to nearby villages Risa and Vattnäs through kindred. At about the same time production started independently in Nusnäs, and being farther away their style was less influenced by those of the other villages. The individual painters each had their particular style, and the few who are old enough to remember first- or second-hand the history can often tell which village, and in some cases which carver or painter, turned out a particular horse. The distinguishing features of many early painters from these villages have now been documented.

Many of the works by the earliest horse makers are no longer in existence but those that remain are cherished by their owners and have often been passed down through generations. These are also coveted by collectors, and their value has risen markedly over the years.

Today, many of the villages in Dalarna county make Dala horses with individual styles representing the district of origin. These horses also have distinctive shapes and often come in different sizes. Some horses like the Nusnäs horse are stocky work horses; others are lean and upright with stately countenance like the Rättvik horse. Many of these can be seen at a yearly exhibition (since the year 2000), which is held at Klockargården in Leksand, Sweden. Currently, about forty present carvers and painters show their Dala horses and put them up for sale.

==Production==

Today, Nusnäs is the centre of Dala horse production with the most famous being the Nils Olsson and Grannas Olsson workshops. Grannas A. Olssons Hemslöjd AB, founded in 1922, is the oldest company which still makes Dala horses. Nils Olssons Hemslöjd is almost as old. The horses made at these workshops share the same familiar pattern which most people associate to Dala horses. Apart from these, old-style horses are also hand-carved and painted in limited editions to replicate the style of the antique horses found in Swedish museums or held in private family collections. These are numbered and signed, so that they cannot be confused with an original early Dala horse.

The wood from which the figures are carved comes from the slow-growing pine forests around Lake Siljan. The wood is ideal for carpentry and carving. The trees to be made into horses are marked out while still standing in the forest. Only the best timber will be selected for carving into horses. The trees are felled and sawed into pieces of a suitable size for the blanks that will eventually be made into Dala horses.

The blanks are sawed and carved by hand. Because of this, no two horses are exactly alike. The horses are dipped in primer immediately after carving, to reveal any defects in the wood that may need to be fixed. After priming, any cavities in the wood are filled in to ensure extra smoothness. The horses are polished to give them a smooth, attractive finish.

After sanding, the horses are dipped into paint of the appropriate colour. The traditional pattern is painted free-hand by practised &quot;ripple&quot; painters. The art of rippling requires great skill and takes many years to learn. Finally, &quot;all the fine horses&quot; are varnished and sent out from Nusnäs to serve as a symbol of Sweden in the outside world.

In the United States, you can also view the production of Dala horses at the Hemslöjd, in Lindsborg, Kansas. This workshop is modelled after the hemslöjds you will find throughout Sweden&#x27;s countryside. Guests are welcome to watch and talk as woodworkers and artists create the handcrafted horses. Artists work in shop Monday through Saturday, and woodworkers are busy in the mornings Monday through Friday. You can also find the beautiful Dala horses that are imported from workshops in Sweden.

===Production of Dala horses===
==Dala horses in the United States==
Dala horses were introduced to North America at the 1939 World&#x27;s Fair in New York. The architects Sven Markelius and Anders Beckman chose the Dala horse because they were searching for a powerful symbol for the Swedish pavilion at the fair.

A similar Dala horse can be seen in Andersonville, Chicago, donated by the Swedish American Women&#x27;s Educational Association (SWEA) to the Swedish American Museum. SWAE commissioned the Swedish Artist Lars Gillis to paint the Dala horse in a way that represents the connection between Sweden and Chicago. After eight years, the original Dala horse could not withstand the harsh Chicago weather conditions and was removed in 2013 for restoration that took a year. It is now kept in the lobby of the Swedish American Museum, which provided a fiberglass replica placed on the corner of Clark and Farragut streets.

==Notes==
==External links==
Nardwuar Interview of Swedish artist Yung Lean, in which a Dala horse is given as a gift.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q615892" start="2" end="12" title="Dala horse" label="Dala horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q615892" start="16" end="33" title="Dala horse" label="Dalecarlian horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="86" end="91" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="111" end="118" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q205218" start="131" end="138" title="Dalarna" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16831078" start="574" end="588" title="Iron oxide red" label="Iron oxide red"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127570" start="651" end="658" title="horse harness" label="harness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885150" start="863" end="870" title="Vattnäs" label="Vattnäs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642885" start="876" end="882" title="Nusnäs" label="Nusnäs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046725" start="1414" end="1421" title="kurbits" label="kurbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q849874" start="1867" end="1871" title="Mora, Sweden" label="Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165755" start="2771" end="2802" title="Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne (1937)" label="World&amp;#x27;s Expo in Paris 1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="2807" end="2841" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s Fair in New York 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="2875" end="2890" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429982" start="3285" end="3309" title="Scandinavian flat-plane style of woodcarving" label="flat-plane style carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="3350" end="3367" title="Apocrypha" label="apocryphal legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="3475" end="3491" title="Charles XII of Sweden" label="King Charles XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q169322" start="3598" end="3613" title="Kitchen Stories" label="Kitchen Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q849874" start="3868" end="3872" title="Mora, Sweden" label="Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975525" start="5076" end="5083" title="Rättvik" label="Rättvik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5180" end="5193" title="Klockargården" label="Klockargården"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003260" start="5197" end="5204" title="Leksand" label="Leksand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037375" start="5416" end="5427" title="Nils Olsson" label="Nils Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5432" end="5446" title="Grannas Olsson" label="Grannas Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5458" end="5488" title="Grannas A. Olssons Hemslöjd AB" label="Grannas A. Olssons Hemslöjd AB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5560" end="5581" title="Nils Olssons Hemslöjd" label="Nils Olssons Hemslöjd"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="5829" end="5836" title="antique" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q217430" start="6098" end="6109" title="Siljan (lake)" label="Lake Siljan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012266" start="7246" end="7263" title="Lindsborg, Kansas" label="Lindsborg, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="7778" end="7800" title="1939 World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047557" start="8009" end="8031" title="Andersonville, Chicago" label="Andersonville, Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654581" start="8116" end="8139" title="Swedish American Museum" label="Swedish American Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="8517" end="8527" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q434956" start="8618" end="8626" title="Nardwuar" label="Nardwuar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281410" start="8655" end="8664" title="Yung Lean" label="Yung Lean"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706595" wikidata="Q246384" url="?curid=706595" title="Schroeder (Peanuts)">
<text>Schroeder is a fictional character in the long-running comic strip &quot;Peanuts&quot;, created by Charles M. Schulz. He is distinguished by his prodigious skill at playing the toy piano, as well as by his love of classical music in general and the composer Ludwig van Beethoven in particular. Schroeder is also the catcher on Charlie Brown&#x27;s baseball team, though he is usually seen walking back to the pitcher&#x27;s mound with the baseball, never throwing it—admitting in one strip he did not want the other team to discover his lack of ability. He is also the object of the unrequited infatuation of Lucy Van Pelt, who constantly leans on Schroeder&#x27;s piano. Charlie Brown, Frieda, Peppermint Patty, and Snoopy are occasionally depicted leaning on Schroeder&#x27;s piano.

Aside from Linus and Snoopy, Schroeder is Charlie Brown&#x27;s closest friend; he once angrily berated Violet Gray for giving Charlie Brown a used valentine well after Valentine&#x27;s Day had come and gone, saying he had feelings and deserved better, only for Charlie Brown to eagerly accept it. Schroeder also joined Linus in chastising the girls (Lucy, Patty, Violet and Frieda) and Snoopy in &quot;Charlie Brown&#x27;s All-Stars&quot;, when it was discovered Charlie Brown refused to remove the girls and Snoopy from his baseball team just to get new uniforms. He also is one of the few players who has any respect for Charlie Brown as a manager; though he is as capable of ire at Charlie Brown&#x27;s poor performance as anyone else, such instances are rare. In one game, when Frieda asked Schroeder &quot;Wouldn&#x27;t you like just once to see Charlie Brown hit that ball?&quot;, Schroeder&#x27;s calm reply was &quot;No, I am not prepared to have the world come to an end&quot;.

In honor of Schroeder&#x27;s passion for Beethoven, the Charles M. Schulz Museum (Santa Rosa) and the Ira F. Brilliant Center for Beethoven Studies announced the launching in December 2009 of a permanent online exhibit of 60 of the 300 Schulz cartoons that involve Schroeder and Beethoven.

== Personality ==

Despite only playing on a toy piano, Schroeder is a very talented musician who is obsessed with the music of Beethoven. Since he is Schroeder&#x27;s &quot;hero&quot;, he wants to be like Beethoven. Since Beethoven was a lifelong bachelor, Schroeder thinks he should be the same, rejecting Lucy&#x27;s love interest in him. The closest Schroeder got to playing a real piano was playing his toy piano on the piano seat of one.

== Appearance ==
Schroeder has short, blond hair and he almost always wears a striped shirt and black shorts.

== History ==
Schroeder was introduced as a baby on May 30, 1951, but he aged up to the maturity level of the other characters over the next three years. In his initial appearance, Patty refers to him as a next-door neighbor. His address is 1770 James Street, easy to remember for him because the number is Beethoven&#x27;s birth year. In 1954, Schroeder&#x27;s birthday was revealed to be January 18. He initially had no notable characteristics, but soon Schulz had the idea to incorporate his daughter Meredith&#x27;s toy piano into the strip, and decided to give it to the newest character. The origin of his name can be found in Schulz&#x27;s 1975 book &quot;Peanuts Jubilee&quot;: &quot;Schroeder was named after a young boy with whom I used to caddy at Highland Park golf course in St. Paul, Minnesota. I don&#x27;t recall ever knowing his first name, but just &#x27;Schroeder&#x27; seemed right for the character in the script, even before he became the great musician he now is.&quot;
From his first appearance at the piano on September 24, 1951, Schroeder has played classical pieces at a virtuoso level, as depicted by Schulz&#x27;s transcription of sheet music onto the panel (a process he called &quot;extremely tedious&quot;). The first piece Schroeder played was Rachmaninoff&#x27;s Prelude in G minor. Schroeder often played music by Beethoven, his favorite composer, though in earlier strips, he also listened to and played other composers&#x27; pieces, particularly Brahms. Schulz once said that Brahms was his own favorite composer and originally planned to depict him as Schroeder&#x27;s idol, but decided that Beethoven sounded &quot;funnier&quot;. Every year, Schroeder marks December 16, his hero&#x27;s birthday, though on at least two occasions Schroeder unintentionally forgot. When Charlie Brown&#x27;s baseball team is required to have a sponsor to play games, Schroeder&#x27;s sponsor is Beethoven.

Schroeder became such a devotee of Beethoven that, after Lucy smashed his bust of Beethoven, he wordlessly got another one from a closetful of Beethoven busts; it was later revealed that he also had an entire closetful of pianos. Lucy once implies that his idolization of Beethoven is excessive, and asks what he thinks of other classical composers such as Schubert, Brahms, Bach, and Chopin. Schroeder replies, &quot;They were great too&quot;, and continues to play Beethoven. On another occasion, Lucy tells Schroeder, &quot;Beethoven wasn&#x27;t so great.&quot; Irritated, Schroeder asks Lucy to explain her comment. Lucy replies, &quot;You&#x27;ve never seen his face on a bubblegum card, have you?&quot; In an early strip, Schroeder finds he has perfect pitch.

Schroeder is usually depicted sitting at his toy piano, able to pound out multi-octave selections of music, despite the fact that such pianos have a very small range (for instance, and as a running joke, the black keys are merely painted onto the white keys). Charlie Brown tried to get him to play a real piano and young Schroeder burst into tears, intimidated by its size. Violet later attempts the same thing, but once again, Schroeder refuses. On another occasion, Charlie Brown arrives with a toy violin and asks Schroeder if he could play Beethoven on it, and Schroeder scoffs at such an absurd idea. Peppermint Patty once called Schroeder a &quot;miniature Leonard Bernstein&quot; after she heard him whistling a classical piece during a ball game shortly after she was introduced to the strip and briefly took over management of the team.

== Relationship with Lucy Van Pelt ==
Schroeder&#x27;s other distinguishing mark as a character is his constant refusal of Lucy&#x27;s love. Lucy is infatuated with Schroeder, and frequently lounges against his piano while he is playing, usually flirting with him or professing her love. But Beethoven was a lifelong bachelor, and Schroeder feels he must emulate every aspect of his idol&#x27;s life, even if he reciprocates Lucy&#x27;s feelings.

In a story arc where she and her family have temporarily moved out of town (also seen in the TV special &quot;Is This Goodbye, Charlie Brown?&quot;), Schroeder becomes frustrated with his music and mutters, disbelievingly, that he misses her, realizing that, despite his animosity toward her, Lucy has unwittingly become his muse and he cannot play without her (he parodies Henry Higgins by saying &quot;Don&#x27;t tell me I&#x27;ve grown accustomed to &quot;THAT&quot; face!&quot;). Sometimes he gets so annoyed with Lucy that he yanks the piano out from underneath her to get her away from him; on one occasion both Lucy and Frieda lounge on Schroeder&#x27;s piano until he yanks it from beneath them both after Frieda mistakenly thinks Beethoven is a drink (she says, &quot;All right, but I&#x27;ll just have a small glass&quot;). Schroeder does allow Charlie Brown to lounge against the piano, because of their solid friendship. How Lucy keeps getting into Schroeder&#x27;s house is never addressed.

Lucy regularly vexes and perplexes Schroeder with speculations about what their lives would be like if they were married. On one occasion, she rattles off a list of all the luxuries she would need in order to maintain a high-society lifestyle before asking Schroeder whether pianists make much money; when he replies that it depends on how much they practice, she encourages him to keep practicing. Her suggestions that he might insist on playing in cheap bars or that she would make him practice in the basement upset him, and several of her fantasies of their married life seem strangely pessimistic: Lucy has imagined that Schroeder could become a famous concert pianist who breaks both arms skiing, leaving them so destitute that she has to take in laundry to support them; on another occasion she remarked that, if they married and Schroeder failed to earn money, they would sell his piano to buy saucepans. On both occasions, Schroeder got up and walked away from his piano in bewilderment.

Though Schroeder is often annoyed by Lucy&#x27;s behavior, he rarely tells her to go away. Most times he is willing to answer her questions, but unfortunately they usually turn into themes that annoy him, such as the idea of them getting married and ignorant comments about music. Schroeder seems to like educating her about Beethoven, although she usually responds with silly answers.

Schroeder once took Lucy&#x27;s place in the psychiatric booth when she was not available. When Charlie Brown poured out his troubles, Schroeder said simply, &quot;Go home and listen to a Brahms piano quartet. Five cents, please!&quot; Later, Charlie Brown asked Lucy, &quot;Just how carefully do you screen these assistants of yours?&quot;

Another time Schroeder appeared as a patient. He told Lucy about how Beethoven wrote his great Ninth Symphony, but as he was deaf, he never got to hear it, and every time he thinks about it, it makes him sad. Lucy simply replies with &quot;Try not to think about it. Five cents, please!&quot; After he leaves, she remarks, &quot;Some cases are relatively simple.&quot;

Schroeder accepted gifts from Lucy on a few occasions. Once, when she gave him a sketch of Beethoven that she drew herself, he was thrilled, but she was then shocked to find he already had a gigantic wall-sized portrait of Beethoven in an elaborate frame hanging in his room. Another time, on Beethoven&#x27;s birthday, she gave him a picture of Johann Strauss because &quot;they were all out of Beethoven&quot;. Schroeder also accepted a flower from Lucy, but after he explained that accepting a flower can mean love, or &quot;just to keep from hurting the other person&#x27;s feelings&quot;, Lucy promptly yanked it back and kicked it away.

In reaction to Lucy&#x27;s constant advances, Schroeder has occasionally humored her. He gave her a valentine after confirming that he did not have to love her to give her one and that just &quot;barely being able to tolerate her&quot; was fine. Schroeder demonstrates the same fondly teasing tone in the December 14, 1975 Sunday strip, whispering flirtatious comments to her while she pretends to be asleep on his piano. He addresses her as &quot;pretty girl&quot;, and says &quot;I think you&#x27;re kind of cute! You really fascinate me!&quot; He ends his string of flirtatious remarks with &quot;I guess I love everything about you... Sweet baby!&quot; Lucy cannot help but grin, to which Schroeder exclaims, &quot;Ha! I knew you weren&#x27;t asleep!&quot; Lucy responds with &quot;Rats!&quot;

Schroeder has been known to kiss Lucy only once. Lucy gives Schroeder a cupcake on Beethoven&#x27;s birthday, and he kisses her on the cheek, but when Lucy turns around she sees Snoopy immediately next to her. Thinking that Snoopy kissed her, she runs away screaming, while Schroeder calls for her to come back. Schroeder once offered to kiss Lucy during a baseball game if she hit a home run (he was confident that would never happen as Lucy had never hit the ball out of the infield). This gave Lucy incentive, and she managed to hit a home run on her very next at-bat. Schroeder waited for her at home plate, reluctantly prepared to kiss her, but Lucy turned it down, not wanting him to kiss her only because he lost a bet.

According to David Michaelis&#x27;s biographical book &quot;Schulz and Peanuts&quot;, Schroeder&#x27;s contentious relationship with Lucy was based on Schulz&#x27;s relationship with his first wife.

== Relationship with Charlie Brown ==
Schroeder is second only to Linus as a close friend of Charlie Brown, though in a strip from the mid-1950s they wrangled over whether Beethoven or Davy Crockett was greater. During conferences on the pitcher&#x27;s mound, the two engage in unusual conversations, mostly about Beethoven and hand signals. Schroeder also often encourages Charlie Brown during games, while the rest of the team says, &quot;Don&#x27;t let us down by showing up!&quot; In the animated cartoon &quot;A Boy Named Charlie Brown&quot;, he limits Charlie Brown to only two pitches, a high and low straight ball.

Schroeder&#x27;s most significant act of friendship came in a strip (also in &quot;Be My Valentine, Charlie Brown&quot;) in which Violet offers Charlie Brown one of her used valentine cards (since he received none the previous day at his school&#x27;s Valentine&#x27;s Day party). Schroeder chastises Violet for disregarding Charlie Brown&#x27;s feelings and her selfish motive of relieving her guilt. Charlie Brown tells Violet not to listen to him and accepts the card, while expressing appreciation for Schroeder&#x27;s gesture.

Charlie Brown is one of the few people Schroeder allows to lounge against his piano, as he knows that Charlie Brown respects his love of Beethoven. When they were younger, Charlie Brown would read Schroeder the story of Beethoven&#x27;s life. Charlie Brown introduced Schroeder to the piano. Schroeder also generally does not mind Snoopy lounging against his piano until, moved by the music (particularly Chopin), Snoopy generally ends up intruding on his playing or dancing on top of the piano, to Schroeder&#x27;s annoyance. In one scene of &quot;A Charlie Brown Christmas&quot;, Schroeder is playing a particularly jazzy portion of Linus and Lucy when Snoopy comes out of nowhere and starts dancing on the piano until Schroeder and Lucy start glaring at him, at which point Snoopy stops and crawls away in embarrassment.

== Relationship with Frieda ==
On a few occasions, Frieda has visited Schroeder, making Lucy jealous. Lucy once physically attacked Frieda (per Snoopy&#x27;s advice) after she discovered her leaning on his piano. Frieda does not seem to annoy him as much as Lucy, but Schroeder obviously prefers Lucy, possibly because Frieda has no knowledge at all of classical music. Frieda once thought Beethoven was some kind of drink, causing Schroeder to pull the piano out from under both her and Lucy.

== Schroeder&#x27;s piano ==
The piano&#x27;s prodigious capabilities are illustrated in 1965&#x27;s &quot;A Charlie Brown Christmas&quot;. Lucy asks Schroeder if he can play &quot;Jingle Bells&quot;. Schroeder first plays it in the style of a conventional grand piano, then manages to generate the warm tones of a Hammond organ. Lucy still does not recognize the tune until the irritated Schroeder plays it in a high register with one finger, in the tones of a normal toy piano, whereupon Lucy shouts &quot;That&#x27;s it!&quot; with such force Schroeder whirls off his chair. (This is the only time in the history of the television specials that his toy piano actually sounds like a toy piano.)

In 1966&#x27;s &quot;It&#x27;s the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown&quot;, Schroeder accommodated Snoopy (as the World War I Flying Ace) by playing a brief medley of World War I songs at Violet&#x27;s Halloween party; he plays &quot;It&#x27;s a Long Way to Tipperary&quot;, &quot;There&#x27;s a Long Long Trail A-Winding&quot;, &quot;Pack Up Your Troubles in Your Old Kit-Bag&quot;, and &quot;Roses of Picardy&quot;.

Schroeder is normally a very passive character, content to keep to himself and play his music, but he can be angered quite easily, especially if his music or Beethoven are insulted. In one strip, Lucy points out to him the woefully inadequate range of a toy piano; Schroeder pulls the piano out from under her, causing her to strike her head on the floor. This became a running gag in the strip&#x27;s later years. In 1971&#x27;s &quot;Play It Again, Charlie Brown&quot;, Lucy asks if pianists make a lot of money, and Schroeder flies into a rage: &quot;Who cares about money?! This is art! This is great music I&#x27;m playing, and playing great music is an art! Do you hear me? An art! Art! Art! Art! Art! Art!&quot; (the last five words punctuated by slamming his hands against his piano). These instances mark the few occasions when any character has successfully stood up to the notoriously aggressive Lucy.

The musical notes Schroeder plays also seem to have substance; characters are able to touch them as they appear in the air. Snoopy, for example, once decorated a Christmas tree using a handful of them and has on at least one occasion been seen dancing atop the musical staff containing them. He has also occasionally dumped a bucketful of them into the piano in order to change the tune Schroeder is playing. Also, twice while Schroeder was playing and the notes were above him, Lucy&#x27;s head appeared between the treble and bass staffs, causing him to stop and say, &quot;Don&#x27;t tell me I&#x27;ve grown accustomed to &quot;that&quot; face!&quot;

Lucy has often spoken of getting Schroeder to give up his piano, saying that married life has financial hardships and he may have to sell his piano in order to buy her a good set of saucepans. On two occasions, Lucy went so far as to destroy Schroeder&#x27;s piano in an attempt to be rid of the &quot;competition&quot; for his affection, but both attempts failed:

*In a series of strips from January 1969, Lucy threw Schroeder&#x27;s piano into the dreaded Kite-Eating Tree, which evidently found toy pianos as appetizing as kites. When Charlie Brown asked whether the piano was covered by insurance, Schroeder replied, &quot;How do you explain to the insurance company that your piano was eaten by a tree?&quot;
*In her second attempt to get rid of the piano, from an October 1974 strip series, Lucy threw the piano into the sewer, from which Charlie Brown and Schroeder attempted to retrieve it. Schroeder was able to reach it, but it was stuck, and when it started raining heavily, the piano washed out to sea.

Lucy once &quot;accidentally&quot; washed the piano and threw it in the dryer which, to Schroeder&#x27;s horror, caused it to shrink.

During the title sequence of &quot;The Peanuts Movie&quot;, Schroeder plays the 20th Century-Fox fanfare on his piano.

== Portrayals ==
* Chris Doran first voiced Schroeder in animation, in 1965&#x27;s &quot;A Charlie Brown Christmas&quot;. Various actors since then have portrayed Schroeder including Todd Barbee, who also voiced Charlie Brown from 1973 to 1974.
* The musical &quot;You&#x27;re a Good Man, Charlie Brown&quot; featured Skip Hinnant as Schroeder in the 1967 original off-Broadway production, and Stanley Wayne Mathis in the 1999 Broadway revival.
* Schroeder is alluded to in the play &quot;Dog Sees God&quot; as Beethoven.

=== Voiced by ===

*Chris Doran (1963, 1965)
*Glenn Mendelson (1966–1968)
*John Daschback (1969)
*Andy Pforsich (1969)
*Danny Hjeim (1971)
*David Carey (1972)
*Brian Kazajian (1972)
*Todd Barbee (1974)
*Greg Felton (1975–1977)
*Daniel Anderson (1979)
*Christopher Donohoe (1980–1982)
*Kevin Brando (1983)
*Gary Goren (1984)
*Danny Colby (1984–1986)
*Jeremy Reinbolt (1985)
*Aron Mandelbaum (1986)
*Curtis Andersen (1988–1989)
*Travis Boles (1996)
*Corey Padnos (2000)
*Christopher Ryan Johnson (2002–2003)
*Nick Price (2003)
*Jake D. Smith (2008–2009)
*Trenton Rogers (2011)
*Connor Keddington (2012)
*Noah Johnston (2015)
*Daniel Thornton (2016)
*Aidan Alberto (2018–2019)
*Matthew Mucci (2021–2023)
*Cash Martin (2024–present)
==In other media==
* Schroeder Hall, at The Green Music Center at Sonoma State University, is a recital hall named after the character due to Jeannie and Charles M. Schulz&#x27;s contributions to the university and ties to the community.
* In &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;Treehouse of Horror IV&quot;, the final story ends in a parody of the &quot;Peanuts&quot; Christmas specials, complete with Milhouse van Houten playing the piano in Schroeder&#x27;s pose while Santa&#x27;s Little Helper dances like Snoopy.
* An album of classical piano music titled &quot;Schroeder&#x27;s Greatest Hits&quot; has been released by RCA Victor. Ostensibly an album recorded by Schroeder himself (though the pianist is actually Nelly Kokinos), the album consists of piano music by some of the composers that Schroeder has been known to play over the years. Beethoven, of course, but Mozart, Chopin, Brahms, and Schumann are also represented.
* In the &quot;South Park&quot; episode &quot;A Very Crappy Christmas&quot;, he appears as the piano player for the Christmas recording session. He makes another appearance in the &quot;South Park&quot; episode &quot;Probably&quot; as the organist at Cartman&#x27;s &quot;children&#x27;s church&quot;. An additional appearance was as the piano player in &quot;Something You Can Do with Your Finger&quot; in tryouts for the fifth member of Cartman&#x27;s boy band.
* Schulz told an anecdote wherein he visited the grave of Beethoven and placed a Snoopy pin on it. A little girl looked at him and asked &quot;Wo ist Schroeder?&quot; (&quot;Where&#x27;s Schroeder?&quot;). Schulz went back to his car, found a Schroeder pin and placed it on the grave instead, eliciting pleased smiles from the child and her mother.
* An older version of Schroeder appears on the &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode &quot;Mother Tucker&quot;, alongside older versions of Charlie Brown, Linus, Peppermint Patty, Sally Brown and others, in a cutaway gag.
* Both Schroeder and Charles Schulz are honorary brothers of the music fraternity Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia.
* In &quot;The Flash&quot; episode &quot;Into the Speed Force&quot;, H.R. Wells refers to the theory of Schrödinger&#x27;s cat as Schroeder&#x27;s Cat, and is told by Cisco that Schroeder is &quot;the kid from &quot;Peanuts&quot; who plays the piano&quot;. Wells responds that in &quot;Peanuts&quot; on his Earth, Charlie Brown plays the piano, and states that it is a recurring joke that &quot;he&#x27;s so bad at it&quot;.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Dembosky, April. &quot;Listening to Schroeder: &#x27;Peanuts&#x27; Scholars Find Messages in Cartoon&#x27;s Scores&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 14 January 2009
* &quot;Schulz&#x27;s Beethoven, Schroeder&#x27;s Muse&quot;, Charles M. Schulz Museum and Beethoven Center online exhibit</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246384" start="0" end="9" title="Schroeder (Peanuts)" label="Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="55" end="66" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="73" end="80" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="99" end="116" title="Charles M. Schulz" label="Charles M. Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="145" end="161" title="child prodigy" label="prodigious skill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300012" start="177" end="186" title="toy piano" label="toy piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="258" end="278" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="327" end="340" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422491" start="609" end="622" title="Lucy Van Pelt" label="Lucy Van Pelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135809" start="687" end="693" title="Frieda (Peanuts)" label="Frieda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094514" start="695" end="711" title="Peppermint Patty" label="Peppermint Patty"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="717" end="723" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351248" start="797" end="802" title="Linus Van Pelt" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="807" end="813" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084304" start="889" end="900" title="Violet (Peanuts)" label="Violet Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084596" start="1188" end="1218" title="Charlie Brown&amp;#x27;s All-Stars" label="Charlie Brown&amp;#x27;s All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135809" start="1568" end="1574" title="Frieda (Peanuts)" label="Frieda"/>
<link wikidata="Q657915" start="1830" end="1854" title="Charles M. Schulz Museum and Research Center" label="Charles M. Schulz Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q212991" start="1856" end="1866" title="Santa Rosa, California" label="Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066044" start="1876" end="1921" title="Ira F. Brilliant Center for Beethoven Studies" label="Ira F. Brilliant Center for Beethoven Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="2193" end="2202" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084342" start="2802" end="2807" title="Patty (Peanuts)" label="Patty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15437374" start="3125" end="3133" title="Meredith Hodges" label="Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q214970" start="3719" end="3727" title="virtuoso" label="virtuoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="3898" end="3910" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408999" start="3918" end="3936" title="Prelude in G minor (Rachmaninoff)" label="Prelude in G minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="3970" end="3979" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="4104" end="4110" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q241045" start="4623" end="4627" title="bust (sculpture)" label="bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="4906" end="4914" title="Schubert" label="Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="4924" end="4928" title="Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="4934" end="4940" title="Chopin" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213250" start="5300" end="5313" title="absolute pitch" label="perfect pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300012" start="5361" end="5370" title="toy piano" label="toy piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094514" start="5923" end="5939" title="Peppermint Patty" label="Peppermint Patty"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="5980" end="5997" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075561" start="6722" end="6753" title="Is This Goodbye, Charlie Brown?" label="Is This Goodbye, Charlie Brown?"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="6986" end="6999" title="My Fair Lady" label="Henry Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="10060" end="10074" title="Johann Strauss" label="Johann Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="11721" end="11727" title="at-bat" label="at-bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q116788822" start="11898" end="11913" title="David Michaelis" label="David Michaelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="12178" end="12191" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q311070" start="12270" end="12283" title="Davy Crockett" label="Davy Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q303887" start="12600" end="12625" title="A Boy Named Charlie Brown" label="A Boy Named Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="12693" end="12706" title="Fastball" label="straight ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875552" start="12792" end="12822" title="Be My Valentine, Charlie Brown" label="Be My Valentine, Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="13647" end="13653" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393337" start="13791" end="13816" title="A Charlie Brown Christmas" label="A Charlie Brown Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241700" start="13877" end="13891" title="Linus and Lucy" label="Linus and Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393337" start="14669" end="14694" title="A Charlie Brown Christmas" label="A Charlie Brown Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q406845" start="14743" end="14755" title="Jingle Bells" label="Jingle Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="14877" end="14890" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q596994" start="15281" end="15323" title="It&amp;#x27;s the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown" label="It&amp;#x27;s the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084304" start="15443" end="15449" title="Violet Gray" label="Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160066" start="15489" end="15522" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Long Way to Tipperary" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Long Way to Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782646" start="15536" end="15576" title="There&amp;#x27;s a Long Long Trail A-Winding" label="There&amp;#x27;s a Long Long Trail A-Winding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122871" start="15590" end="15631" title="Pack Up Your Troubles in Your Old Kit-Bag" label="Pack Up Your Troubles in Your Old Kit-Bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431416" start="15649" end="15665" title="Roses of Picardy" label="Roses of Picardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469546" start="16044" end="16055" title="running gag" label="running gag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203025" start="16110" end="16138" title="Play It Again, Charlie Brown" label="Play It Again, Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905617" start="17702" end="17718" title="Kite-Eating Tree" label="Kite-Eating Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982441" start="18430" end="18447" title="The Peanuts Movie" label="The Peanuts Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="18475" end="18491" title="20th Century-Fox" label="20th Century-Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393337" start="18604" end="18629" title="A Charlie Brown Christmas" label="A Charlie Brown Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992002" start="18780" end="18817" title="You&amp;#x27;re a Good Man, Charlie Brown" label="You&amp;#x27;re a Good Man, Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15503273" start="18833" end="18845" title="Skip Hinnant" label="Skip Hinnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600030" start="18909" end="18929" title="Stanley Wayne Mathis" label="Stanley Wayne Mathis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712526" start="19004" end="19016" title="Dog Sees God" label="Dog Sees God"/>
<link wikidata="Q624571" start="19833" end="19856" title="Sonoma State University" label="Sonoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="20016" end="20028" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444196" start="20049" end="20071" title="Treehouse of Horror IV" label="Treehouse of Horror IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514450" start="20173" end="20192" title="Milhouse van Houten" label="Milhouse van Houten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425114" start="20242" end="20268" title="Santa&amp;#x27;s Little Helper" label="Santa&amp;#x27;s Little Helper"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="20396" end="20406" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="20719" end="20729" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q467320" start="20750" end="20773" title="A Very Crappy Christmas" label="A Very Crappy Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q834900" start="20921" end="20929" title="Probably (South Park episode)" label="Probably"/>
<link wikidata="Q47352" start="20955" end="20969" title="Eric Cartman" label="Cartman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q837854" start="21064" end="21101" title="Something You Can Do with Your Finger" label="Something You Can Do with Your Finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="21570" end="21580" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31413" start="21601" end="21614" title="Mother Tucker (Family Guy)" label="Mother Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181548" start="21814" end="21835" title="Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia" label="Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711398" start="21848" end="21857" title="The Flash (2014 TV series)" label="The Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q48893044" start="21906" end="21916" title="H.R. Wells" label="H.R. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q8588" start="21941" end="21963" title="Schrödinger&amp;#x27;s cat" label="Schrödinger&amp;#x27;s cat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706600" wikidata="Q33259" url="?curid=706600" title="Bats language">
<text>Bats (, or , ), also known as Batsbi, Batsi, Batsb, Batsaw, or Tsova-Tush) is the endangered language of the Bats people, a North Caucasian minority group living in the Republic of Georgia. Batsbi is part of the Nakh branch of Northeast Caucasian languages. It had 2,500 to 3,000 speakers in 1975, with only one dialect. Batsbi is only used for spoken communication, as Bats people tend to use Georgian when writing.

==History==

Tusheti, the northeastern mountainous region of Georgia, is home to four tribes that consider themselves Tushetians: the Batsbi (also known as Tsovatush), the Gometsari, the Piriqiti, and the Chagma-Tush. Tsovatush people make up 50% of Tushetians. Only several hundred Tsovatush people speak Bats, whereas the other tribes (Gometsari, Piriqiti and Chagma-Tush) have lost the language. Evidence from toponymics indicates that the other three Tushetian tribes formerly spoke Bats, suggesting that all Tushetians once did and over time the Georgian language replaced Bats.

The mountainous terrain preserved the culture and traditions of Tushetians, but the history of isolation makes it more difficult to document them as only a few records exist.

The first grammar of Bats, , was compiled by the German orientalist Anton Schiefner (1817–1879), making it into the first grammar of an indigenous Caucasian language based on sound scientific principles.

==Classification &amp; Distribution==
Batsbi belongs to the Nakh branch of the Northeast Caucasian language family. The language is not mutually intelligible with either Chechen or Ingush, the other two Nakh languages.

=== Geographic distribution ===
Most speakers of Bats live in the village of Zemo-Alvani, on the Kakheti Plain, in the Akhmeta Municipality of Georgia. There are some families of Bats in Tbilisi and other bigger towns in Georgia.

== Phonology ==

=== Vowels ===
Bats has a typologically common five-vowel system. Although some authors claim that all vowels but /u/ contrast in length, no minimal pairs are given in any studies of Batsbi, nor are examples of long vowels available in the literature.

Bats also has the following diphthongs: , , , , , and .

All vowels and diphthongs have nasalised allophones that are the result of phonetic and morphophonemic processes: [ ĩ ẽ ã õ ũ ]. Nasalised vowels are represented in the Mkhedruli script via a superscript ⟨ნ⟩ following the vowel in question, as in კნათენ for [k&#x27;natẽ] .

=== Consonants ===
Batsbi has a large consonant inventory, relatively typical for a Nakh-Dagestanian language, containing ejectives, pharyngeals and uvulars. Unlike its close Nakh relatives, Chechen and Ingush, Batsbi has on the other hand retained the voiceless lateral fricative /ɬ/. Also notable is the presence of two geminate ejectives, /tʼː/ and /qʼː/, which are cross-linguistically rare.
=== Phonotactics ===
The most common syllable type in Batsbi is CVC. However, Batsbi words commonly contain sequences of two consonants, the second of which is often a fricative. Stop-stop clusters often contain an ejective. Those two-consonant clusters can occur in any position within the word, although less commonly word-finally. Sequences of three consonants do occur as well, although many are borrowings from Georgian. Like many clusters in non-Indo-European languages, consonant sequences in Batsbi often fail to conform to the sonority sequencing principle. 
Of the words containing three-consonant onsets above, all but /psʼtu/ &quot;wife&quot; and /tʼkʼmel/ &quot;dust&quot; are native to Batsbi, those being loanwords from Georgian.

==Spelling systems==
===Comparison table of various spelling systems for Batsbi===
==Morphosyntax==
Batsbi is an SOV language with ergative-absolutive alignment which makes extensive use of bound morphological derivation and inflection. It has both grammatical gender (i.e. noun classes) and several grammatical cases.

=== Pronouns ===

==== Personal pronouns - first and second persons ====
Batsbi pronouns encode three persons, two numbers, and clusivity for first person plural (&quot;you and us&quot; &quot;vs&quot;. &quot;us but not you&quot;). Demonstratives work as third person pronouns.

It is noteworthy that for singular first person (&#x27;I&#x27;) and second person (&#x27;you&#x27;) almost always differ systematically by a single consonant, first person having /s/ and second person /ħ/, whereas the plural forms regularly have /txo/ for first person exclusive, and /ʃu/ for second person. Case endings are regular for all pronouns, shown below. 
==== Third person pronouns/Demonstratives ====
In Batsbi, the distal demonstrative (&#x27;that yonder&#x27;) also serves as a third person pronoun (&#x27;s/he&#x27;, &#x27;it&#x27;, &#x27;they&#x27;). As such, the language does not encode gender in its pronouns. However, gender may still be indexed on verbs and adjectives.
==== Adnominal demonstratives ====

Adnominal demonstratives code no gender in Batsbi.


==== Interrogative pronouns ====
===Noun classes===
As in other Nakh languages, Batsbi has several noun classes (grammatical genders) that are indexed through class prefixes on some vowel-initial verbs, adjectives, numerals, and a few other words. That is, nouns themselves show no morphologically marks for gender. Gender indexing is highly complex in the language, with subject gender agreement on intransitive verbs (absolutive), but object agreement on transitive verbs. The table below shows gender agreement on verbs for three of the noun classes:
==== Number of classes ====
Holisky and Gagua (1994) analyse Batsbi as having five noun classes, whereas Alice Harris posits that Batsbi has eight genders in total, based on the behaviour of words that fail to conform to the patterns of the five major classes. The breakdown below follows Harris:

==== Exceptions and Nouns without inherent gender ====
According to Holisky and Gagua (1994), the class with the largest number of nouns is the D-class (e.g. da&quot; &quot;it is&quot;), followed by the J-class (e.g. ja&quot; &quot;it is&quot;). Class D markers are also used when the noun class is unknown (as in open interrogatives, see 1a) and in clauses with mixed genders (1d).



Additionally, some nouns referring to humans have no inherent gender, so that class agreement is contextual. These includes the words for &quot;teacher&quot; (უჩიტელ &quot;učitʼel&quot;), &quot;friend&quot; (ნაყბისტ &quot;naq&#x27;bist&quot;&#x27;), &quot;enemy&quot; (მასთხოვ &quot;mastxov&quot;), &quot;neighbor&quot; (მეზობელ &quot;mezobel&quot;) and others.

Gender is lexicalized in a few words such as vašu&quot; (ვაშუ &quot;brother&quot;) vs. jašu&quot; (ჲაშუ &quot;sister&quot;),in that -&quot;ašu&quot; could be translated as &quot;sibling&quot;.

==== Gender agreement in adjectives ====
Only eight vowel-initial adjectives agree in gender with the noun they modify:
===Grammatical number and case===
Batsbi nouns are inflected for two numbers, singular and plural, and nine cases. Number inflection occurs via suffixation and/or root changes, and is chiefly unpredictable. Harris (ms) identifies nine suffixes for plural marking in the nominative case; note that vowel changes (i.e. ablaut) may also affect the root of the plural form. 
Batsbi makes use of nine noun cases total. In the majority of nouns, the ergative and instrumental cases have a common form.

===Verbs===
Verds in Batsbi encode not only tense, and aspect, but also gender, person, mood, and other categories. Person suffixes also encode whether the subject of the verb is ergative or absolutive. Person suffixes for are shown in the table below. Note that Batsbi verbs also agree with the object through a prefix denoting a noun class, not shown in the table that follows. 

Batsbi has explicit inflections for agentivity of a verb; it makes a distinction between:
: (I fell down through no fault of my own)
: (I fell down and it was my own fault)

=== Postpositions ===
In Batsbi, a number of spatial and time relations are expressed via postpositions. In many cases, the nouns that precede the postposition occur in the dative case, although there are exceptions. 

Note that some of the directions or states which in English and Indo-European languages are expressed via prepositions, are in Batsbi expressed via locative cases.

== Word order ==
The neutral word order in Batsbi is SOV.

== Numerals ==
Like most of its relatives, Bats&#x27; numerals are vigesimal, using 20 as a common base. This is mainly evident in the construction of higher decads, so:
: 40 () is formed from 2 20
: 200 () formed from is 10 20

When modifying nominals, the numeral precedes the noun it modifies.



In Bats, as in its closest relatives Chechen and Ingush, the number four () begins with a noun-class marker, represented by &quot;D&quot; (by default, or another capital letter for the other classes). This marker will agree in class with the class of the nominal which the number modifies, even if that nominal is not overtly expressed and is only apparent through pragmatic or discursive context, as in (four (males)). This is seen in the word &#x27;four&#x27; itself as well as its derivatives.

== References ==
* 

== External links ==

* The Red Book of Peoples of the Russian Empire: The Bats
* Languages of the World report 
* Bats basic lexicon at the Global Lexicostatistical Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33259" start="0" end="4" title="Bats language" label="Bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q33259" start="30" end="36" title="Bats language" label="Batsbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33259" start="38" end="43" title="Bats language" label="Batsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33259" start="45" end="50" title="Bats language" label="Batsb"/>
<link wikidata="Q33259" start="52" end="58" title="Bats language" label="Batsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q33259" start="63" end="73" title="Bats language" label="Tsova-Tush"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="82" end="101" title="endangered language" label="endangered language"/>
<link wikidata="Q584462" start="109" end="120" title="Bats people" label="Bats people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33732" start="124" end="139" title="North Caucasian languages" label="North Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="169" end="188" title="Georgia (country)" label="Republic of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24441" start="212" end="223" title="Nakh languages" label="Nakh branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q27387" start="227" end="256" title="Northeast Caucasian languages" label="Northeast Caucasian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="394" end="402" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461736" start="536" end="546" title="Tushetians" label="Tushetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="831" end="841" title="toponymics" label="toponymics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1228" end="1234" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="1235" end="1246" title="oriental studies" label="orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q551620" start="1247" end="1262" title="Anton Schiefner" label="Anton Schiefner"/>
<link wikidata="Q24441" start="1444" end="1448" title="Nakh languages" label="Nakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27387" start="1463" end="1491" title="Northeast Caucasian languages" label="Northeast Caucasian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="1520" end="1541" title="mutually intelligible" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q33350" start="1554" end="1561" title="Chechen language" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33509" start="1565" end="1571" title="Ingush language" label="Ingush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1681" end="1692" title="Zemo-Alvani" label="Zemo-Alvani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1701" end="1714" title="Kakhetia Plain" label="Kakheti Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q748753" start="1723" end="1743" title="Akhmeta Municipality" label="Akhmeta Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="1791" end="1798" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192625" start="1878" end="1898" title="Linguistic typology" label="typologically common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="1982" end="1988" title="Vowel length" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="1993" end="2005" title="minimal pair" label="minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="2133" end="2142" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606582" start="2193" end="2202" title="Nasalization" label="nasalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="2203" end="2212" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35395" start="2237" end="2245" title="Phonetics" label="phonetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q661093" start="2250" end="2264" title="Morphophonology" label="morphophonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161428" start="2331" end="2347" title="Georgian scripts" label="Mkhedruli script"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="2475" end="2494" title="Consonant" label="consonant inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="2559" end="2568" title="Ejective consonant" label="ejectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q252321" start="2570" end="2581" title="Pharyngeal consonant" label="pharyngeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q623772" start="2586" end="2593" title="Uvular consonant" label="uvulars"/>
<link wikidata="Q33350" start="2628" end="2635" title="Chechen language" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33509" start="2640" end="2646" title="Ingush language" label="Ingush"/>
<link wikidata="Q223714" start="2700" end="2707" title="Lateral consonant" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365390" start="2718" end="2721" title="Voiceless dental and alveolar lateral fricatives" label="/ɬ/"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="2759" end="2767" title="Gemination" label="geminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="3048" end="3056" title="Ejective consonant" label="ejective"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="3249" end="3257" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="3285" end="3298" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562250" start="3369" end="3398" title="sonority sequencing principle" label="sonority sequencing principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="3553" end="3561" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="3692" end="3704" title="SOV language" label="SOV language"/>
<link wikidata="Q862156" start="3710" end="3729" title="Ergative–absolutive alignment" label="ergative-absolutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q728001" start="3775" end="3799" title="morphological derivation" label="morphological derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="3804" end="3814" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="3828" end="3846" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="3879" end="3895" title="grammatical case" label="grammatical case"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="3979" end="3986" title="pronoun" label="pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q282301" start="4130" end="4143" title="Demonstrative" label="Demonstrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="4668" end="4680" title="Grammatical person" label="third person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598075" start="5055" end="5065" title="noun class" label="noun class"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="5121" end="5127" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166153" start="5356" end="5373" title="intransitive verb" label="intransitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="6922" end="6931" title="Inflection" label="inflected"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="6940" end="6947" title="Grammatical number" label="numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="7015" end="7021" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125709" start="7188" end="7194" title="Indo-European ablaut" label="ablaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="7267" end="7276" title="noun case" label="noun case"/>
<link wikidata="Q324305" start="7315" end="7323" title="Ergative case" label="ergative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="7328" end="7340" title="Instrumental case" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q392648" start="7786" end="7796" title="Agent (grammar)" label="agentivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="8014" end="8027" title="Adposition" label="postpositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="8097" end="8108" title="dative case" label="dative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="8291" end="8299" title="Locative case" label="locative"/>
<link wikidata="Q257885" start="8329" end="8347" title="Word order" label="neutral word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q842387" start="8434" end="8443" title="vigesimal" label="vigesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33350" start="8704" end="8711" title="Chechen language" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33509" start="8716" end="8722" title="Ingush language" label="Ingush"/>
<link wikidata="Q63153" start="8762" end="8774" title="class marker (morphology)" label="class marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="8829" end="8843" title="capital letter" label="capital letter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706602" wikidata="Q219804" url="?curid=706602" title="Zombies Ate My Neighbors">
<text>Zombies Ate My Neighbors also is a run and gun video game developed by LucasArts and published by Konami for the Super NES and Sega Genesis consoles in 1993.

One or two players take control of the protagonists, Zeke and Julie, in order to rescue the titular neighbors from monsters often seen in horror movies. Aiding them in this task are a variety of weapons and power-ups that can be used to battle the numerous enemies in each level. Various elements and aspects of horror movies are referenced in the game with some of its more violent content being censored in various territories such as Europe and Australia, where it is known only as Zombies.

While not a great commercial success, the game was well-received for its graphical style, humor and deep gameplay. It spawned a sequel, &quot;Ghoul Patrol&quot;, released in 1994. Both games were re-released as part of &quot;Lucasfilm Classic Games: Zombies Ate My Neighbors and Ghoul Patrol&quot; for the Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Microsoft Windows by Disney Interactive in June 2021.

==Gameplay==

The mad scientist Dr. Tongue has created a wide variety of monsters within the bowels of his castle and has unleashed them on nearby suburban areas, terrorizing its inhabitants. Two teenage friends, Zeke and Julie, having witnessed the attack of said monsters, arm themselves with a great deal of unconventional weaponry and items to combat them and save their neighbors from certain death. Ultimately, they will come face to face with Dr. Tongue himself and defeat him to put an end to his plans.

The player can choose between Zeke and Julie, or play both in a two-player mode. They navigate suburban neighborhoods, shopping malls, pyramids, haunted castles, and other areas, destroying a variety of horror-movie monsters, including vampires, werewolves, huge demonic babies, spiders, squidmen, evil dolls, aliens, UFOs, giant ants, blobs, giant worms, mummies, chainsaw-wielding maniacs, &quot;pod people&quot; (aggressive alien clones of the players), and the game&#x27;s namesake, zombies. In each of the 48 stages, which includes seven optional bonus levels, the players must rescue numerous types of neighbors, including barbecue chefs, teachers, babies, tourists, archeologists, soldiers, dogs, and cheerleaders. Once all neighbors on a level have been killed by zombies or saved by the players touching them, a door opens that will take the player to the next stage.

All types of neighbors will be killed if an enemy touches them, preventing them from being saved for the remainder of the game or until an &quot;Extra Bonus Victim&quot; is awarded. On some levels, daytime gradually turns to night. Upon nightfall, tourists transform into werewolves and cannot be saved; the game counts it as if they had been killed. At least one neighbor must be saved from each level to progress to the next. The game is lost if the players lose all of their lives or if all of the neighbors are killed. Scoring points earns players neighbors to save and extra lives. Each level has at most ten neighbors, and each neighbor type is worth a different number of points.

There are various items that the players can pick up along the way. These include keys that open up doors, health packs that restore health, and potions with various effects such as increasing speed or temporarily transforming the player into a powerful monster. Players can also collect various types of weapons, such as an Uzi water gun, bazookas, weed-whackers, explosive soda cans, ice pops, tomatoes, silverware, dishes, ancient crucifixes, flamethrowers, fire extinguishers and Martian bubble guns, each with their own effectiveness against certain types of enemies.

==Development==
&quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; was originally developed by LucasArts. It was published by Konami, a company already known for platformers in 1993. Music for the game was composed by Joseph &quot;Joe&quot; McDermott. The game was developed on the Super NES, before it was ported to the Sega Genesis about halfway through. The ZAMN engine would later be used for &quot;Ghoul Patrol&quot;, &quot;Metal Warriors&quot; and &quot;Big Sky Trooper&quot;. The developer wanted to include a battery save in the game but was unable to as they could not afford it.

The monsters in the game are based on classic horror films released in the 1950s and more modern films like &quot;Friday the 13th&quot; and &quot;The Texas Chain Saw Massacre&quot;. Weapon effectiveness is also based on these depictions; werewolves die in one hit if attacked with silverware and vampires die faster if attacked with the crucifix. In the SNES version of the game, there&#x27;s a flamethrower which is not included in the Mega Drive version. The North American SNES game was later released with a variant cover art in limited quantities.

== Release ==
The game was subject to some censorship. This game was released before the ESRB existed and, before then, Nintendo did not want violence in their video games. Nintendo of America ordered all depictions of blood and gore to be removed or changed to purple ooze. Censorship committees in several European Nations – the United Kingdom, Ireland, Italy, France, Spain, Austria, Portugal, Finland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Germany – censored it further by having the game renamed to &quot;Zombies&quot;, and ordered other changes including the replacement of the chainsaw-wielding enemies with lumberjacks wielding axes.

In October 2009, the Super NES version of &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; was re-released for the Wii Virtual Console.

In May 2021, the game and its sequel were announced for the Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Windows, with a port developed by Dotemu and co-published by Disney Interactive and Lucasfilm Games. &quot;Lucasfilm Classic Games: Zombies Ate My Neighbors and Ghoul Patrol&quot; was released on June 29, 2021.

==Reception==
Although not an immediate success, &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; became a cult classic years after its release. Upon its release, it got above average praise, earning an 84.5% on Gamerankings.com. Reviewers of the game often cited its humor, two-player mode, graphics and music as some of its best aspects.

Mike Seiblier of &quot;Sega-16&quot; said the variety of weapons shows off the game&#x27;s &quot;tongue in cheek nature by giving you weapons and items like silverware, dishes, soda can grenades, a weed whacker, keys, bazookas as well as health packs&quot;. &quot;The Armchair Empire&quot; similarly praised the variety and strategy that the weapon system incorporated. They also made note of the &quot;little details that make it so cool to play&quot;, saying: &quot;If you come across a door, which you don&#x27;t have the key for, you can blow it open with the bazooka.&quot; Critics agreed the co-op mode is &quot;highly recommended&quot;.

The game&#x27;s &quot;colorful and detailed&quot; graphics have been praised as well as its soundtrack, which Seibler called an &quot;homage to the spooky, over the top music found in old, scary flicks&quot;. He went on to mention the sound effects are equally impressive. Corbie Dillard of &quot;Nintendolife.com&quot; said the graphics do not &quot;exactly set new 16-bit standards, but they still manage to look sharp and the creative use of the darker color scheme used throughout the game really makes the creepy visuals come to life onscreen&quot;. He ended his review by affectionately calling the game a &quot;second-rate horror movie&quot; version of &quot;Contra&quot;. &quot;Power Unlimited&quot; praised the game calling it a &quot;Fantastically wacky game&quot;, praised the two-player mode and found the SNES version has better graphics than the Mega Drive counterpart. They also reviewed the Mega Drive version and found the game to be almost as good as the SNES version, except for the controls being more difficult and graphics not as good.

Upon the game&#x27;s release for the Wii Virtual Console, &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; received immense praise and earned an Editor&#x27;s Choice Award from &quot;IGN&quot;. The game has been regarded as one of &quot;the most requested additions to the VC system even before the Wii launch&quot;.

===Accolades===
&quot;Mega&quot; ranked the game 42nd in their &quot;Top 50 Mega Drive Games&quot; in 1994. &quot;IGN&quot; ranks it the 48th best Super Nintendo game. They called the game &quot;Incredibly fun and funny.&quot; In 2018, &quot;Complex&quot; listed the game 48th on its &quot;The Best Super Nintendo Games of All Time&quot; list. They felt the game was amazing and the only criticism they had was the levels got a little repetitive. In 2017, &quot;GamesRadar&quot; rated the game 21st on their &quot;Best Sega Genesis/Mega Drive Games of All Time&quot; In 1995, &quot;Total!&quot; ranked the game 43rd in their Top 100 SNES Games. In 1996, &quot;GamesMaster&quot; listed the Mega Drive version ninth in their &quot;The &quot;GamesMaster&quot; Mega Drive Top 10.&quot;

==Legacy==
In 1997, LucasArts released a game for the PlayStation and the Sega Saturn titled &quot;Herc&#x27;s Adventures&quot;, which uses the same basic gameplay format and mechanics as &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot;. Programmer Chris Long cited &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; as a major influence on his 1997 game &quot;Swagman&quot;.

&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot;, another game developed by LucasArts, is referenced in &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; through a secret level. Comparisons to the game &quot;Dead Rising&quot;, released for the Xbox 360 in 2006, have been drawn, Lucas Thomas of &quot;IGN&quot; saying: &quot;&quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; is basically a comical 16-bit template for the new Xbox 360 release, &quot;Dead Rising&quot;. And like that game, this one arm you with a pretty bizarre arsenal. Weed whackers, exploding soda cans, and flying silverware all make an appearance to help you, or you and a friend, put a hurt on these living dead.&quot;

===Sequels and spin-offs===
A sequel entitled &quot;Ghoul Patrol&quot; was released in 1994, which was also well-received. Originally, &quot;Ghoul Patrol&quot; was not intended to be released as a sequel to &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot;, but was re-worked as such to increase sales.

, a film based on the game was in development. The film was being penned and produced by screenwriter and director John Darko, known for his work on James Wan&#x27;s &quot;Insidious&quot; and Aaron Sims&#x27; &quot;Archetype&quot;. At the time of the report, the film was in the process of securing rights from LucasArts and obtaining a director, as well as financing.

An unofficial, spiritual sequel, &quot;Demons Ate My Neighbors&quot;, has been in development by Tuned-Out Games since 2020.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="35" end="46" title="run and gun (video game)" label="run and gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="47" end="57" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="71" end="80" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="98" end="104" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="113" end="122" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="127" end="139" title="Sega Genesis" label="Sega Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="297" end="310" title="Horror Film" label="horror movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107094" start="366" end="374" title="power-up" label="power-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="432" end="437" title="level (video gaming)" label="level"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284282" start="796" end="808" title="Ghoul Patrol" label="Ghoul Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="960" end="975" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="977" end="990" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="992" end="1000" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1005" end="1022" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030432" start="1026" end="1044" title="Disney Interactive" label="Disney Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2929" end="2934" title="Life (video games)#Extra lives" label="lives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3025" end="3036" title="Life (video games)#Extra lives" label="extra lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q155644" start="3464" end="3467" title="Uzi" label="Uzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q842870" start="3468" end="3477" title="water gun" label="water gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q319432" start="3479" end="3486" title="bazooka" label="bazooka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340233" start="3489" end="3502" title="String trimmer" label="weed-whackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="3504" end="3513" title="explosive material" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121690" start="3514" end="3523" title="Drink can" label="soda cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q855373" start="3525" end="3532" title="ice pop" label="ice pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="3535" end="3541" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683099" start="3545" end="3555" title="Silver (household)" label="silverware"/>
<link wikidata="Q851782" start="3557" end="3563" title="Dishware" label="dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20460" start="3573" end="3581" title="crucifix" label="crucifix"/>
<link wikidata="Q45183" start="3585" end="3597" title="flamethrower" label="flamethrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q190672" start="3600" end="3617" title="fire extinguisher" label="fire extinguisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="3861" end="3872" title="platform game" label="platformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284282" start="4102" end="4114" title="Ghoul Patrol" label="Ghoul Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307249" start="4128" end="4142" title="Metal Warriors" label="Metal Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639833" start="4159" end="4174" title="Big Sky Trooper" label="Big Sky Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243029" start="4403" end="4418" title="Friday the 13th (1980 film)" label="Friday the 13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q886597" start="4435" end="4463" title="The Texas Chain Saw Massacre" label="The Texas Chain Saw Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="4570" end="4580" title="stainless steel" label="silverware"/>
<link wikidata="Q20460" start="4626" end="4634" title="crucifix" label="crucifix"/>
<link wikidata="Q45183" start="4684" end="4696" title="flamethrower" label="flamethrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="4886" end="4896" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q191458" start="4932" end="4936" title="Entertainment Software Rating Board" label="ESRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="5016" end="5024" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="5579" end="5582" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="5583" end="5598" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="5661" end="5676" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="5678" end="5691" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="5693" end="5701" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="5706" end="5713" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037549" start="5740" end="5746" title="Dotemu" label="Dotemu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030432" start="5767" end="5785" title="Disney Interactive" label="Disney Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="5790" end="5805" title="Lucasfilm Games" label="Lucasfilm Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="6013" end="6025" title="cult classic" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40160" start="6118" end="6134" title="Gamerankings.com" label="Gamerankings.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="7510" end="7534" title="B movie" label="second-rate horror movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q849328" start="7558" end="7564" title="Contra (video game)" label="Contra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237804" start="7578" end="7593" title="Power Unlimited" label="Power Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="7988" end="7991" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="7992" end="8007" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="8122" end="8125" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175394" start="8273" end="8289" title="Mega (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mega&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156550" start="8493" end="8512" title="Complex Networks" label="&amp;quot;Complex&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q960011" start="8713" end="8735" title="GamesRadar+" label="&amp;quot;GamesRadar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q876243" start="8839" end="8845" title="Total!" label="Total!"/>
<link wikidata="Q726621" start="8911" end="8934" title="GamesMaster (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;GamesMaster&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="9060" end="9069" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="9094" end="9105" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="9114" end="9125" title="Sega Saturn" label="Sega Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475051" start="9139" end="9161" title="Herc&amp;#x27;s Adventures" label="Herc&amp;#x27;s Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q98119155" start="9375" end="9382" title="Swagman (video game)" label="Swagman"/>
<link wikidata="Q845645" start="9397" end="9416" title="Day of the Tentacle" label="Day of the Tentacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145336" start="9569" end="9580" title="Dead Rising (video game)" label="Dead Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="9605" end="9613" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284282" start="10092" end="10104" title="Ghoul Patrol" label="Ghoul Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q108047434" start="10480" end="10489" title="James Wan" label="James Wan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122713" start="10503" end="10512" title="Insidious (film)" label="Insidious"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706605" wikidata="Q1187" url="?curid=706605" title="River Wandle">
<text>The River Wandle is a right-bank tributary of the River Thames in south London, England. With a total length of about , the river passes through the London boroughs of Croydon, Sutton, Merton and Wandsworth, where it reaches the Thames. A short headwater – the Caterham Bourne – is partially in Surrey, the historic county of the river&#x27;s catchment. Tributaries of the Wandle include Carshalton Ponds and Norbury Brook.

The Wandle Trail follows the course of the river from Croydon to Wandsworth.

== Toponym ==
The name is thought to derive from a back-formation of Wandsworth ( meaning Wendle&#x27;s Enclosure).

==History and boundaries==
In the pleistocene before the carving of the Mole Gap, water lapped the north of the area between the North Downs and Greensand Hills known as the Vale of Holmesdale taking the Caterham or Coulsdon Bourne routes, to form the much less deep Merstham Gap, a wind gap. In more recent times, precipitation on the local central, small section of the long escarpment percolates through the chalk and reappears as springs in central Croydon, Beddington, and Carshalton. The occasional stream, known as the Bourne, which runs through the Caterham valley (and Smitham Bottom in Coulsdon) is a source of the River Wandle but only surfaces after heavy rainfall. A series of ditches and culverts carries the water from Purley to Croydon.

For many centuries the River Wandle rose from springs including the garden of Blunt House, South End, Croydon and Brighton Road to enter and flow through the Haling neighbourhood in the south of Croydon. It ran along Southbridge Road and upon reaching Old Town it reached a maximal across and began to divide into smaller channels. The grounds of the Old Palace and Scarbrook Hill had springs engineered with ponds, streams and canals where fish swam, especially trout. Over the years, it became renowned for its fish, and is mentioned in works such as William Camden&#x27;s &quot;Britannia&quot; (1586) and Izaak Walton&#x27;s &quot;The Compleat Angler&quot; (1653). Lord Nelson would fish in its waters, leading his mistress, Lady Hamilton, to rename the Wandle, as it flowed through her garden, the &quot;River Nile&quot;, in Nelson&#x27;s memory.

However, as Croydon&#x27;s population grew and use of the water closet increased, the Old Town streams became little more than open sewers and were filled in or culverted from 1840 after outbreaks of typhoid and cholera.

The Wandle then flowed through Pitlake and on through two marshy fields – Froggs Mead and Stubbs Mead – drained to form Wandle Park in 1890. Local springs were used to form a boating lake in the park, but frequent drying up problems led to the lake being filled in and the river was culverted in 1967. In 2012, the Wandle was restored to the surface in Wandle Park. From there, the river continues underground, through where the gas works used to stand, under the Purley Way road past Waddon Ponds and appears on the surface at Richmond Green road, where a small green buffer to its north acts as the green after the footpath at the end of Mill Lane in Waddon, Croydon.

For part of its length, the Wandle forms the boundary between the London Boroughs of Croydon and Lambeth and, further downstream bounds Merton and Wandsworth. Shortly before reaching the Thames the navigable Bell Lane Creek splits from the river, rejoining close to the confluence.

Localities adjoining the river and its mentioned main tributaries include: Croydon, Waddon, Beddington, Wallington, Carshalton, The Wrythe, Hackbridge, Mitcham, Ravensbury, St Helier, Morden, Merton Abbey, Colliers Wood, South Wimbledon, Summerstown, and Wandsworth. Honeywood Museum, in Carshalton Village, includes displays and an interactive map about the River Wandle and its influence on the life of the area.

==Headwaters==
===Intermittently visible watercourses===
Rain falling on part of the North Downs mainly filters through a thin topsoil into chalk and emerges on the spring line and in gentle ravines carved by water erosion. At the top of the catchment, the Wandle has four main headwaters historically noted as winterbournes — streams which only flow when the water table is high.

Two such streams, culverted, combine in Central Croydon beneath Bourne Street to form the Wandle which emerges immediately north-west in Wandle Park. The Wandle is piped part-way-through neighbouring New South Quarter to flow under Purley Way (formerly Waddon Marsh Lane) and part of its retail park. From its central gathering the flow is westwards (or WSW) until merging with the Carshalton branch. On its route the early Wandle surfaces to receive springs at a long lake &quot;Waddon Ponds&quot; beside Mill Lane, Croydon.

The Coulsdon Bourne and linked Caterham Bourne south of Croydon town centre ran in wet seasons. They have been culverted since before 1900. When the water table is medium or high these waters meet at Purley, run in a culvert the length of the Brighton Road, South Croydon, and merge into the surface water drains and culverts in the town centre (which become much of the above stream).

===The Norbury Brook===
The Norbury Brook is in its western section for parochial boundaries called the Graveney River. Aggregated streams combine under Grant Road, Addiscombe. Straightened, it roughly bounds Croydon and Lambeth Boroughs forming the ancient boundary of Croydon and Norwood (once the large woodland in Norbury parish). Its long, culverted mouth with the Wandle is in Tooting Graveney – it meets the Wandle fronting the Haydons Road part of Wimbledon in the Borough of Merton.

==Industry==
The river has been well-used since Roman times; in the 17th century Huguenots were attracted by the cloth and textile mills which lined the banks of the river. It was heavily industrialised in the 18th and 19th centuries, during the Industrial Revolution, and was declared one of the most polluted rivers in England. The main industries then were tobacco and textiles. The river was used to power 68 water wheels, of which only a few survive, such as at Merton Abbey Mills for the production of paper, print and tapestries.

The Liberty print works (latterly Merton Abbey Mills) and Merton Board Mills dominated the riverscape with the board mills being demolished in the 1990s (the site was redeveloped into a Sainsbury’s Savacentre). Local concentration of heavy industry resulted in multiple leats being cut during the 18th century; a remnant of the old courses, the Pickle, is two ditches, one running beneath Liberty Avenue. The former leat has become the main river next to Merton Abbey Mills craft village.

Clean-ups of the Wandle have improved the water quality dramatically, leading to a return of the river&#x27;s brown trout. This improvement in water quality has also seen other fish thrive with stocks of chub, roach and dace all flourishing once again with the most popular angling spots being in Hackbridge and Colliers Wood.

==Local nature reserves==
A stretch of the river between Trewint Street and Plough Lane in Merton has been designated as the Lower Wandle Local Nature Reserve (LNR). It is lined by mature trees and patches of grassland. South of the Lower Wandle, an area of wetland between the River Wandle and the Wandle trail is the Wandle Meadow Nature Park LNR. Another LNR adjacent to the Wandle is the Wandle Valley Wetland in Carshalton.

In 2017, a new nature reserve was created in Bell Lane Creek at the confluence of the Wandle and the Thames, by removing a half-tide weir that had been installed in the 1980s. This had been built as the first part of a project to create a marina, however it had ceased to work some years previously. Restoring it would allow the tide to clear out silt and restore a natural tidal river. In addition, a section of the Thames river wall was lowered as part of the Wandsworth Riverside Quarter residential development, to allow reeds and vegetation to develop and provide a more natural sloping embankment. As part of the project, layers of contaminated sediment were dredged from the site, to restore a gravel bed and restore a wildlife habitat measuring roughly a hectare in size.

==Incidents==
===21st century hazardous discharges===
On 17th September 2007, Sodium hypochlorite was accidentally flushed into the Wandle from Thames Water&#x27;s Beddington sewage works. The chemical was being used to clean its tertiary treatment screens. Its use is permitted if captured (&quot;re-circulated&quot;) for further treatment. The discharge killed over 2,000 fish of various species. The sewerage undertaker failed to notify the Environment Agency – its site manager thought it was minor. The company apologised; it offered to meet local angling clubs and the Wandle Trust to discuss restocking and long-term support for the Trust&#x27;s work. The regulator fined the provider £125,000 and legal costs. In 2009 it was the greatest penalty for a one-day unlawful discharge into controlled waters. In 2010 a High Court judge found the fine was under the statutory rules governing pollution penalties &quot;manifestly&quot; excessive, reducing it to £50,000, noting Thames Water had donated £500,000 to clean up the river.

On February 18th 2025, an estimated 4,000 Litres of diesel was released into the river, polluting it from Beddington to Wandsworth. The source was reportedly a storage tank at a bus depot in Thornton Heath, Croydon.

==Makeup==
The predominant geology of the south part is chalk interspersed with flint and narrow alluvial gravel beds in the south. London clay overlaid with patches of gravel topped by deeper humus forms the north; the top soil, tempered by the chalk beneath is less acidic where still seasonally turned in the south.

The river has since the 18th century been largely terraformed with tributary artificial channels (becoming surface water drains) and runoff ditches. It has its relatively few underground (culverted) stretches; these are in Croydon.

==Water quality==
The Environment Agency measures the water quality of the river systems in England. Each is given an overall ecological status, which may be one of five levels: high, good, moderate, poor and bad. There are several components that are used to determine this, including biological status, which looks at the quantity and varieties of invertebrates, angiosperms and fish. Chemical status, which compares the concentrations of various chemicals against known safe concentrations, is rated good or fail.

==Namesakes==
;Current
*The Wandle River in South Island, New Zealand.
*The SS &quot;Wandle&quot;, four successive steamships. Three were built for the local Wandsworth, Wimbledon and Epsom District Gas Company.
;Former
In the 1980s Wandle was designated as one of the London bus districts. Its logo was a water wheel above the London Transport roundel.

==Landmarks==
;Current
*A signposted link to the Thames Path exists in the north including its riverside at Wandsworth Park
*Bridges, one with an information plaque, cross the river at Wandsworth High Street and its central park, dotted with high rise housing.
*Plough Lane football stadium since 2020
;Former
*Plough Lane football stadium to 1998
*Wimbledon Stadium – greyhound racing track to 2017
*Site of the Ram Brewery – to 2006

==See also==
* Tributaries of the River Thames
* List of rivers in England
* Wandle Trail
* Wandle Meadow Nature Park

==Further reading==
* &quot;River Wandle Companion and Wandle Trail Guide&quot; by Bob Steel, with Derek Coleman. Culverhouse Books 2012, 248pp fully illustrated. Paperback and hardback. and . See http://www.wandlebook.co.uk
* The Wandle Group edited by Doug Cluett and John Phillips &quot;The Wandle Guide&quot; Sutton Leisure Services 1997 

==Notes and references==
==External links==

* The Wandle Trust
* Wandle News
* River Wandle on UK Rivers Guidebook
* The Wandle Piscators fishing club
* Nature Conservation Plan for the Lower Wandle Local Nature Reserve, Merton Council, 2001</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1187" start="4" end="16" title="River Wandle" label="River Wandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="33" end="42" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="50" end="62" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="72" end="78" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211690" start="149" end="164" title="London boroughs" label="London boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q26888" start="168" end="175" title="London Borough of Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q320378" start="177" end="183" title="London Borough of Sutton" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="185" end="191" title="London Borough of Merton" label="Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210563" start="196" end="206" title="London Borough of Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996975" start="261" end="269" title="Caterham" label="Caterham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="295" end="301" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050453" start="409" end="422" title="Norbury Brook" label="Norbury Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967269" start="429" end="441" title="Wandle Trail" label="Wandle Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q989162" start="554" end="568" title="back-formation" label="back-formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166359" start="572" end="582" title="Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="654" end="665" title="pleistocene" label="pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="692" end="700" title="River Mole#Mole Gap" label="Mole Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909544" start="794" end="812" title="Vale of Holmesdale" label="Vale of Holmesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820621" start="887" end="895" title="Merstham" label="Merstham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972304" start="903" end="911" title="wind gap (topography)" label="wind gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="935" end="948" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="997" end="1007" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="1073" end="1080" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437783" start="1082" end="1092" title="Beddington" label="Beddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220276" start="1098" end="1108" title="Carshalton" label="Carshalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996975" start="1177" end="1185" title="Caterham" label="Caterham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545431" start="1198" end="1205" title="Smitham" label="Smitham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463831" start="1216" end="1224" title="Coulsdon" label="Coulsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118905" start="1354" end="1360" title="Purley, London" label="Purley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698718" start="1626" end="1634" title="Old Town, Croydon" label="Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657356" start="1725" end="1735" title="Croydon Palace" label="Old Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q364239" start="1927" end="1941" title="William Camden" label="William Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q562133" start="1982" end="1994" title="Izaak Walton" label="Izaak Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225234" start="2008" end="2027" title="The Compleat Angler" label="The Compleat Angler"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="2042" end="2053" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Lord Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q234811" start="2102" end="2115" title="Emma, Lady Hamilton" label="Lady Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2182" end="2192" title="Nile" label="River Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q268534" start="2284" end="2296" title="water closet" label="water closet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="2426" end="2433" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="2438" end="2445" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967265" start="2568" end="2579" title="Wandle Park, Croydon" label="Wandle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="2731" end="2738" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261318" start="2912" end="2922" title="Purley Way" label="Purley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q107451920" start="2933" end="2945" title="Waddon Ponds" label="Waddon Ponds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054581" start="3011" end="3023" title="buffer zone" label="green buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996918" start="3101" end="3107" title="Waddon" label="Waddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26888" start="3204" end="3211" title="London Borough of Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="3216" end="3223" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="3255" end="3261" title="London Borough of Merton" label="Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210563" start="3266" end="3276" title="London Borough of Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437783" start="3494" end="3504" title="Beddington" label="Beddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509310" start="3506" end="3516" title="Wallington, London" label="Wallington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220276" start="3518" end="3528" title="Carshalton" label="Carshalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901547" start="3530" end="3540" title="The Wrythe" label="The Wrythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637199" start="3542" end="3552" title="Hackbridge" label="Hackbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q687798" start="3554" end="3561" title="Mitcham" label="Mitcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593365" start="3575" end="3584" title="St Helier, London" label="St Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323858" start="3586" end="3592" title="Morden" label="Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820706" start="3594" end="3606" title="Merton Abbey, London" label="Merton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q677762" start="3608" end="3621" title="Colliers Wood" label="Colliers Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232191" start="3623" end="3638" title="South Wimbledon" label="South Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248244" start="3640" end="3651" title="Summerstown, London" label="Summerstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166359" start="3657" end="3667" title="Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220276" start="3669" end="3685" title="Honeywood Museum" label="Honeywood Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="3903" end="3914" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122725" start="3983" end="3994" title="spring line" label="spring line"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="4027" end="4040" title="water erosion" label="water erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026426" start="4129" end="4141" title="winterbourne (stream)" label="winterbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="4178" end="4189" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="4554" end="4557" title="boxing the compass" label="WSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q26888" start="5323" end="5330" title="London Borough of Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="5335" end="5342" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q123292" start="5396" end="5403" title="Upper Norwood" label="Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q389071" start="5432" end="5439" title="Norbury, London" label="Norbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361392" start="5497" end="5513" title="Tooting Graveney" label="Tooting Graveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909042" start="5549" end="5561" title="Haydons Road railway station" label="Haydons Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="5570" end="5579" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226614" start="5688" end="5697" title="Huguenot Burial Site" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="5853" end="5874" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="6020" end="6031" title="water wheel" label="water wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820707" start="6074" end="6092" title="Merton Abbey Mills" label="Merton Abbey Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237793" start="6149" end="6156" title="Liberty (department store)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820707" start="6179" end="6197" title="Merton Abbey Mills" label="Merton Abbey Mills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6203" end="6221" title="Merton Board Mills" label="Merton Board Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q152096" start="6331" end="6342" title="Sainsbury’s" label="Sainsbury’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q14556915" start="6415" end="6419" title="leat" label="leat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308978" start="6427" end="6430" title="cutting (transportation)" label="cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857311" start="6745" end="6756" title="brown trout" label="brown trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q26821893" start="6839" end="6843" title="European chub" label="chub"/>
<link wikidata="Q182976" start="6845" end="6850" title="Common Roach" label="roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q143326" start="6855" end="6859" title="Common Dace" label="dace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637199" start="6932" end="6942" title="Hackbridge" label="Hackbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q677762" start="6947" end="6960" title="Colliers Wood" label="Colliers Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457526" start="7101" end="7121" title="Local nature reserve" label="Local Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902919" start="7355" end="7376" title="Wandle Valley Wetland" label="Wandle Valley Wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641835" start="7516" end="7530" title="Half tide dock" label="half-tide weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q407204" start="8252" end="8271" title="Sodium hypochlorite" label="Sodium hypochlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408951" start="8318" end="8330" title="Thames Water" label="Thames Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381011" start="8618" end="8636" title="Environment Agency" label="Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123194" start="9401" end="9415" title="Thornton Heath" label="Thornton Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="9454" end="9461" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="9483" end="9488" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733342" start="9559" end="9570" title="London clay" label="London clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="9620" end="9625" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="10330" end="10342" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="10345" end="10355" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967267" start="10526" end="10538" title="Wandle River" label="Wandle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="10542" end="10554" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394524" start="10574" end="10595" title="SS Wandle (1932)" label="SS &amp;quot;Wandle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967317" start="10656" end="10708" title="Wandsworth and District Gas Company" label="Wandsworth, Wimbledon and Epsom District Gas Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928683" start="10767" end="10777" title="Buses in London" label="London bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934097" start="10826" end="10850" title="London Transport (brand)" label="London Transport roundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324561" start="10902" end="10913" title="Thames Path" label="Thames Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967312" start="10961" end="10976" title="Wandsworth Park" label="Wandsworth Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166359" start="11038" end="11048" title="Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q48699006" start="11115" end="11126" title="Plough Lane" label="Plough Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q975681" start="11164" end="11175" title="Plough Lane (1912–98)" label="Plough Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020308" start="11202" end="11219" title="Wimbledon Stadium" label="Wimbledon Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057802" start="11266" end="11277" title="Young&amp;#x27;s" label="Ram Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840500" start="11304" end="11335" title="Tributaries of the River Thames" label="Tributaries of the River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280413" start="11338" end="11363" title="List of rivers in England" label="List of rivers in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967269" start="11366" end="11378" title="Wandle Trail" label="Wandle Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902910" start="11381" end="11406" title="Wandle Meadow Nature Park" label="Wandle Meadow Nature Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706612" wikidata="Q959524" url="?curid=706612" title="Bocconi University">
<text>Bocconi University or Università Bocconi (formally known in Italian as &quot;Università Commerciale Luigi Bocconi&quot; - Luigi Bocconi Commercial University) is a private university in Milan, Italy. The university is consistently ranked as the best in Italy in its fields and among the best in the world.

The university provides education in the fields of economics, finance, law, business administration, management, political science, public administration, information science, data science, and computer science. Bocconi is a founding member of CEMS - The Global Alliance in Management Education, and the university through its graduate business school, SDA Bocconi School of Management, has received triple accreditation from the AACSB, EQUIS, and the AMBA where it offers MBA, Executive MBA, DBA, professional development, executive education, and professional certification programs.

==History==

Bocconi University was founded in 1902 by Ferdinando Bocconi and was named after his son, who died in the Battle of Adwa during the First Italo-Ethiopian War. The university was originally affiliated with the Polytechnic University of Milan engineering school and incorporated a teaching model that was based on what was in use at the École Supérieure of Antwerp.

==Campus==
The campus was originally located in Via Statuto near the Pinacoteca di Brera, where its first building was inaugurated in 1902. The campus is now located beside Parco Ravizza, between Via Sarfatti and Viale Bligny and consists of several buildings within walking distance to Porta Ticinese, the Basilica of Sant&#x27;Eustorgio:
*The Sarfatti Building is the oldest building on campus. It was designed in 1936 by the Italian architect Giuseppe Pagano. It contains classrooms, an aula magna, a restaurant, and most of the administrative offices. Its entrance features two lion statues which are the subject of several university myths.
*The &quot;pensionato&quot; building, which faces Via Ferdinando Bocconi, was inaugurated in 1956 by architect Giovanni Muzio and hosts some grand halls, some of the canteen and dormitory facilities (350 bedrooms on 5 floors), and some faculty offices. The different floors have an irregular form and bear the shape of a symmetric &quot;L&quot; letter, which stands for Laude.
*The SDA Bocconi building, which is also in Via Ferdinando Bocconi, was opened in 1985 and featured two blocks with a distinct set of dark metal panels. The building was extended in 2001, especially to host EGEA, the university bookstore. The campus football pitch is placed between the &quot;pensionato&quot; and the SDA Bocconi building.
*The modern &quot;Velodromo&quot; building was projected by Ignazio Gardella and opened in 2001. It is called so due to its form resembling an ellipsoid velodrome. Each of its four floors has about ten classrooms with a capacity of 150. The &quot;Velodromo&quot; uses a geothermal exchange heat pump as its air conditioning system, which provides energy conservation. A marble statue of Ferdinando Bocconi overlooks the foyer of the ground floor.
*Close by, in Piazza Sraffa, are the Library building (also built by Giovanni Muzio in 1962), the campus chapel &quot;San Ferdinando&quot;, and some smaller buildings such as those with the offices of the Language Center and other extracurricular activities.
*In 2007, a new building was inaugurated in Via Guglielmo Roentgen known as Grafton Building from the name of the Irish practice Grafton Architects which designed the innovative building. The Grafton Building won the &quot;World building of the year&quot; at the World Architecture Festival 2008 held in Barcelona. The new building houses the offices of the entire Faculty, with its Departments and Research Centers in Viale Bligny. Its underground levels include, in addition to the new Aula Magna, seminar rooms, a spacious foyer, an exhibition area and parking. It is situated next to the &quot;Velodromo&quot;. The 2020 Pritzker Architecture Prize was awarded to its designers, Yvonne Farrell and Shelley McNamara of Grafton Architects.

Several other administrative and research offices of Bocconi&#x27;s institutes are scattered across the area, especially around Parco Ravizza and Viale Isonzo.

===Dormitories===
Bocconi University provides off-campus students with approximately 1800 places in dorms. Residences for students are &quot;Bocconi Residence&quot;, &quot;Javotte Residence&quot;, &quot;Dubini Residence&quot;, &quot;Spadolini Residence&quot;, &quot;Arcobaleno Residence&quot;, the more modern &quot;Isonzo Residence&quot;, &quot;Bligny Residence&quot;, and the latest &quot;Castiglioni Residence&quot; (inaugurated in 2018) and the former &quot;Kramer Residence&quot; (Now closed).

==Academics==
===Undergraduate programs===
The university offers four three-year undergraduate courses in Economics which share a common basis in the first three semesters and then distinguish themselves from one another by focusing on either Finance (CLEF), Social sciences (CLES) or Business administration (CLEAM); the fourth course is entirely taught in English (BIEF) and is targeted at both international students and students pursuing an international career. Students in this course have the choice to major in Economics, Management or Finance during their course of studies.

A fifth separate three-year undergraduate course in Economics focuses on the economics and management of Arts, Culture and Communication (CLEACC).

Another three-year undergraduate course is the Bachelor&#x27;s in International Politics and Government (BIG), the first degree in the field of political science and international relations offered by the university. 

Also the university offers a Bachelor of Arts in partnership with HEC Paris. Announced in October 2023, it is focused on Data, Society &amp; Organizations, it combines data sciences and social sciences. Students spend the first three semesters in Italy and the last three in France on the Jouy-en-Josas campus.

Bocconi also offers the World Bachelor in Business program, a four-year undergraduate degree developed in partnership with the University of Southern California and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, allowing students to study across three continents and earn degrees from all three institutions.
The university also offers a five-year course in Law, which incorporates the Italian equivalents of the Bachelor of Laws and the Master of Laws.

The bachelor&#x27;s degrees in finance (BIEF) has been recognized by the Chartered Financial Analyst Institute (CFA Institute). The partnership is granted to programs which cover at least 70% of the content necessary to take the CFA Program Exam level III, the highest level.

In a joint venture with the Central European University of Budapest, Hungary, Bocconi also offers a four-year &quot;Dual Degree in International Business&quot;, the first two years of which are spent in Budapest and the latter in Milan.

===Graduate programs===
The Bocconi Graduate School mainly offers master programs taught in English, with some also in Italian:
*International Management; 
*CEMS MIM Program
*China MIM Program
*Management (English and Italian); 
*ESSEC - Bocconi Double Degree
*Marketing Management (English and Italian); 
*Accounting, Financial Management and Control (English and Italian);
*Finance (English and Italian); 
*Economics and Management in Arts, Culture, Media and Entertainment; 
*Economics and Management for Arts, Culture and Communication;
*Economics and Management of Government and International Organizations
*Economics and Social Sciences;
*Economics and Management of Innovation and Technology; 
*Data Science and Business Analytics;
*Cyber Risk Strategy and Governance
*LSE - Bocconi Double Degree;
*Sciences Po - Bocconi Double Degree;
*Law and Business Administration (Only in Italian).
Bocconi has established many partnerships for its Master of Science programs: the Master of Science in Finance was among the first six programs in the world to establish a partnership with the CFA institute and the first in continental Europe, while the Masters of Science in Management and International Management enable a select number of students to take part in the CEMS Master of International Management, of which Bocconi is a founding member, along with HEC, ESADE and University of Cologne.

===School of Law===

Bocconi University School of Law was established in 2006, consolidating the tradition of legal studies at Bocconi under the aegis of the &quot;A. Sraffa&quot; Institute for Comparative Law. The School of Law currently offers a combined LL.B. and LL.M. in Law, runs the Specialization School for Legal professions in cooperation with the University of Pavia, and hosts a Summer Academy in cooperation with the University of Trento, as well as with the Sant&#x27;Anna School of Advanced Studies.

===PhD School===
The Bocconi PhD School offers the following 4-year PhD programs:
*PhD in Economics and Finance;
*PhD in Business Administration and Management;
*PhD in Statistics and Computer Science;
*PhD in Public Policy and Administration;
*PhD in Legal Studies (3-year program);

===SDA Bocconi===

SDA Bocconi () is the graduate business school of the university. The business school offers MBA programs, executive education, professional certifications, and a Doctor of Business Administration (DBA). Founded in 1971, SDA Bocconi is fully accredited by the AACSB, EQUIS, and AMBA. The school is also the publisher of &quot;E&amp;M&quot; (Economia &amp; Management), an Italian business and management review. The SDA also offers further Master of Science programs in Corporate Finance and Banking, Real Estate Management, Fine Food and Beverage management, Fashion Management, Design Management, Sports Law and Sport Management, and a Master in Stage and Show Management.

==Research and endowment==
In 2006, research was mainly funded by Bocconi itself (around €1.5 million), the European Union (around €1.4 million) and the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research (around €300 thousand), in addition to other external sources (around €11 million). In 2011, the European Research Council (ERC) assigned around €5 million to five projects in the area &quot;social science and humanities&quot; led by five Bocconi professors.

Bocconi is a member of the Offshoring Research Network, an international network researching the offshoring of business processes and services.

===Departments===
*Accounting
*Economics
*Finance
*Management and Technology
*Marketing
*Decision Sciences
*Legal Studies
*Policy Analysis and Public Management
*Computing sciences

===Permanent Research Centers===
*&quot;ASK&quot; - Centre for Research on Management and Economics of Arts and Culture Institutions (Study centre on the economics and management of the arts and culture)
*&quot;PAOLO BAFFI CENTRE&quot; - Paolo Baffi Centre on International Markets, Money and Regulation
*&quot;CAREFIN&quot; - Centre for Applied Research in Finance
*&quot;CERGAS&quot; - Centre for Research on Health and Social Care Management (Institutional structures; management of public and private companies providing healthcare and social services)
*&quot;CERMES&quot; - Centre for Research on Marketing &amp; Services (Marketing and competitive analysis; commercial consumption and distribution; trade fairs)
*&quot;CERTeT&quot; - Center for Research on Regional Economics, Transport and Tourism (Urban, regional and transport structures of territorial economics; evaluation of EU policies on territorial development)
*&quot;CREDI&quot; - &quot;Ariberto Mignoli&quot; Centre for European Research on Business Law and History
*&quot;CReSV&quot; - Center for Research on Sustainability and Value
*&quot;CRIOS&quot; - Center for Research on Innovation, Organization and Strategy
*&quot;DONDENA CENTRE&quot; - Carlo F. Dondena Centre for Research on Social Dynamics (Interdisciplinary research on social cohesion, demography, life course dynamics and public policy)
*&quot;IEFE&quot; - Centre for Research on Energy and Environmental Economics and Policy (Energy economics and policies; environmental policies and management; economics and management of public utility companies - energy and environmental)
*&quot;IGIER&quot; - Innocenzo Gasparini Institute for Economic Research. Part of the Institute of Economics, it operates jointly with two international bodies, the US-based NBER, National Bureau of Economic Research, and the UK-based CEPR, Centre for Economic Policy Research (Economics and economic policy)
*&quot;ECONPUBBLICA&quot; - Centre for Research on the Public Sector (Taxation system; organisation of the social state; privatisation; income distribution; fiscal federalism)

==International rankings==
==Student life==
===Student publications===
The university hosts student-run publications:
*Tra i Leoni: a campus magazine run by the eponymous society.
*Bocconi School of Law Student-Edited Papers: the Law School&#x27;s official student publication. The journal&#x27;s editorial board are selected by way of an annual write-on competition, and go on to select and provide feedback on submitted papers, as well as organizing the annual call for papers.
*IS@B News: a campus magazine run by the International Student Association (IS@B).
*Be OBjective Magazine: a bimonthly pdf magazine founded by students from the ACME course. The magazine focuses on art, culture, media and entertainment.

===Superstitions===
In the atrium of the oldest building of the university, there are three sets of doors. The central doors, which are larger than the others, have two lions on either side of them. There is a superstition within the university that students who pass in between the two lions via the central doors risk not being able to graduate. This derives from the adage &quot;Chi passa tra i Leoni non si laurea alla Bocconi.&quot;

If seen from the top, the three main buildings of Bocconi seem to spell &quot;30L&quot; (30 &quot;cum laude&quot;), the maximum achievable grade in any exam. The building in Via Roentgen is the &quot;3&quot;, the velodrome is the &quot;0&quot; and the main building is a cross of two &quot;L&quot;s.

==Notable people==
===Alumni===

*Alberto Alemanno, professor of law at New York University (NYU)
*Alberto Alesina, Harvard University professor
*Franco Amatori, Bocconi University professor of Economics History, past president of the European Business History Association
*Jörg Asmussen, member of the executive board of the European Central Bank
*Oriana Bandiera, professor of economics at the London School of Economics
*Tito Boeri, professor of Labour economics at Bocconi University, columnist for &quot;La Repubblica&quot; and former president of INPS (National Institute for Social Security in Italy)
*Luigi Corradi, engineer and CEO of Trenitalia
*Francesca Cornelli, Dean of Northwestern University&#x27;s Kellogg School of Management, previously professor of finance and deputy dean at London Business School
*Jelena Djokovic, tennis player and Novak Djokovic&#x27;s wife
*Luigi Einaudi, President of the Italian Republic (1948–1955) and governor of Bank of Italy
*Francesco Giavazzi, economist and Bocconi University professor
*Vittorio Grilli, Italian Minister of Economy and Finance (2012–13) and previously a professor at Yale University
*Fiorella Kostoris, professor of economics at the Sapienza University of Rome
*Luca de Meo, CEO of Renault; former president of SEAT
*Antonio Merlo, Rice University professor and dean
*Mario Monti, former Italian Prime Minister (2011–13)
*Emma Bonino, former Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs (2013–14)
*Vittorio Colao, CEO of Vodafone Group, Italian Minister for Technological Innovation in the government of Prime Minister Mario Draghi
*Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, economist and former Italian Minister of Economy and Finance (2006–08)
*Corrado Passera, former Italian Minister of Enterprises and Made in Italy, Infrastructure and Transport (2011–13)
*Barbara Pollastrini, former Italian Minister for Equal Opportunities in the Prodi II Cabinet (2006)
*Nouriel Roubini, NYU Stern School of Business professor
*Fabrizio Saccomanni, Minister of Economy and Finance of the Italian government and former General Manager of the Bank of Italy
*Paolo Scaroni, CEO of Eni; chair of AC Milan
*Renato Soru, billionaire entrepreneur and manager, founder of the internet service company Tiscali
*Luigi Zingales, University of Chicago Booth School of Business professor
*Patrizia Toia, Italian politician and member of the European Parliament
*Marco Patuano, CEO of TIM Group
*Federico Marchetti, CEO and founder of YOOX Net-a-Porter Group
*Marco Cappato, Italian politician and member of the European Parliament
*Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi, economist
*Alessandro Pansa, former CEO of Leonardo
*Claudio Costamagna, chairman of Advanced Accelerator Applications
*Giovanni Arrighi, professor of sociology at Johns Hopkins University
*Domenico Lombardi, president of The Oxford Institute for Economic Policy, and a Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution
*Eduardo Missoni, secretary general of the World Organization of the Scout Movement
*Andrea Enria, chair of the ECB Supervisory Board (2019–present), and previously chair of the European Banking Authority (2011–19)
*Mario Biondi, novelist, travel writer, poet
*Paolo Brera, journalist, author, and former assistant professor of political economy at Bocconi University
*Teresa de Lauretis, writer and professor at the University of California, Santa Cruz
*Valerio Massimo Manfredi, journalist, television host, historical novelist
*Mario Arcelli, economist, Minister for the Budget in the Italian government
*Fabio De&#x27;Longhi, CEO of De&#x27;Longhi
*Francesco Milleri, CEO of Luxottica
*Salvatore Aranzulla, blogger and entrepreneur
*Dubravka Negre, Minister of Mining and Energy of Serbia since 2022
*Sergio Noja Noseda, professor of Islamic law, Arabic Language and Literature. Author of multiple books on Islamic culture
*Alessandro Profumo, banker
*Marco Tronchetti Provera, manager
*Massimo Renon, CEO of the Benetton Group since 2020
*Luigi Roth, CEO of Breda Railway Construction (1993-2001)
*Leopoldo Sabbatini, first dean of Bocconi University, vice president of the Milan Chamber of Commerce
*Nina Senicar, Serbian model
*Guido Tabellini, former rector of Bocconi University (2008–12) and columnist for &quot;Il Sole 24 Ore&quot;
*Sara Tommasi, pornographic actress 
*Benedetto Della Vedova, politician
*Roberto Vedovotto, CEO of Kering Eyewear since 2014

===Other===

*Andrea Agnelli, businessman and chairman of Juventus FC
*Prince Aimone of Savoy, Duke of Apulia
*Pierre Casiraghi, seventh in line to the throne of Monaco, son of Caroline, Princess of Hanover, and nephew of Albert II, Prince of Monaco
*Giovanni Cobolli Gigli, former chairman of Juventus F.C.
*Chiara Ferragni, fashion blogger, has not obtained the degree.
*Steven Goldstein, race car driver
*Beatrice Borromeo, noblewoman of the House of Borromeo, journalist and ex-model
*Prince Joachim of Belgium, Archduke of Austria-Este
*Vittorio Gallinari, basketball player
*Clarence Seedorf, Dutch football player
*Carla Sozzani, gallerist known for creating the 10 Corso Como complex

==Alumnus of the Year==
The award for &quot;Alumnus of the Year&quot; was given for the first time in 2011 to Fabrizio Saccomanni, former general director of Bank of Italy, replacing the awards for &quot;Bocconian of the Year&quot; (given since 1988) and &quot;Master of Masters&quot; (given since 2007). The award is given to a Bocconi alumnus from any of the five schools (Undergraduate School, School of Law, Graduate School, PhD School and SDA Bocconi School of Management) who has distinguished himself following the Bocconian values of professionality, entrepreneurship, integrity, responsibility and openness. The award is given by the Bocconi Alumni Association (BAA) and recipients have included: Jörg Asmussen, Emma Bonino, Urbano Cairo, Giovanni Castellucci, Vittorio Colao, Claudio Costamagna, Andrea Enria, Corrado Passera, Alessandro Profumo, Nouriel Roubini, Paolo Scaroni, Carlo Scognamiglio, Renato Soru, Lucio Stanca, Luca de Meo, Francesca Bellettini, Roberto Mazzotta, Stefano Sassi, Giuseppe Sala, Federico Marchetti, Giovanni Ciserani, Diego Piacentini, Laura Cioli, Alberto Cribiore, Gaetano Micciché, Paolo Cuccia, Enrico Cucchiani, Vittorio Grilli, Marco Drago, Emma Marcegaglia, Isabella Ventura, Marco Tronchetti Provera, Giovanni Giudici, Jody Vender, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Giordano Zucchi.

== See also ==
* University of Milan
* Polytechnic University of Milan

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q959524" start="0" end="18" title="Bocconi University" label="Bocconi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q959524" start="22" end="40" title="Bocconi University" label="Università Bocconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="60" end="67" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="164" end="182" title="private university" label="private university"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="186" end="191" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="193" end="198" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="383" end="406" title="business administration" label="business administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="408" end="418" title="management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="420" end="437" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="439" end="460" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387" start="462" end="481" title="information science" label="information science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374463" start="483" end="495" title="data science" label="data science"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="501" end="517" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023349" start="551" end="601" title="CEMS - The Global Alliance in Management Education" label="CEMS - The Global Alliance in Management Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143635" start="643" end="658" title="business school" label="business school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943517" start="660" end="692" title="SDA Bocconi School of Management" label="SDA Bocconi School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435271" start="707" end="727" title="triple accreditation" label="triple accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q744144" start="737" end="742" title="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business" label="AACSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376925" start="744" end="749" title="EFMD Quality Improvement System" label="EQUIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q392156" start="759" end="763" title="Association of MBAs" label="AMBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="780" end="783" title="MBA" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="785" end="798" title="Executive MBA" label="Executive MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233911" start="800" end="803" title="Doctor of Business Administration" label="DBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q828812" start="805" end="829" title="professional development" label="professional development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419939" start="831" end="850" title="executive education" label="executive education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16023913" start="856" end="882" title="professional certification" label="professional certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742559" start="949" end="967" title="Ferdinando Bocconi" label="Ferdinando Bocconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q302519" start="1013" end="1027" title="Battle of Adwa" label="Battle of Adwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q989115" start="1039" end="1064" title="First Italo-Ethiopian War" label="First Italo-Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q392904" start="1116" end="1147" title="Polytechnic University of Milan" label="Polytechnic University of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="1262" end="1269" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q150066" start="1341" end="1360" title="Pinacoteca di Brera" label="Pinacoteca di Brera"/>
<link wikidata="Q734204" start="1559" end="1573" title="Porta Ticinese" label="Porta Ticinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q672082" start="1579" end="1610" title="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Eustorgio" label="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Eustorgio"/>
<link wikidata="Q113403055" start="1617" end="1634" title="Sarfatti Building" label="Sarfatti Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q552423" start="1718" end="1733" title="Giuseppe Pagano" label="Giuseppe Pagano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1900" end="1916" title="#Superstitions" label="university myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463304" start="2084" end="2091" title="Canteen (place)" label="canteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943517" start="2300" end="2311" title="SDA Bocconi" label="SDA Bocconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524" start="2545" end="2559" title="Association football pitch" label="football pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943517" start="2613" end="2624" title="SDA Bocconi" label="SDA Bocconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306518" start="2695" end="2711" title="Ignazio Gardella" label="Ignazio Gardella"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="2778" end="2787" title="ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q830528" start="2788" end="2797" title="velodrome" label="velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365511" start="2905" end="2934" title="geothermal exchange heat pump" label="geothermal exchange heat pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="2942" end="2958" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q380170" start="2982" end="3001" title="energy conservation" label="energy conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="3005" end="3011" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="3119" end="3126" title="Library" label="Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="3187" end="3193" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341006" start="3313" end="3328" title="extracurricular" label="extracurricular"/>
<link wikidata="Q555896" start="3604" end="3631" title="World Architecture Festival" label="World Architecture Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="3965" end="3992" title="Pritzker Architecture Prize" label="Pritzker Architecture Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151248" start="4023" end="4037" title="Yvonne Farrell" label="Yvonne Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q21132821" start="4042" end="4058" title="Shelley McNamara" label="Shelley McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="4850" end="4859" title="Economics" label="Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="4987" end="4994" title="Finance" label="Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="5003" end="5018" title="Social sciences" label="Social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="5029" end="5052" title="Business administration" label="Business administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="5263" end="5272" title="Economics" label="Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="5274" end="5284" title="Management" label="Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="5288" end="5295" title="Finance" label="Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="5621" end="5638" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="5643" end="5666" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="5725" end="5741" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q273535" start="5762" end="5771" title="HEC Paris" label="HEC Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374463" start="5864" end="5877" title="Data science" label="data sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="5882" end="5897" title="Social science" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5943" end="5948" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q372483" start="5985" end="5998" title="Jouy-en-Josas" label="Jouy-en-Josas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="6135" end="6168" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333303" start="6177" end="6223" title="Hong Kong University of Science and Technology" label="Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="6426" end="6442" title="Bachelor of Laws" label="Bachelor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q754848" start="6451" end="6465" title="Master of Laws" label="Master of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q964941" start="6580" end="6593" title="CFA Institute" label="CFA Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q757391" start="6773" end="6800" title="Central European University" label="Central European University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="6804" end="6812" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="6814" end="6821" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="6975" end="6980" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023349" start="8250" end="8254" title="Global Alliance in Management Education" label="CEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q273535" start="8341" end="8344" title="HEC Paris" label="HEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q682316" start="8346" end="8351" title="ESADE" label="ESADE"/>
<link wikidata="Q54096" start="8356" end="8377" title="University of Cologne" label="University of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="8738" end="8757" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q930528" start="8810" end="8830" title="University of Trento" label="University of Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q774609" start="8852" end="8893" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Anna School of Advanced Studies" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Anna School of Advanced Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="8964" end="8967" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="9222" end="9230" title="Postgraduate education" label="graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143635" start="9231" end="9246" title="business school" label="business school"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="9293" end="9296" title="MBA" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16023913" start="9328" end="9355" title="Professional certification" label="professional certifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233911" start="9398" end="9401" title="Doctor of Business Administration" label="DBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="9640" end="9657" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134763" start="9670" end="9687" title="Corporate Finance" label="Corporate Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="9984" end="9998" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307461" start="10029" end="10083" title="Ministry of Education, University and Research" label="Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377836" start="10181" end="10206" title="European Research Council" label="European Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975085" start="10371" end="10398" title="Offshoring Research Network" label="Offshoring Research Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q219186" start="11680" end="11692" title="Business Law" label="Business Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295557" start="11863" end="11877" title="Dondena Centre" label="DONDENA CENTRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q753291" start="12096" end="12119" title="Environmental Economics" label="Environmental Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948258" start="12304" end="12355" title="Innocenzo Gasparini Institute for Economic Research" label="Innocenzo Gasparini Institute for Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q475424" start="12457" end="12461" title="National Bureau of Economic Research" label="NBER"/>
<link wikidata="Q380062" start="12518" end="12522" title="Centre for Economic Policy Research" label="CEPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429095" start="14261" end="14277" title="Alberto Alemanno" label="Alberto Alemanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="14299" end="14318" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387534" start="14326" end="14341" title="Alberto Alesina" label="Alberto Alesina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="14343" end="14361" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948688" start="14373" end="14387" title="Franco Amatori" label="Franco Amatori"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160296" start="14462" end="14499" title="European Business History Association" label="European Business History Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q73330" start="14501" end="14514" title="Jörg Asmussen" label="Jörg Asmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="14553" end="14574" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q29349920" start="14576" end="14591" title="Oriana Bandiera" label="Oriana Bandiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="14623" end="14649" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529579" start="14651" end="14661" title="Tito Boeri" label="Tito Boeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="14676" end="14692" title="Labour economics" label="Labour economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q85329" start="14736" end="14749" title="La Repubblica" label="La Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674860" start="14780" end="14784" title="National Institute for Social Security (Italy)" label="INPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q117455374" start="14836" end="14849" title="Luigi Corradi (engineer)" label="Luigi Corradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q286650" start="14871" end="14881" title="Trenitalia" label="Trenitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62715362" start="14883" end="14901" title="Francesca Cornelli" label="Francesca Cornelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="14911" end="14934" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142073" start="14942" end="14970" title="Kellogg School of Management" label="Kellogg School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481050" start="15023" end="15045" title="London Business School" label="London Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="15082" end="15096" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242" start="15110" end="15123" title="Luigi Einaudi" label="Luigi Einaudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="15125" end="15158" title="President of the Italian Republic" label="President of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q806176" start="15187" end="15200" title="Bank of Italy" label="Bank of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750044" start="15202" end="15220" title="Francesco Giavazzi" label="Francesco Giavazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341209" start="15266" end="15281" title="Vittorio Grilli" label="Vittorio Grilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721645" start="15283" end="15322" title="Italian Minister of Economy and Finance" label="Italian Minister of Economy and Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="15363" end="15378" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745861" start="15380" end="15397" title="Fiorella Kostoris" label="Fiorella Kostoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="15429" end="15456" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="Sapienza University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264974" start="15458" end="15469" title="Luca de Meo" label="Luca de Meo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="15478" end="15485" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q188217" start="15507" end="15511" title="SEAT" label="SEAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q41805732" start="15513" end="15526" title="Antonio Merlo" label="Antonio Merlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="15528" end="15543" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q47904" start="15564" end="15575" title="Mario Monti" label="Mario Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="15584" end="15606" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Italian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q50002" start="15618" end="15629" title="Emma Bonino" label="Emma Bonino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321872" start="15638" end="15673" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Italy)" label="Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q981692" start="15685" end="15699" title="Vittorio Colao" label="Vittorio Colao"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="15708" end="15722" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076432" start="15724" end="15769" title="Minister for Technological Innovation" label="Italian Minister for Technological Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460407" start="15777" end="15787" title="Draghi government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="15791" end="15805" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q294460" start="15806" end="15818" title="Mario Draghi" label="Mario Draghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q558991" start="15820" end="15842" title="Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa" label="Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721645" start="15865" end="15904" title="Minister of Economy and Finance (Italy)" label="Italian Minister of Economy and Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135246" start="15916" end="15931" title="Corrado Passera" label="Corrado Passera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072860" start="15940" end="15989" title="Ministry for Business and Made in Italy" label="Italian Minister of Enterprises and Made in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071082" start="16031" end="16050" title="Barbara Pollastrini" label="Barbara Pollastrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721668" start="16059" end="16099" title="Minister for Equal Opportunities" label="Italian Minister for Equal Opportunities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720224" start="16107" end="16123" title="Second Prodi government" label="Prodi II Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313923" start="16132" end="16147" title="Nouriel Roubini" label="Nouriel Roubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q770467" start="16153" end="16177" title="Stern School of Business" label="Stern School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738115" start="16189" end="16208" title="Fabrizio Saccomanni" label="Fabrizio Saccomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721645" start="16210" end="16267" title="Minister of Economy and Finance (Italy)" label="Minister of Economy and Finance of the Italian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q806176" start="16302" end="16315" title="Bank of Italy" label="Bank of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q529638" start="16317" end="16330" title="Paolo Scaroni" label="Paolo Scaroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="16339" end="16342" title="Eni" label="Eni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="16353" end="16361" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167404" start="16363" end="16374" title="Renato Soru" label="Renato Soru"/>
<link wikidata="Q726572" start="16454" end="16461" title="Tessellis" label="Tiscali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840268" start="16463" end="16477" title="Luigi Zingales" label="Luigi Zingales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963304" start="16479" end="16525" title="University of Chicago Booth School of Business" label="University of Chicago Booth School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q446679" start="16537" end="16550" title="Patrizia Toia" label="Patrizia Toia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="16589" end="16608" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575905" start="16610" end="16623" title="Marco Patuano" label="Marco Patuano"/>
<link wikidata="Q144617" start="16632" end="16641" title="TIM Group" label="TIM Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441031" start="16643" end="16661" title="Federico Marchetti (businessman)" label="Federico Marchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022139" start="16682" end="16705" title="YOOX Net-a-Porter Group" label="YOOX Net-a-Porter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892362" start="16707" end="16720" title="Marco Cappato" label="Marco Cappato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716366" start="16780" end="16805" title="Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi" label="Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66848754" start="16818" end="16834" title="Alessandro Pansa" label="Alessandro Pansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q910379" start="16850" end="16858" title="Leonardo (company)" label="Leonardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15676279" start="16860" end="16878" title="Claudio Costamagna" label="Claudio Costamagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824303" start="16892" end="16925" title="Advanced Accelerator Applications" label="Advanced Accelerator Applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q375310" start="16927" end="16943" title="Giovanni Arrighi" label="Giovanni Arrighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="16971" end="16995" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290101" start="16997" end="17014" title="Domenico Lombardi" label="Domenico Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="17098" end="17119" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288929" start="17121" end="17136" title="Eduardo Missoni" label="Eduardo Missoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="17163" end="17203" title="World Organization of the Scout Movement" label="World Organization of the Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755070" start="17205" end="17217" title="Andrea Enria" label="Andrea Enria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123677204" start="17232" end="17253" title="Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank" label="ECB Supervisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q769548" start="17298" end="17324" title="European Banking Authority" label="European Banking Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q354085" start="17336" end="17348" title="Mario Biondi (writer)" label="Mario Biondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423068" start="17381" end="17392" title="Paolo Brera" label="Paolo Brera"/>
<link wikidata="Q292326" start="17489" end="17507" title="Teresa de Lauretis" label="Teresa de Lauretis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="17537" end="17573" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="University of California, Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q467817" start="17575" end="17599" title="Valerio Massimo Manfredi" label="Valerio Massimo Manfredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848290" start="17651" end="17664" title="Mario Arcelli" label="Mario Arcelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975780" start="17728" end="17748" title="Fabio De&amp;#x27;Longhi" label="Fabio De&amp;#x27;Longhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207494" start="17757" end="17771" title="De&amp;#x27; Longhi" label="De&amp;#x27;Longhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816269" start="17773" end="17790" title="Francesco Milleri" label="Francesco Milleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878364" start="17799" end="17808" title="Luxottica" label="Luxottica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41438659" start="17810" end="17829" title="Salvatore Aranzulla" label="Salvatore Aranzulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q59624525" start="17857" end="17871" title="Dubravka Negre" label="Dubravka Negre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22662468" start="17873" end="17912" title="Ministry of Mining and Energy (Serbia)" label="Minister of Mining and Energy of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q523283" start="17925" end="17943" title="Sergio Noja Noseda" label="Sergio Noja Noseda"/>
<link wikidata="Q706554" start="18048" end="18066" title="Alessandro Profumo" label="Alessandro Profumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q144191" start="18076" end="18100" title="Marco Tronchetti Provera" label="Marco Tronchetti Provera"/>
<link wikidata="Q113653323" start="18111" end="18124" title="Massimo Renon" label="Massimo Renon"/>
<link wikidata="Q817139" start="18137" end="18151" title="Benetton Group" label="Benetton Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574331" start="18164" end="18174" title="Luigi Roth" label="Luigi Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q428294" start="18223" end="18241" title="Leopoldo Sabbatini" label="Leopoldo Sabbatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877060" start="18326" end="18338" title="Nina Senicar" label="Nina Senicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553680" start="18355" end="18370" title="Guido Tabellini" label="Guido Tabellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658262" start="18442" end="18456" title="Il Sole 24 Ore" label="Il Sole 24 Ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430832" start="18464" end="18476" title="Sara Tommasi" label="Sara Tommasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248530" start="18501" end="18523" title="Benedetto Della Vedova" label="Benedetto Della Vedova"/>
<link wikidata="Q950766" start="18537" end="18554" title="Roberto Vedovotto" label="Roberto Vedovotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q931207" start="18563" end="18569" title="Kering" label="Kering"/>
<link wikidata="Q138351" start="18604" end="18618" title="Andrea Agnelli" label="Andrea Agnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="18648" end="18659" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031618" start="18661" end="18683" title="Aimone di Savoia Aosta (born 1967)" label="Prince Aimone of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="18693" end="18699" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204805" start="18701" end="18717" title="Pierre Casiraghi" label="Pierre Casiraghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q233966" start="18767" end="18796" title="Princess Caroline of Monaco" label="Caroline, Princess of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910" start="18812" end="18839" title="Albert II, Prince of Monaco" label="Albert II, Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371320" start="18841" end="18863" title="Giovanni Cobolli Gigli" label="Giovanni Cobolli Gigli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8933801" start="18899" end="18914" title="Chiara Ferragni" label="Chiara Ferragni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321406" start="18963" end="18979" title="Steven Goldstein (driver)" label="Steven Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637234" start="18998" end="19015" title="Beatrice Borromeo" label="Beatrice Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015389" start="19132" end="19150" title="Vittorio Gallinari" label="Vittorio Gallinari"/>
<link wikidata="Q484909" start="19171" end="19187" title="Clarence Seedorf" label="Clarence Seedorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041107" start="19212" end="19225" title="Carla Sozzani" label="Carla Sozzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738115" start="19393" end="19412" title="Fabrizio Saccomanni" label="Fabrizio Saccomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q806176" start="19441" end="19454" title="Banca d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Bank of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q73330" start="19989" end="20002" title="Jörg Asmussen" label="Jörg Asmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50002" start="20004" end="20015" title="Emma Bonino" label="Emma Bonino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006398" start="20017" end="20029" title="Urbano Cairo" label="Urbano Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766982" start="20031" end="20051" title="Giovanni Castellucci" label="Giovanni Castellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q981692" start="20053" end="20067" title="Vittorio Colao" label="Vittorio Colao"/>
<link wikidata="Q15676279" start="20069" end="20087" title="Claudio Costamagna" label="Claudio Costamagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755070" start="20089" end="20101" title="Andrea Enria" label="Andrea Enria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135246" start="20103" end="20118" title="Corrado Passera" label="Corrado Passera"/>
<link wikidata="Q706554" start="20120" end="20138" title="Alessandro Profumo" label="Alessandro Profumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313923" start="20140" end="20155" title="Nouriel Roubini" label="Nouriel Roubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q529638" start="20157" end="20170" title="Paolo Scaroni" label="Paolo Scaroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q630738" start="20172" end="20190" title="Carlo Scognamiglio" label="Carlo Scognamiglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q167404" start="20192" end="20203" title="Renato Soru" label="Renato Soru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838943" start="20205" end="20217" title="Lucio Stanca" label="Lucio Stanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264974" start="20219" end="20230" title="Luca de Meo" label="Luca de Meo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146774" start="20287" end="20300" title="Giuseppe Sala (politician)" label="Giuseppe Sala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441031" start="20302" end="20320" title="Federico Marchetti (businessman)" label="Federico Marchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893949" start="20408" end="20420" title="Paolo Cuccia" label="Paolo Cuccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341209" start="20440" end="20455" title="Vittorio Grilli" label="Vittorio Grilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q144191" start="20506" end="20530" title="Marco Tronchetti Provera" label="Marco Tronchetti Provera"/>
<link wikidata="Q558991" start="20563" end="20585" title="Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa" label="Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46210" start="20622" end="20641" title="University of Milan" label="University of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q392904" start="20644" end="20675" title="Polytechnic University of Milan" label="Polytechnic University of Milan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706615" wikidata="Q984010" url="?curid=706615" title="David Price (American politician)">
<text>David Eugene Price (born August 17, 1940) is an American politician who was the U.S. representative for from 1997 to 2023, previously holding the position from 1987 to 1995. A member of the Democratic Party, he represented a district covering much of the heart of the Triangle, including all of Orange County and parts of Wake and Durham counties. It included most of Raleigh, parts of Durham, and all of Cary and Chapel Hill. Price was the dean of North Carolina&#x27;s delegation to the House of Representatives. He retired from Congress in 2022.

==Early life and education==
Born in Erwin, Tennessee, Price attended Mars Hill College when it was a junior college. He later transferred to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill after winning a Morehead Scholarship and became a member of the Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies. He earned his degree in 1961. Originally intent on becoming an engineer, Price continued his education at Yale University, where he received a theology degree (1964) and a Ph.D. in political science (1969).

== Career ==
Price served as an aide to Alaska Senator Bob Bartlett from 1963 to 1967 and then entered academia, working as a political science and public policy professor at Duke University from 1973 until his first campaign for Congress in 1986. He also served as a Duke professor during 1995 and 1996, when he was not in Congress.

Price worked for the North Carolina Democratic Party from 1979 to 1984. He has written a political science textbook, &quot;The Congressional Experience&quot;, from the perspective of a candidate for office and then a member of Congress. Price also served as executive director and then state chair of the North Carolina Democratic Party before his election to Congress.

==U.S. House of Representatives==

===Elections===
;1986–1992
Price first entered Congress in 1987 after defeating one-term Representative Bill Cobey, 56% to 44%. He was reelected in 1988 and 1990 with 58% of the vote. In 1992, he was reelected with 65%.

;1994
In 1994, Price lost to the Republican nominee, former Raleigh police chief Fred Heineman, by a margin of less than 1% during the Republican Revolution, in part due to lower-than-expected turnout in the Democratic stronghold of Orange County (home to Chapel Hill), but despite the fact that heavily Republican Randolph County had been eliminated from the fourth district during redistricting.

;1996
In 1996, Price defeated Heineman in a rematch, 54% to 44%. He was helped in part by voters who were not happy with the lack of progress made by the freshman class on the goals of the Contract with America.

;1998–2006
The district reverted to form, and Price was reelected by wide margins in 1998 (57%), 2000 (62%), 2002 (61%), 2004 (64%), and 2006 (65%).

;2008–2020
Price&#x27;s opponent in the 2008 election was Republican B.J. Lawson. Lawson was called the most formidable opposition Price had faced since he lost to Heineman in 1994. For example, he ran television ads, which Price&#x27;s opponents hadn&#x27;t done in at least a decade. Despite Lawson&#x27;s increased efforts and expenditures, Price defeated him, 63% to 37%.

Price launched his 2010 reelection campaign on September 8 of that year. Price defeated Lawson in a rematch, 56% to 44%.

In 2012, Price defeated the Republican nominee, businessman Tim D&#x27;Annunzio. In 2014, he defeated Republican Paul Wright, a trial lawyer, former District Court and Superior Court judge and 2012 candidate for governor of North Carolina. In 2016, Price defeated Republican nominee Sue Googe. In 2018, he defeated Republican nominee Steve Von Loor and Libertarian nominee Barbara Howe. The 4th district was reconfigured as a result of court-mandated redistricting in 2019. The new district shed much of its Raleigh sections in exchange for all of Durham County and several other more rural counties. In 2020, Price defeated Republican nominee Robert Thomas with more than 67% of the vote.

===Tenure===

Price was an early opponent of the Iraq War of 2003 and sponsored a bill to bring the conduct of private military companies working in Iraq under legal jurisdiction of the United States. He has also introduced legislation to prohibit contractors from performing interrogations of prisoners in the custody of intelligence agencies.

As chairman of the 2008 House subcommittee responsible for determining the budget for the Department of Homeland Security, Price sought to focus immigration enforcement efforts on criminal convicts.

Price authored a provision of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 that made the interest on student loans tax-deductible, and legislation creating the Advanced Technological Education program at the National Science Foundation, which provides grants for high-tech education in community colleges and was enacted in 1993. He voted for the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, reasoning that &quot;the harmful effects of the credit crisis on all North Carolinians were too great for the federal government to sit on the sidelines.&quot; and for &quot;[defending] critical emergency management and homeland security priorities&quot; received an award from the association of state emergency managers. In December 2009, he voted for the Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which enacted more stringent regulations on the financial industry to protect consumers and taxpayers from another financial crisis.

Price was the author of legislation to reform the public financing system for presidential campaigns.

Price has opposed concentration of media ownership. He worked on legislative initiatives to roll back the FCC&#x27;s 2003 rules and co-sponsored an unsuccessful bill to overturn another 2008 FCC approval of media consolidation. Price voted for the 2006 &quot;Markey amendment&quot; to establish network neutrality in the Communication Act of 1934.

In 2013, Price voted against the amendment to the Patriot Act that would have eliminated Section 215 and curtailed the National Security Agency&#x27;s controversial data collection program.

On October 18, 2021, Price announced that he would not seek reelection.

===Committee assignments===
*Committee on Appropriations
**Subcommittee on Homeland Security 
**Subcommittee on the Legislative Branch
**Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies (Chair)

===Caucus memberships===
*Congressional Humanities Caucus (Co-Chair)
*House Democracy Partnership
*United States Congressional International Conservation Caucus
*National Service Caucus (Co-Chair)
*Congressional Arts Caucus
*Veterinary Medicine Caucus
*House Baltic Caucus
*Afterschool Caucuses
*Congressional NextGen 9-1-1 Caucus
*America&#x27;s Language Caucus

Price also chaired the House Democracy Assistance Commission.

==Personal life==
Price married his wife, Lisa Kanwit, in 1968. They were longtime Democratic Party activists together, and have two children: Karen, a filmmaker; and Michael, a professor of Evolutionary Psychology at Brunel University in London. They have three grandchildren. Price resides in Chapel Hill and is a member of the Binkley Memorial Baptist Church.

He received the 2011 John Tyler Caldwell Award for the Humanities from the North Carolina Humanities Council.

Price is a Baptist.

==Electoral history==























































==References==
==External links==
*Congressman David Price official U.S. House website
*David Price for Congress 




|-
|-
|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q984010" start="0" end="18" title="David Price (American politician)" label="David Eugene Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="80" end="99" title="U.S. representative" label="U.S. representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="190" end="206" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q767860" start="268" end="276" title="Research Triangle" label="Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q507957" start="295" end="308" title="Orange County, North Carolina" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506215" start="322" end="326" title="Wake County, North Carolina" label="Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q428298" start="331" end="337" title="Durham County, North Carolina" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="368" end="375" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="386" end="392" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q852665" start="405" end="409" title="Cary, North Carolina" label="Cary"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="414" end="425" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796053" start="449" end="513" title="List of United States representatives from North Carolina" label="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s delegation to the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="543" end="547" title="2022 United States House of Representatives elections in North Carolina#District 4" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289449" start="587" end="603" title="Erwin, Tennessee" label="Erwin, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773136" start="620" end="637" title="Mars Hill College" label="Mars Hill College"/>
<link wikidata="Q370258" start="652" end="666" title="junior college" label="junior college"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="696" end="739" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270502" start="804" end="841" title="Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies" label="Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="949" end="964" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="986" end="994" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1015" end="1020" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="1024" end="1041" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779379" start="1091" end="1097" title="List of United States Senators from Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q719965" start="1106" end="1118" title="Bob Bartlett" label="Bob Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="1154" end="1162" title="academia" label="academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="1177" end="1194" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="1199" end="1212" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="1226" end="1241" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054469" start="1407" end="1438" title="North Carolina Democratic Party" label="North Carolina Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q862019" start="1896" end="1906" title="Bill Cobey" label="Bill Cobey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2046" end="2056" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="2073" end="2080" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312401" start="2094" end="2107" title="Fred Heineman" label="Fred Heineman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="2148" end="2169" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q507957" start="2246" end="2259" title="Orange County, North Carolina" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q507943" start="2328" end="2343" title="Randolph County, North Carolina" label="Randolph County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689146" start="2601" end="2622" title="Contract with America" label="Contract with America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2762" end="2766" title="2006 United States House of Representatives elections in North Carolina#District 4" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2815" end="2828" title="2008 United States House of Representatives elections in North Carolina#District 4" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833811" start="2844" end="2855" title="B.J. Lawson" label="B.J. Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3171" end="3195" title="2010 United States House of Representatives elections in North Carolina#District 4" label="2010 reelection campaign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3277" end="3281" title="2012 United States House of Representatives elections in North Carolina#District 4" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3358" end="3362" title="2014 United States House of Representatives elections in North Carolina#District 4" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054624" start="3442" end="3456" title="North Carolina Superior Court" label="Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202700" start="3486" end="3512" title="governor of North Carolina" label="governor of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3517" end="3521" title="2016 United States House of Representatives elections in North Carolina#District 4" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q428298" start="3822" end="3835" title="Durham County, North Carolina" label="Durham County"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="4014" end="4030" title="Iraq War of 2003" label="Iraq War of 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057214" start="4076" end="4102" title="private military companies" label="private military companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="4401" end="4432" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689696" start="4545" end="4572" title="Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997" label="Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="4706" end="4733" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q391478" start="4845" end="4889" title="Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008" label="Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="5194" end="5212" title="emergency management" label="emergency managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234044" start="5249" end="5295" title="Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act" label="Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q274490" start="5481" end="5497" title="public financing" label="public financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="5552" end="5584" title="concentration of media ownership" label="concentration of media ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998488" start="5829" end="5847" title="net neutrality in the United States" label="network neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q221689" start="5933" end="5944" title="Patriot Act" label="Patriot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863020" start="6176" end="6203" title="United States House Committee on Appropriations" label="Committee on Appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889942" start="6206" end="6239" title="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Homeland Security" label="Subcommittee on Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889948" start="6243" end="6281" title="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on the Legislative Branch" label="Subcommittee on the Legislative Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889947" start="6284" end="6367" title="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies" label="Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889657" start="6476" end="6537" title="United States Congressional International Conservation Caucus" label="United States Congressional International Conservation Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136200" start="6575" end="6600" title="Congressional Arts Caucus" label="Congressional Arts Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449023" start="6602" end="6628" title="Veterinary Medicine Caucus" label="Veterinary Medicine Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135688" start="6630" end="6649" title="House Baltic Caucus" label="House Baltic Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690801" start="6651" end="6671" title="Afterschool Caucuses" label="Afterschool Caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003922" start="6673" end="6707" title="Congressional NextGen 9-1-1 Caucus" label="Congressional NextGen 9-1-1 Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q932411" start="7022" end="7039" title="Brunel University" label="Brunel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="7099" end="7110" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261496" start="7189" end="7208" title="John Tyler Caldwell" label="John Tyler Caldwell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706620" wikidata="Q3634336" url="?curid=706620" title="Gants Hill">
<text>Gants Hill is an area of Ilford in East London, England, within the borough of Redbridge. It is a suburb east northeast of Charing Cross. It lends its name to a central roundabout where five roads meet.

==History==

The name likely originated from the le Gant family, who were stewards of Barking Abbey. The name Gantesgrave appears in records as early as 1291.

==Geography==
The area is mostly residential with a selection of retail outlets, a wide variety of restaurants, pub-restaurants, bars and a hotel. Green space with historic mansion, Valentines Park, occupies the land between Gants Hill and Ilford.

Valentines High School and Gearies School are local schools. Other nearby schools include Beal High School in Clayhall, King Solomon High School in Fairlop, and the selective grammar schools Ilford County High School and Woodford County High School in Barkingside and Woodford respectively.

Perth Road is the main road of the &quot;Commonwealth Estate&quot;, overlapping with Ilford proper, in which the roads are named after cities of former British colonies such as Aden, Colombo, Auckland, Toronto, Quebec, Melbourne and Perth.

The Odeon cinema, originally called the Savoy, was demolished in 2003 to provide space for a block of flats. It stood between Eastern Avenue and Perth Road.

Gants Hill hosts the popular &#x27;Faces&#x27; nightclub, which is in Cranbrook Road. The club featured in the ITV2 reality series &quot;The Only Way Is Essex&quot; and opens Thursday to Saturday. The club has six bars, two music rooms and VIP tables.

Nearest places are Newbury Park, Barkingside, Ilford and Redbridge.

===Renovation===
Gants Hill roundabout and the surrounding area underwent extensive renovation, beginning in June 2009. The works were paid for by Transport For London. The project introduced new signalised pedestrian crossings around the roundabout whilst the Gants Hill subways received new floor tiles and coloured banding on the walls. The renovations were completed in late September 2010 with the Mayor of London, Boris Johnson, visiting the roundabout. Boris Johnson also unveiled a plaque to mark his visit.

==Transport==
Formerly part of the A406, Woodford Avenue has now been renumbered as the A1400 and a new section of the A406 has been built through Redbridge and Ilford to Barking and Beckton. The A12 runs east–west, and the A123, Cranbrook Road, runs north–south, through Gants Hill roundabout, which is also the endpoint of the A1400. All these roads have several bus routes along them (see map). A one-way minor road, Clarence Avenue, also leads onto the roundabout.

===Nearest stations===
The nearest London Underground station is Gants Hill on the Central line. Ilford railway station is an Elizabeth Line station to the south of the district.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3634336" start="0" end="10" title="Gants Hill" label="Gants Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297044" start="25" end="31" title="Ilford" label="Ilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220704" start="35" end="46" title="East London" label="East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q208955" start="79" end="88" title="London Borough of Redbridge" label="Redbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="105" end="119" title="boxing the compass" label="east northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q216185" start="123" end="136" title="Charing Cross" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q808279" start="290" end="303" title="Barking Abbey" label="Barking Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911047" start="546" end="561" title="Valentines Park" label="Valentines Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297044" start="604" end="610" title="Ilford" label="Ilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911042" start="613" end="635" title="Valentines High School" label="Valentines High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876119" start="703" end="719" title="Beal High School" label="Beal High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412063" start="733" end="757" title="King Solomon High School" label="King Solomon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109469" start="804" end="829" title="Ilford County High School" label="Ilford County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032649" start="834" end="861" title="Woodford County High School (London)" label="Woodford County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297044" start="990" end="996" title="Ilford" label="Ilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="1082" end="1086" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="1088" end="1095" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="1097" end="1105" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1107" end="1114" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1116" end="1122" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="1124" end="1133" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="1138" end="1143" title="Perth, Western Australia" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127470" start="1150" end="1162" title="Odeon cinema" label="Odeon cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532410" start="1441" end="1462" title="The Only Way Is Essex" label="The Only Way Is Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284627" start="1576" end="1588" title="Newbury Park, London" label="Newbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634315" start="1590" end="1601" title="Barkingside" label="Barkingside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297044" start="1603" end="1609" title="Ilford" label="Ilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422834" start="1614" end="1623" title="Redbridge, London" label="Redbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="2029" end="2044" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="2046" end="2059" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422834" start="2290" end="2299" title="Redbridge, London" label="Redbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297044" start="2304" end="2310" title="Ilford" label="Ilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q377720" start="2314" end="2321" title="Barking, London" label="Barking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417728" start="2326" end="2333" title="Beckton" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648862" start="2339" end="2342" title="A12 road (Great Britain)" label="A12"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880" start="2648" end="2674" title="List of London Underground stations" label="London Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493698" start="2678" end="2688" title="Gants Hill tube station" label="Gants Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q205355" start="2696" end="2708" title="Central line (London Underground)" label="Central line"/>
<link wikidata="Q587700" start="2710" end="2732" title="Ilford railway station" label="Ilford railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="2739" end="2753" title="Elizabeth Line" label="Elizabeth Line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706621" wikidata="Q2422491" url="?curid=706621" title="Lucy Van Pelt">
<text>Lucille &quot;Lucy&quot; Van Pelt is a fictional character in the syndicated comic strip &quot;Peanuts&quot;, written and drawn by Charles Schulz. She is the older sister of Linus and Rerun. Lucy is characterized as a &quot;fussbudget&quot;, crabby, bossy and opinionated girl who bullies most other characters in the strip, particularly Linus and Charlie Brown.

==Personality==
Lucy often mocks and intimidates others, especially Charlie Brown and her younger brother, Linus. She is often the antagonist in a number of the comics. She has moments of tenderness, such as when Linus replies to her despondency over the unfairness of life by saying &quot;Well, for one thing, you have a little brother who loves you,&quot; whereupon Lucy hugs her little brother and bursts into tears.

Although she often torments, teases, and belittles Charlie Brown, she is genuinely fond of him, and their true friendship is obvious throughout the strip. In one storyline, where Linus and Lucy&#x27;s family move away (temporarily, as it turned out), both Lucy and Charlie Brown become very emotional when they say goodbye to each other. In some strips, Charlie Brown gets the better of Lucy. In one, she lectures him about putting his hands in a bowl of popcorn that they&#x27;re sharing after licking his fingers. The last panel of the strip shows him walking away from her as she sits there with a surprised expression on her face with the bowl of popcorn dumped on her head. Like her brother, she loves sinking into her Sacco chair.

Lucy has an unrequited crush on musical prodigy Schroeder, in part because Schroeder cares about nothing but Beethoven and playing the piano. Kevin Wong from the blog Kotaku wrote of the relationship: &quot;Over the years, the reader empathized less with Schroeder and more with Lucy, even though she was the initial aggressor in this dysfunctional dynamic. At least she had some skin in the game—she opened herself to rejection every time she leaned on Schroeder’s piano. Schroeder was never open, and at times, he even seemed to take pleasure in his cruel reactions to her flirtations.&quot; By 1966, Lucy’s relationship with Schroeder bordered on masochistic. She persisted in her efforts to win him over, despite his indifference. During a multi-day, extended storyline during which Lucy and Linus moved away, Schroeder realized he missed her. He couldn’t play his piano without her there. Like Charlie Brown in the storyline, the reader is irritated at Schroeder for his prior callousness and emotional constipation.

===Psychiatric booth===
Lucy operates a psychiatric booth, parodying the lemonade stand operated by many young children in the United States. Here, she offers advice and psychoanalysis for five cents, most often to an anxious or depressed Charlie Brown; however, the &quot;advice&quot; is usually worthless. Her advice ranges from street smart popular psychology to hilarious obvious truths to insightful investigation. One example is when, while treating Snoopy, Lucy asks him how he related, during his childhood, to the other (if you allow the expression) &quot;dogs&quot; in his family. Needless to say, Snoopy was quick to disallow the expression. Another is when she asks him to give her his paw and recite to himself: &quot;I am loved. I am needed. I am important.&quot; Snoopy reacts by thinking &quot;I am blushing!&quot; 

A sign on the front of the booth declares that &quot;The Doctor is&quot; in or out, depending on which side of the &quot;In/out&quot; placard is displayed. In &quot;A Charlie Brown Christmas&quot;, Lucy reverses the placard from displaying its &quot;Out&quot; side to reveal the words &quot;Real In&quot;.

===Baseball===
On Charlie Brown&#x27;s baseball team Lucy plays right field (or occasionally center field), and is characterized as a bad player, who, when temporarily kicked off the team, turns to heckling the games. Lucy has a knack for coming up with a nonsensical excuse for every fly ball she misses, such as &quot;The moons of Saturn got in my eyes&quot; or &quot;I think there were toxic substances coming from my glove, and they made me dizzy.&quot; Other times, she finds an excuse to have one-sided conversations with Charlie Brown at the pitcher&#x27;s mound, often over some trivial thing she noticed, which usually result in Charlie Brown blowing his top and yelling at her to &quot;Get back in right field where you belong!&quot;

==History==
The third new character in &quot;Peanuts&quot; after Violet and Schroeder, Lucy made her debut on March 3, 1952. Originally based on Schulz&#x27;s adopted daughter Meredith, Lucy was a goggle-eyed toddler who continually annoyed her parents and the older kids. Her future irascibility was hinted at in a 1953 strip when she tells Charlie Brown that she&#x27;d just been expelled from nursery school. Over the next two years, she aged up so that by 1954, she appeared to be about the same age as Charlie Brown. (The early strips with toddler-age Lucy were not reprinted until after Charles Schulz&#x27;s death.) Within a few months of her introduction, Schulz altered Lucy&#x27;s eyes to have the same appearance as that of the other characters, except for small extra lines around them which were also later sported by her two siblings.

Lucy has short, black hair and wears a blue dress with blue socks and saddle shoes until the late 1970s when Schulz began showing the strip&#x27;s female characters in pants and shirts in order to keep their outfits more contemporary. By the late 1980s, she had switched to this look permanently.

Lucy was named after Louanne Van Pelt, a former neighbor of Charles Schulz in Colorado Springs and, according to David Michaelis of Time Magazine, was modeled after Schulz&#x27;s first wife, Joyce.

In a 1967 interview with &quot;Psychology Today&quot;, Schulz said that his favorite characters were Snoopy, Linus and Charlie Brown. &quot;Lucy is not a favorite, because I don&#x27;t especially like her, that&#x27;s all. But she &quot;works&quot;, and a central comic-strip character is not only one who fills his role very well, but who will provide ideas by the very nature of his personality.&quot; Also in the article, Schulz added that Lucy was mean, because supposedly weak people dominating strong people is funny: &quot;There is nothing funny about a little boy being mean to a little girl. That is simply not funny! But there is something funny about a little girl being able to be mean to a little boy.&quot; 
He continues: &quot;You have to give (Lucy) credit though; she has a way of cutting right down to the truth. This is one of her good points. She can cut through a lot of the sham and she can really feel what&#x27;s wrong with Charlie Brown which he can&#x27;t see himself.&quot;

==Annual football strips==

Lucy frequently pulls the football away from Charlie Brown right as he is about to kick it.

The first occasion on which she did this was November 16, 1952 (Violet unintentionally did the same thing a year before because she was afraid Charlie Brown would accidentally kick &quot;her&quot;), but unlike subsequent stunts, Lucy first pulled the ball away because she did not want Charlie Brown to get it dirty (he took a second try in the same strip, only to trip over it at the end).

The football strips became an annual tradition, and Schulz did one nearly every year for the rest of the strip&#x27;s run, becoming a core part of Peanuts lore. The most controversial example is in the animated special &quot;It&#x27;s Your First Kiss, Charlie Brown&quot;; during an actual football game with many spectators, Lucy pulls the ball away on Charlie Brown four times keeping him from making any scoring plays and causing the team to lose the Homecoming game by one point. Though he is clearly innocent, Charlie Brown is blamed for the loss even by Lucy herself.

In the Peanuts specials, this first happens in &quot;It&#x27;s the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown&quot;. In &quot;A Charlie Brown Thanksgiving&quot;, Lucy says that &quot;the biggest, most important tradition of all is the kicking off of the football.&quot;, making Charlie Brown ready to kick the football before Lucy once again pulls the football away from him.

Charlie Brown did in fact kick a football in the September 12, 1956 strip, but only because Schroeder was holding the ball. In a July–August 1979 story when Charlie Brown checked himself into the hospital due to feeling ill, Lucy was so distraught at Charlie Brown in that state that she vowed that she would let Charlie Brown kick the football. When Charlie Brown was released, he kept her to that vow. Unfortunately, when Charlie Brown made his place kick, he missed the ball and hit her hand instead.

==Voiced by==

*Karen Mendelson (1963)
*Tracy Stratford (1963, 1965)
*Sally Dryer (1966–1968)
*Pamelyn Ferdin (1969–1971)
*Robin Kohn (1972–1973)
*Melanie Kohn (1974–1975, 1977)
*Sarah Beach (1976)
*Lynn Mortensen (1976)
*Michelle Muller (1977–1979)
*Laura Planting (1980)
*Kristen Fullerton (1980)
*Sydney Penny (1981)
*Angela Lee (1983)
*Heather Stoneman (1984–1985)
*Jessica Lee Smith (1984–1985)
*Melissa Guzzi (1986)
*Tiffany Billings (1986–1988)
*Ami Foster (1988)
*Erica Gayle (1988–1989)
*Jennifer Banko (1990)
*Marne Patterson (1992)
*Molly Dunham (1993)
*Jamie Cronin (1995–1997)
*Rachel Davey (2000)
*Lauren Schaffel (2002)
*Serena Berman (2002–2003)
*Ashley Rose Orr (2003)
*Stephanie Patton (2006)
*Michelle Creber (2008–2009)
*Grace Rolek (2011)
*Scarlett Sperduto (2012–2013; Metlife Commercials)
*Hadley Belle Miller (2015)
*Bella Stine (2016)
*Merrit Grove (2018–2019)
*Isabella Leo (2019–present)

Source(s):

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2422491" start="0" end="7" title="Lucy Van Pelt" label="Lucille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422491" start="14" end="18" title="Lucy Van Pelt" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422491" start="25" end="33" title="Lucy Van Pelt" label="Van Pelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="77" end="88" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="95" end="102" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="131" end="145" title="Charles Schulz" label="Charles Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351248" start="174" end="179" title="Linus Van Pelt" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054270" start="184" end="189" title="Rerun Van Pelt" label="Rerun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="348" end="361" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="432" end="445" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351248" start="471" end="476" title="Linus Van Pelt" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="836" end="849" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q55698" start="1509" end="1520" title="Bean bag chair" label="Sacco chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q246384" start="1571" end="1580" title="Schroeder (Peanuts)" label="Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="2586" end="2597" title="Psychiatry" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496544" start="2619" end="2633" title="Lemonade Stand (business)" label="lemonade stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="2716" end="2730" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="3002" end="3008" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393337" start="3544" end="3569" title="A Charlie Brown Christmas" label="A Charlie Brown Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084304" start="4496" end="4502" title="Violet (Peanuts)" label="Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q246384" start="4507" end="4516" title="Schroeder (Peanuts)" label="Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q15437374" start="4607" end="4615" title="Meredith Hodges" label="Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397732" start="5351" end="5363" title="saddle shoes" label="saddle shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116788822" start="5692" end="5707" title="David Michaelis" label="David Michaelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256412" start="5809" end="5825" title="Psychology Today" label="Psychology Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715770" start="6834" end="6842" title="Ball (gridiron football)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084304" start="6965" end="6971" title="Violet Gray" label="Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090942" start="7518" end="7558" title="It&amp;#x27;s Your First Kiss, Charlie Brown" label="It&amp;#x27;s Your First Kiss, Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q596994" start="7921" end="7963" title="It&amp;#x27;s the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown" label="It&amp;#x27;s the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655826" start="7980" end="8008" title="A Charlie Brown Thanksgiving" label="A Charlie Brown Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405120" start="8806" end="8817" title="Sally Dryer" label="Sally Dryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129298" start="8831" end="8845" title="Pamelyn Ferdin" label="Pamelyn Ferdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352596" start="8859" end="8869" title="Robin Kohn" label="Robin Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811303" start="8883" end="8895" title="Melanie Kohn" label="Melanie Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q445518" start="9036" end="9048" title="Sydney Penny" label="Sydney Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746081" start="9189" end="9199" title="Ami Foster" label="Ami Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q264946" start="9256" end="9271" title="Marnette Patterson" label="Marne Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453108" start="9372" end="9385" title="Serena Berman" label="Serena Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856870" start="9448" end="9463" title="Michelle Creber" label="Michelle Creber"/>
<link wikidata="Q43066886" start="9477" end="9488" title="Grace Rolek" label="Grace Rolek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706626" wikidata="Q7058197" url="?curid=706626" title="Northern California Indian Development Council">
<text>The Northern California Indian Development Council, Inc. (NCIDC) is a private nonprofit corporation that annually provides services to 14,000 to 15,000 clients statewide. NCIDC was established in 1976 with the following goals: 
*To research, develop and administer social and economic development programs designed to meet the needs of Native American communities
*To provide support and technical assistance for the development of such programs
*The conservation and preservation of historic and archeological sites and resources

In 1978, NCIDC became one of a very limited number of Community Services Administration Indian grantees located in Region IX. Although established as a Limited Purpose Agency, NCIDC functions in a similar capacity to a Community Action Agency, with the exception being the service population focus of American Indians.

The NCIDC administers a Workforce Investment Act (WIA) program, previously called the JTPA, which is available to provide quality employment and training services to assist eligible individuals in finding and qualifying for meaningful employment, and to help employers find skilled workers.

==External links==
*NCIDC Home Page
*Full description of WIA program</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7058197" start="4" end="56" title="Northern California Indian Development Council" label="Northern California Indian Development Council, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7058197" start="58" end="63" title="Northern California Indian Development Council" label="NCIDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="78" end="99" title="nonprofit" label="nonprofit corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="276" end="296" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="336" end="351" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="497" end="510" title="archeological" label="archeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079208" start="586" end="619" title="Community Services Administration" label="Community Services Administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="684" end="706" title="Limited Purpose Agency" label="Limited Purpose Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989709" start="751" end="774" title="Community Action Agency" label="Community Action Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034847" start="876" end="900" title="Workforce Investment Act of 1998" label="Workforce Investment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206700" start="938" end="942" title="Job Training Partnership Act of 1982" label="JTPA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706633" wikidata="Q640768" url="?curid=706633" title="Dave Treen">
<text>David Conner Treen Sr. (July 16, 1928 – October 29, 2009) was an American politician and attorney from Louisiana. A member of the Republican Party, Treen served as U.S. Representative for Louisiana&#x27;s 3rd congressional district from 1973 to 1980 and the 51st governor of Louisiana from 1980 to 1984. Treen was the first Republican elected to either office since Reconstruction.

Born in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, on July 16 1928 Treen grew up in New Orleans and later settled in Metairie. After three unsuccessful runs for Congress in the 1960s, Treen won his first election in 1972 to represent a U.S. House district that covered parts of Greater New Orleans and Acadiana. In Congress, Treen had a reliably conservative voting record, and he subsequently won reelection three times by increasing margins. Treen was among the inaugural members of the House Select Committee on Intelligence when it was created in 1975.

In 1979, Treen won election as governor of Louisiana, and he resigned from the House in 1980 to take office as governor. During his single term as governor, Treen cut the state income tax and created a professional development program for teachers. Treen also signed legislation creating the Louisiana School for Math, Science and the Arts and Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality. However, as the Treen administration took place during the early 1980s recession, Louisiana faced increasing unemployment and bond debt. Treen lost his reelection bid in 1983 to Edwin Edwards, who had served as governor before Treen.

After leaving the governor&#x27;s office, Treen continued to be politically involved in Louisiana, running for Congress and endorsing gubernatorial candidates as recently as 2008 before his death in 2009.

==Early life and legal career==
Treen was born in the state capital of Baton Rouge, Louisiana to Joseph Paul and Elizabeth (née Speir) Treen. He attended public schools in the parishes of East Baton Rouge, Jefferson, and Orleans.

In 1945, Treen graduated from the former Alcee Fortier High School in New Orleans, where his classmates included the subsequent political consultant and journalist Victor Gold. He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1948 in history and political science from Tulane University in New Orleans. While at Tulane, he was a brother of Kappa Sigma fraternity. In 1950, he graduated from Tulane Law School and was admitted to the bar.

Treen served in the U.S. Air Force from 1951 to 1952. After his discharge, Treen joined the law firm of Deutsch, Kerrigan &amp; Stiles. From 1952 to 1957, Treen was legal counsel and vice president of the Simplex Manufacturing Corporation in New Orleans. In 1957, Treen became an associate at the Beard, Blue &amp; Schmitt law firm before eventually being promoted to partner in what became Beard, Blue, Schmitt &amp; Treen.

==Early political career==
===States&#x27; Rights party chair and presidential elector candidate in 1960===
In the 1960 U.S. presidential election, Treen ran as an elector for the States&#x27; Rights Party, which supported Virginia U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd, Sr., a segregationist Democrat, over the two mainstream candidates, Democrat John F. Kennedy and Republican Richard Nixon. He also served as the chairman of the party&#x27;s state central committee. Along with Treen, States&#x27; Rights electors from Louisiana included hard-line segregationists Leander Perez and Willie Rainach. Treen warned at a rally that &quot;Reconstruction of the South is far from being over&quot; and that &quot;the Democratic and Republican parties would reduce the laboring man to mere tools in a socialistic state.&quot;

Ultimately, Kennedy won the election in Louisiana; the States&#x27; Rights ticket received 21 percent of the popular vote in Louisiana. But after the result was in, Treen called for the Louisiana Legislature to refuse to accept Kennedy&#x27;s electors and instead send those of the States&#x27; Rights Party, unpledged, to the Electoral College, saying there was no requirement that the legislature respect the popular vote. The legislature did not go along with Treen&#x27;s idea.

Treen emphasized in 1961 that his states&#x27; rights group was not affiliated with the National States&#x27; Rights Party, a group that he said was &quot;a disgrace to the term &#x27;states rights.&#x27;&quot; However, Treen would later leave the Louisiana States&#x27; Rights Party because he perceived the party to be anti-Semitic.

===1962, 1964, and 1968 U.S. House elections===
In 1962 Treen joined the central committee of the Louisiana Republican Party. Encouraged by friends, Treen launched a campaign for the U.S. House of Representatives to serve Louisiana&#x27;s 2nd congressional district, based in New Orleans, against incumbent Democrat Hale Boggs. Treen raised $11,000 for his 1962 campaign and lost the election, receiving only about a third of total votes.

In 1964, Treen again challenged Boggs. In a year when Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater won the majority of statewide votes in Louisiana, Treen received 62,881 votes (45 percent) to Boggs&#x27; 77,009 (55 percent).

Treen ran again in 1968 in his third and final campaign against Boggs, who was then the House majority whip; Boggs won with 81,537 votes (51 percent) to Treen&#x27;s 77,633 (49 percent). Following the 1970 United States census, Louisiana&#x27;s 2nd congressional district was reapportioned to exclude parts of Jefferson Parish with strong Republican support, including Treen&#x27;s residence.

===1971–72 gubernatorial election===
Treen was challenged in 1971 in the only Republican gubernatorial closed primary ever held in Louisiana by Robert Max Ross. In a campaign tour in Minden, Treen said that Louisiana needed &quot;true competition&quot; in state government, or &quot;a system in which two political parties operate on a continuing and permanent basis to examine and criticize each other&#x27;s policies and programs.&quot; If elected, Treen said that he would be &quot;as independent as possible&quot; in the governorship. Treen won the Republican primary with 92 percent of the vote.

Treen polled 480,424 ballots (42.8%) to Edwards&#x27;s 641,146 (57.2%) Treen carried twenty-seven parishes, mostly in the northern part of the state, with margins exceeding 60 percent in ten of those parishes. Weak support among black voters was reported as one factor in Treen&#x27;s loss.

==U.S. House of Representatives (1973–1980)==
===Elections===
====1972====

After a decade of service on the Republican State Central Committee, Treen was named as the Louisiana Republican national committeeman for a two-year stint that began in 1972. He succeeded his former ticket mate, Tom Stagg, who later was appointed as a U.S. District judge in Shreveport.

Later in 1972, Treen ran for the open Louisiana&#x27;s 3rd congressional district seat vacated by conservative Democrat Patrick T. Caffery of New Iberia. At the time, the district included the Acadiana and Greater New Orleans parishes of Iberia, Lafourche, St. Charles, St. Mary, and Terrebonne, as well as parts of Jefferson and St. Martin parishes. Treen defeated Democrat J. Louis Watkins Jr. with 71,090 (54 percent) to 60,521 (46 percent) votes on November 7, 1972. On the same day, incumbent President Richard Nixon, a Republican, carried Louisiana in winning reelection. Republicans also had a net gain of 12 seats in the U.S. House.

====1974====
In the 1974 midterm elections that happened nearly three months after the resignation of President Richard Nixon, Democrats added 49 seats to their House majority. However, in contrast to national trends, Treen won reelection against Democratic challenger State Representative Charles Grisbaum Jr. Treen carried 58.5 percent of the vote with 55,574 votes, while Grisbaum had 39,412 votes (41.5 percent). Also in that election cycle, Henson Moore won the 6th district race and became just the second Republican elected to Louisiana&#x27;s congressional delegation in the 20th century.

====1976====
Although Democrat Jimmy Carter won the 1976 presidential election both nationally and in Louisiana, Treen won reelection in 1976 by an even larger margin than 1974, with nearly 73 percent of the vote against Democratic candidate David Scheuermann.

====1978====
Already using them in gubernatorial elections, Louisiana began using open primaries for congressional elections in 1978; Treen ran unopposed in the 1978 District 3 open primary. Because he faced no opposition in the primary, scheduled for September 16, no votes were tabulated for his district in the general election on November 7, and Treen won reelection by default. Nationally, Republicans gained 15 seats in the U.S. House.

===Congressional tenure===
Sworn in to office on January 3, 1973, Treen became the first Republican from Louisiana to serve in Congress in the 20th century.

In its 100-point scale ranking members of Congress for their votes on key conservative issues, the American Conservative Union (ACU) rated Treen a perfect 100 in 1973. By 1979, Treen had a lifetime ACU rating of 91. In contrast, Americans for Democratic Action rated Treen 5 out of 100 in 1979 on votes for liberal policies.

While in Congress, Treen was part of a special committee that successfully amended the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953 to allow states greater review of offshore drilling on the Gulf Coast. Treen also introduced an amendment to the Small Business Act that was enacted as section 5 of the Small Business Amendments of 1974 (Public Law 93-386). The amendment added the following text to the Small Business Act: &quot;If loan applications are being refused or loans denied by such other department or agency responsible for such work or activity due to administrative withholding from obligation or withholding from apportionment, or due to administratively declared moratorium, then, for purposes of this section, no duplication shall be deemed to have occurred.&quot; According to &quot;The Times-Picayune&quot;, the Treen amendment granted access to Small Business Administration loans to those in the fishing industry.

Following the 1974 resignation of President Richard Nixon that followed Watergate, Treen voted against the confirmation of former New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller to serve as vice president under Gerald Ford; the confirmation passed both houses of Congress.

In 1975, Treen was among three conservative appointees of House Minority Leader John J. Rhodes to the newly created House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence that was established to investigate activities of the United States Intelligence Community.

While in Congress, Treen co-sponsored 26 bills that became law. Among those bills was a 1973 bill allowing Louisiana State University access to federal lands in Caddo Parish for pecan research. Treen also was among 59 co-sponsors of a bill introduced in 1979 to &quot;facilitate increased enforcement by the Coast Guard of laws relating to the importation of controlled substances, and for other purposes&quot;; the bill was signed by President Carter on September 15, 1980, months after Treen left Congress to serve as Governor of Louisiana.

===Committee assignments===
* House Committee on Armed Services
* House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries
* House Select Committee on Intelligence

==1979 gubernatorial election==

Because the state constitution restricted governors from seeking a third consecutive term in office, incumbent Governor Edwin Edwards was ineligible for the 1979 election. Treen was the only Republican candidate among six major candidates. On October 27, 1979, in one of the closest elections in Louisiana history, Treen won first place with nearly 22 percent of the vote in the jungle primary for governor, the second such election held in Louisiana following Edwards&#x27;s reform of Louisiana elections.

Barely finishing in second place and the final qualifying spot for the general election was Louis Lambert, a Democratic member of the Louisiana Public Service Commission, with 20.74 percent of the vote. While Treen was most popular in the Greater New Orleans, Acadiana, and North Louisiana, Lambert had the strongest support among black voters and members of labor unions. One factor in black and labor voters&#x27; preferring Lambert, according to Howell Raines of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, was Treen&#x27;s 1960 work for the Louisiana States&#x27; Rights Party.

For the December 8 general election, the four losing Democratic candidates, Lieutenant Governor Jimmy Fitzmorris, Secretary of State Paul Hardy, Speaker of the Louisiana House E.L. &quot;Bubba&quot; Henry and State Senator Edgar G. &quot;Sonny&quot; Mouton, Jr., all endorsed Treen. Their support helped him to defeat Democratic challenger Louis Lambert by 9,557 votes. Treen received 690,691 (50.3%) to Lambert&#x27;s 681,134 (49.7%). He won 22 parishes in victory, compared to 27 parishes in defeat in 1972. Only ten parishes that had voted for Treen in 1972 stuck with him in 1979. His strongest parishes in victory were all in south Louisiana: Plaquemines, Lafayette, St. Tammany, and Iberia. Treen paid off the four Democratic candidates&#x27; campaign debts in exchange for their support.

==Governor of Louisiana (1980–1984)==
===Tenure===
On March 10, 1980, the 51-year-old Treen became the 51st governor of Louisiana. Until then, the last Republican to serve in that office was Stephen B. Packard, who briefly served in the first few months of 1877 following the Compromise of 1877 that ended Reconstruction. His oath of office was administered by 19th Judicial Court Judge Douglas Gonzales, a Republican from Baton Rouge. Gonzales gave Treen a Bible inscribed, &quot;Dave, Upon this good book, you took your oath of office. Please keep it close so it can serve as a constant reminder of your solemn commitment to the people of this great state ...&quot;

Treen entered office with Democratic Lieutenant Governor Robert L. Freeman (an Edwards floor leader during his two terms in the House), a Louisiana State Senate that had no Republican members, and Louisiana House of Representatives where Democrats had a supermajority.

====Cabinet appointments====
During his single term, Treen appointed more African Americans to state offices than had any other previous governor in history.

Treen named Lockport shipbuilder Donald G. Bollinger as the secretary of the Louisiana Department of Public Safety &amp; Corrections. Bollinger also served for two years as the state Republican chairman prior to Nungesser. After taking office, Treen elevated Ansel M. Stroud, Jr., from assistant adjutant general to adjutant general of the Louisiana National Guard, a position that Stroud continued to hold until 1997.

====Education policy====
In 1981, Treen signed into law the Balanced Treatment for Creation-Science and Evolution-Science in Public School Instruction Act, commonly called the Creationism Act. Authored by Senator Bill Keith of Caddo Parish, the bill required public schools to balance the teaching of evolution and creation science. Three years after Treen left office, the United States Supreme Court ruled against that law in the 1987 case &quot;Edwards v. Aguillard,&quot; as creation science is not science but religious teaching.

Introduced by State Representative Jimmy D. Long of Natchitoches Parish, chair of the House Education Committee, a 1981 bill signed by Treen established the Louisiana School for Math, Science, and the Arts, a statewide high school for gifted children located on the campus of Northwestern State University in Natchitoches. The school opened in 1983.

====Crime policy====
He established in 1981 the Litter Control and Recycling Commission, as a measure to improve quality of life in cities and other areas. Violators faced potential fines of $100 to $500 and/or several days of litter collection from along state highways.

Capital punishment in Louisiana resumed very late in the Treen administration. In December 1983, nearly two months after losing his re-election bid, Treen ordered the execution by electric chair of convicted murderer Robert Wayne Williams, the tenth American and first in Louisiana to face execution since the U.S. Supreme Court in 1976 upheld capital punishment in a series of cases including &quot;Roberts v. Louisiana&quot;.

By September 1983, Treen signed only 34 pardons or commutations, far fewer than the 1,526 signed by Edwards in his two terms.

====Environmental policy====
In 1983, Treen signed legislation that established the Department of Environmental Quality, which opened on February 1, 1984. He accused &quot;political special interests&quot; loyal to Edwin Edwards with undermining his effort.

====State budget and economic policy====
During the Treen administration, revenues from the Louisiana state income tax decreased by $100 million, but the state budget increased to nearly $6 billion. Two years into Treen&#x27;s governorship, Louisiana owed nearly $2.5 billion in capital construction project bond debt. Treen entered office in March 1980 with Louisiana&#x27;s unemployment rate at 6.4 percent. However, as the early 1980s recession took hold, the statewide unemployment rate in Louisiana consistently rose and reached a high of 13.3 percent in June 1983.

In 1982, Treen proposed a $450 million tax on petroleum and natural gas, to support preservation of coastal wetlands, as more was being understood about their critical role in protecting the coast. It was known as the Coastal Wetlands Environmental Levy, but the measure ran into strong opposition from conservatives and the trade association, the Louisiana Association of Business and Industry (LABI). Treen defended CWEL on the premise that it would place no undue burden on any individual or group and would increase the state coffers at a much higher yield than would a boost in the state income tax. LABI director Edward J. Steimel announced immediate opposition to CWEL. CWEL was defeated in the Louisiana House although it received approval from a majority of lawmakers; it fell twelve votes short of the required two-thirds needed. Among the opponents were conservative legislators Woody Jenkins of Baton Rouge and B.F. O&#x27;Neal, Jr., of Shreveport.

After the defeat of CWEL, Treen ordered a three percent reduction in state employment, with the goal of saving $12 million, far less than the environmental tax would have generated. In 1986, out of office, Treen noted that state finances had declined by $450 million, an amount which he had projected CWEL would have brought into the state treasury.

In December 1982, Treen abandoned his call for new taxes and attempted to cut $150 million from the state budget to provide seniority raises for state employees. House Speaker John Hainkel, meanwhile, proposed $40 million in higher taxes, including higher tuition and fees at vocational schools and repeal of a $5 million tax exemption provided to Blue Cross Blue Shield in Louisiana.

In August 1982, Treen vetoed 24 bills passed by the legislature on the premise that most would have added expense to the already strained state budget. One of the bills would have exempted Butane and propane gas dealers from sales taxes.

Treen worked to reform the state worker&#x27;s compensation program, long known for its high insurance rates on business. When a 1982 reform plan failed, Treen blamed LABI because the trade association would not compromise with the Democrats to secure a bill that could pass the legislature. LABI director Ed Steimel declared the worker&#x27;s compensation problem at the time to be the major roadblock to bringing new and expanded industries into the state.

Early in 1983, a revised worker&#x27;s compensation bill was passed, and money was earmarked to make the unemployment compensation fund solvent. No action was taken on a policy involving hiring out convict labor. &quot;A majority of the Senate thought we had asked for enough. There was a lack of enthusiasm once again against a position taken by Victor Bussie, the president of the state AFL-CIO.

With Treen&#x27;s backing, the state of Louisiana subsidized the 1984 Louisiana World Exposition held in New Orleans from April to November 1984, which encountered financial issues from the start to the point that balancing its budget required over 11 million visitors paying the full $15 admission. Ultimately, under 7.5 million people attended, and most of them paid discounted admission prices. The exposition declared bankruptcy, and the governments of New Orleans and Louisiana lost a combined $140 million on the event.

===Lawsuit from lieutenant governor===
Treen and Lieutenant Governor Freeman, who openly endorsed Edwards&#x27; bid for a third term almost immediately following Treen&#x27;s inauguration, had a dispute in the summer of 1983 over the 1983–84 operating budget for Freeman&#x27;s office. Treen recommended $411,907, an amount considerably lower than Freeman had requested; the latter said he would have to lay off six of his fifteen employees. Freeman threatened to take Treen to court if he vetoed the larger amount: &quot;I&#x27;m certainly not going to continue cooperating with a man who threatens me and my employees.&quot; Treen vetoed the entire appropriation of nearly $381,500 for the lieutenant governor&#x27;s office, resulting in a lawsuit from Freeman. A trial court initially blocked the veto, but in August 1983, the Louisiana Court of Appeal reversed that decision and let the veto stand: &quot;In the present controversy, the issuance of the preliminary injunction, rather than preserving the status quo, effectively mandated the expenditures of the vetoed funds from the state treasury at a time of declining state revenues and uniform budget cuts.&quot;

===1983 gubernatorial election===

Treen and Edwards were known as fierce rivals. Treen began his campaign for a second term in December 1982, with John Cade leading the group, &#x27;People for Dave Treen.&#x27; At first, Cade emerged as the governor&#x27;s campaign spokesman so that he could concentrate on his job duties. Cade questioned Edwards&#x27; decision to forgo his gubernatorial retirement income of $40,000 per year on the grounds that Edwards was no longer &quot;retired&quot; because he was running to reclaim the governorship. Cade said that Edwards would have collected only $14,000 in pension and not before the age of sixty had he not engineered legislative approval of the more lucrative package.

At a fundraiser in Thibodaux to celebrate his 55th birthday, Treen said that Edwards in 1980 &quot;left a pile of unpaid bills and a stinking surplus of hazardous waste dumps.&quot; As of June 30, 1983, Edwards raised far more campaign cash than Treen, $5.4 million to $2.1 million. On October 9, the comedian Bob Hope headlined a Treen fundraiser at $1,000 per ticket held in the Downtown Sheraton Hotel in New Orleans. Treen picked up the support of former U.S. Representative James Domengeaux, a Democrat from Lafayette and director of the Council for the Development of French in Louisiana.

==Later political career==
===U.S. Senate and federal judgeship bids===
After leaving the governor&#x27;s office, Treen returned to practicing law. Still, Treen continued to seek political office. On July 20, 1984, Treen filed to be a candidate for that year&#x27;s U.S. Senate election to challenge incumbent Democratic U.S. Senator J. Bennett Johnston, only to withdraw four days later.
On July 23, 1987, President Ronald Reagan nominated Treen for a seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in New Orleans vacated by the death of Albert Tate Jr. However, the appointment was delayed by Democratic senators on the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, chaired by Delaware senator and future President Joe Biden, who objected to Treen&#x27;s past membership in the Louisiana States&#x27; Rights Party and other allegations. Treen withdrew from consideration on April 26, 1988. The Senate wound up confirming Reagan&#x27;s second choice, attorney John M. Duhé, Jr.

===Work in 1991 gubernatorial and 1992 presidential elections===
For the 1991 gubernatorial election, despite their differences, Treen endorsed Edwards&#x27;s bid for a fourth term over Republican candidate David Duke, a former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan and by then a perennial candidate. Treen said that a Duke win &quot;would damage this state for decades to come.&quot; In the general election, Edwards won with over 61 percent of the vote. Two years earlier, Duke had defeated Treen&#x27;s brother John in a race for the Louisiana House of Representatives.

For the 1992 United States presidential election, Treen became Louisiana chair of President George H. W. Bush&#x27;s re-election campaign, focusing on voter registration, fundraising, and campaign messaging. Treen and U.S. Representative Jim McCrery of the 4th congressional district joined Bush at a rally in Shreveport in September 1992. On November 1, the Sunday before Election Day, Treen introduced Vice President Dan Quayle at a rally in New Orleans. Ultimately, Democrat Bill Clinton won the election and a 45.6 percent plurality of Louisiana votes, while Bush came in second with 41 percent and Reform Party candidate Ross Perot third with 11.8 percent.

===1995 gubernatorial election===
On June 30, 1994, Treen announced a comeback candidacy for governor of Louisiana. Nearly three months earlier, Treen gave a speech before a Lions Club in Slidell advocating that the Louisiana State Legislature become single-body like the Nebraska Legislature. Addressing an increasing incarceration rate in Louisiana, Treen advocated crime prevention programs such as education, arts, and sports.

Keeping their campaigns independent of the party structure, Treen and fellow former governor Buddy Roemer declined to participate in the January 1995 state Republican convention or sign an oath to support the eventual Republican candidate.

On July 25, 1995, &quot;The Times-Picayune&quot; published a front-page story revealing that Treen&#x27;s son received tuition waivers at the Tulane University School of Medicine in the early 1980s when Treen was governor. The same story reported that as a state legislator in the 1980s, Democratic candidate Mary Landrieu had given Tulane tuition waivers to a former campaign manager. Citing personal reasons, Treen withdrew from the gubernatorial election on August 11, 1995; by that time, he had been polling in the single digits. Treen endorsed Republican candidate Mike Foster. After taking first place in the October 21 open primary with a 26.1 percent plurality, Foster won the November 18 top-two runoff with 63.5 percent of the vote. Foster became only the second Republican to be elected governor of Louisiana in the 20th century, following Treen&#x27;s historic election in 1979.

===1999 U.S. House special election===

Following the resignation of Representative Bob Livingston, Treen attempted a political comeback by entering the 1999 Louisiana&#x27;s 1st congressional district special election on January 26, 1999. By this time, his home in Mandeville had been drawn into the 1st District.

In the open primary held May 1, 1999, Treen finished first among nine candidates with 36,719 votes (25 percent). State Representative David Vitter came in second with 31,741 votes (22 percent); David Duke was third with 28,055 votes (19 percent). In the May 29 runoff, Vitter defeated Treen, 61,661 ballots (51 percent) to 59,849 (49 percent), a margin of 1,812 votes.

===Activities since 2000===
In the 2000 United States presidential election, Treen endorsed Republican candidate George W. Bush and appeared at a Bush rally at the Castine Center in Mandeville on October 30, 2000. Bush won the election and carried Louisiana with 52.6 percent of the popular vote.

Treen declared on March 11, 2003 that he would run for that year&#x27;s gubernatorial election. Treen withdrew on June 12 prior to the primary. Treen eventually backed Republican candidate Bobby Jindal, who took first place in the open primary but lost the runoff to Democratic candidate Lieutenant Governor Kathleen Blanco.

In 2007, Treen and Johnston wrote to then-President George W. Bush to request a presidential pardon of Edwards, who began a 10-year prison sentence in 2002 for corruption. Bush left office in January 2009 without pardoning Edwards.

On October 23, 2007, Treen announced that he would be a candidate in the March 8, 2008, special election to succeed Bobby Jindal, who was elected governor. He cited his experience and political ties in Washington, D.C. as reasons for his candidacy. Once among four Republican candidates, Treen withdrew from consideration on January 28, 2008. Later in the year for the 2008 U.S. Senate election, Treen endorsed the reelection of Democratic U.S. Senator Mary Landrieu against Republican state Treasurer John Neely Kennedy.

==Personal life, death, and memorial==
Until becoming governor, Treen lived in Metairie, Louisiana. He lived in Mandeville after his governorship. From 1951 until her death in 2005, Treen was married to Dolores &quot;Dodie&quot; Brisbi, a graduate of Newcomb College in New Orleans. They had three children, Jennifer, David Jr., and Cynthia. As of 2009, David and Dodie Treen had nine grandchildren. Treen&#x27;s eldest grandson, Jason Neville, was a chair of the Louisiana Green Party.

Treen died from complications from a respiratory illness at East Jefferson General Hospital in Metairie. Condolences and kinds words poured in from around the state, typified by Southeastern Louisiana University president John L. Crain&#x27;s tribute that Treen &quot;was a true Louisiana icon, a Republican governor in Louisiana before it was cool&quot;. His body lay in state at the Louisiana State Capitol following a memorial service on November 2, 2009. A second memorial service was held at St. Timothy United Methodist Church in Mandeville on November 3. The family requested memorials to, among several charities, the Methodist Children&#x27;s Home in Mandeville.

==Legacy==
Prior to Treen&#x27;s 1979 election victory as governor, the last Republican to win election as governor of Louisiana was William Pitt Kellogg in 1872, during the Reconstruction era. Following Reconstruction, the Democratic Party had a de facto political monopoly in Louisiana and other southern states. By the 1970s, white voters in Louisiana began shifting towards the Republican Party. &quot;Louisiana: A History&quot; recounted that Treen and other Republican candidates in that decade &quot;appeal[ed] to the rapidly increasing population in the suburbs.&quot; After 1979, Republicans won Louisiana gubernatorial elections four times: Mike Foster in 1995 and 1999 and Bobby Jindal in 2007 and 2011. The GOP has also won six United States Senate elections since 2004, two each by Vitter, Bill Cassidy and John N. Kennedy. 

In an editorial following his death, &quot;The Times-Picayune&quot; of New Orleans said of Treen: &quot;Louisianians will remember him as a sensitive, honorable and fair man who carried those qualities into the governor&#x27;s office during his tenure from 1980 to 1984.&quot; Writing for the conservative &quot;American Spectator&quot;, Quin Hillyer said that Treen was influential in conservative politics in both Louisiana and the U.S.:

Roger Villere, chair of the Louisiana Republican Party, called Treen &quot;a courageous man who loved our country and our state&quot; and added: &quot;He fought the political establishment in the 1960s and 1970s when it was very difficult to elect a Republican in our state, and his career in political office was marked with integrity and fiscal discipline.&quot; At the time of Treen&#x27;s death, only a few living members of the Louisiana GOP had been members of the party longer than him.

In November 2009, the St. Tammany Parish school board voted unanimously to dedicate the David C. Treen Instructional Technology Center, which opened in March 2010. Located in Mandeville, the center serves as a secondary location for the Louisiana Small Business Development Corporation, a federally funded program.

==References==
;Works cited
* 
* 

==External links==

*Former Governor Aids Medical Students
*General Edwin Walker&#x27;s New Orleans Links


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q640768" start="0" end="22" title="Dave Treen" label="David Conner Treen Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q16153408" start="89" end="97" title="attorney at law (United States)" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="103" end="112" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="130" end="146" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="164" end="183" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689044" start="188" end="231" title="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q20766109" start="263" end="284" title="governor of Louisiana" label="governor of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="366" end="380" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="391" end="413" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="448" end="459" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q126661" start="481" end="489" title="Metairie, Louisiana" label="Metairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010868" start="642" end="661" title="Greater New Orleans" label="Greater New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q337417" start="666" end="674" title="Acadiana" label="Acadiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17133295" start="853" end="891" title="Pike Committee" label="House Select Committee on Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689271" start="1214" end="1261" title="Louisiana School for Math, Science and the Arts" label="Louisiana School for Math, Science and the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326572" start="1372" end="1393" title="early 1980s recession in the United States" label="early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q737491" start="1491" end="1504" title="Edwin Edwards" label="Edwin Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="1825" end="1847" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q491949" start="1942" end="1958" title="East Baton Rouge" label="East Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q498276" start="1960" end="1969" title="Jefferson Parish, Louisiana" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="1975" end="1982" title="Orleans Parish, Louisiana" label="Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974913" start="2026" end="2051" title="Alcee Fortier High School" label="Alcee Fortier High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q599048" start="2113" end="2133" title="political consultant" label="political consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="2138" end="2148" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557338" start="2149" end="2160" title="Victor Gold (journalist)" label="Victor Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="2221" end="2238" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="2244" end="2261" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367086" start="2315" end="2326" title="Kappa Sigma" label="Kappa Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="2327" end="2337" title="College fraternity" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691855" start="2366" end="2383" title="Tulane Law School" label="Tulane Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2434" end="2448" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622971" start="2619" end="2652" title="Simplex Manufacturing Corporation" label="Simplex Manufacturing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="2955" end="2986" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="3004" end="3011" title="US Presidential Electors" label="elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="3020" end="3045" title="Dixiecrat" label="States&amp;#x27; Rights Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q775382" start="3085" end="3103" title="Harry F. Byrd, Sr." label="Harry F. Byrd, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3177" end="3192" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="3208" end="3221" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509536" start="3396" end="3409" title="Leander Perez" label="Leander Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014922" start="3414" end="3428" title="William M. Rainach" label="Willie Rainach"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="3465" end="3479" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689290" start="3836" end="3857" title="Louisiana Legislature" label="Louisiana Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="3977" end="3994" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978683" start="4221" end="4255" title="National States&amp;#x27; Rights Party" label="National States&amp;#x27; Rights Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="4454" end="4466" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314658" start="4567" end="4593" title="Louisiana Republican Party" label="Louisiana Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4652" end="4681" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689039" start="4691" end="4734" title="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="4745" end="4756" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567156" start="4785" end="4795" title="Hale Boggs" label="Hale Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="4997" end="5012" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642961" start="5033" end="5061" title="1964 United States presidential election in Louisiana" label="statewide votes in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="5235" end="5248" title="majority whip" label="majority whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730452" start="5342" end="5367" title="1970 United States census" label="1970 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="5638" end="5652" title="closed primary" label="closed primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226213" start="5679" end="5694" title="Robert Max Ross" label="Robert Max Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752205" start="5718" end="5724" title="Minden, Louisiana" label="Minden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689044" start="6832" end="6875" title="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057997" start="6914" end="6932" title="Patrick T. Caffery" label="Patrick T. Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q991355" start="6936" end="6946" title="New Iberia" label="New Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337417" start="6987" end="6995" title="Acadiana" label="Acadiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010868" start="7000" end="7019" title="Greater New Orleans" label="Greater New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q504415" start="7032" end="7038" title="Iberia Parish, Louisiana" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q507139" start="7040" end="7049" title="Lafourche Parish, Louisiana" label="Lafourche"/>
<link wikidata="Q507153" start="7051" end="7062" title="St. Charles Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q507088" start="7064" end="7072" title="St. Mary Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q387555" start="7078" end="7088" title="Terrebonne Parish, Louisiana" label="Terrebonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q498276" start="7110" end="7119" title="Jefferson Parish, Louisiana" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q512868" start="7124" end="7134" title="St. Martin Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013983" start="7169" end="7189" title="J. Louis Watkins Jr." label="J. Louis Watkins Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="7302" end="7315" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30634122" start="7331" end="7348" title="1972 United States presidential election in Louisiana" label="carried Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="7360" end="7370" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="reelection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892442" start="7456" end="7478" title="1974 United States elections" label="1974 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="7523" end="7561" title="resignation of Richard Nixon" label="resignation of President Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607589" start="7882" end="7894" title="Henson Moore" label="Henson Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689048" start="7903" end="7915" title="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="6th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="8065" end="8077" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="8086" end="8112" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222321" start="8133" end="8145" title="1976 United States presidential election in Louisiana" label="in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049544" start="8378" end="8392" title="Nonpartisan blanket primary" label="open primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614053" start="8996" end="9023" title="American Conservative Union" label="American Conservative Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745611" start="9126" end="9157" title="Americans for Democratic Action" label="Americans for Democratic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111969" start="9310" end="9333" title="Outer Continental Shelf" label="Outer Continental Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079691" start="9386" end="9403" title="offshore drilling" label="offshore drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q21052756" start="9465" end="9483" title="Small Business Act (United States)" label="Small Business Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886708" start="10019" end="10037" title="The Times-Picayune" label="The Times-Picayune"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="10083" end="10112" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="10198" end="10211" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25046275" start="10261" end="10273" title="1974 United States vice presidential confirmation" label="confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="10302" end="10320" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="10354" end="10365" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q444678" start="10497" end="10511" title="John J. Rhodes" label="John J. Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17133295" start="10533" end="10581" title="Pike Committee" label="House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="10636" end="10672" title="United States Intelligence Community" label="United States Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="10782" end="10808" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q177562" start="10836" end="10848" title="Caddo Parish, Louisiana" label="Caddo Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q333877" start="10853" end="10858" title="pecan" label="pecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="10983" end="10994" title="United States Coast Guard" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508630" start="11249" end="11282" title="United States House Committee on Armed Services" label="House Committee on Armed Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454855" start="11285" end="11333" title="United States House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries" label="House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495362" start="11336" end="11374" title="United States House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence" label="House Select Committee on Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q737491" start="11529" end="11542" title="Edwin Edwards" label="Edwin Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q284409" start="11566" end="11579" title="1979 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="1979 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049544" start="11788" end="11802" title="nonpartisan blanket primary" label="jungle primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687618" start="12009" end="12022" title="Louis Lambert (politician)" label="Louis Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689250" start="12051" end="12086" title="Louisiana Public Service Commission" label="Louisiana Public Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010868" start="12156" end="12175" title="New Orleans metropolitan area" label="Greater New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q337417" start="12177" end="12185" title="Acadiana" label="Acadiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055998" start="12191" end="12206" title="North Louisiana" label="North Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921785" start="12366" end="12379" title="Howell Raines" label="Howell Raines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12389" end="12407" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200105" start="12584" end="12600" title="Jimmy Fitzmorris" label="Jimmy Fitzmorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15831679" start="12621" end="12631" title="Paul Hardy (politician)" label="Paul Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337249" start="12711" end="12749" title="Edgar G. &amp;quot;Sonny&amp;quot; Mouton, Jr." label="Edgar G. &amp;quot;Sonny&amp;quot; Mouton, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7608625" start="13475" end="13493" title="Stephen B. Packard" label="Stephen B. Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983570" start="13560" end="13578" title="Compromise of 1877" label="Compromise of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="13590" end="13604" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341157" start="14010" end="14027" title="Robert Louis Freeman Sr." label="Robert L. Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494541" start="14091" end="14113" title="Louisiana State Senate" label="Louisiana State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494581" start="14150" end="14184" title="Louisiana House of Representatives" label="Louisiana House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194112" start="14394" end="14402" title="Lockport, Louisiana" label="Lockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689104" start="14459" end="14514" title="Louisiana Department of Public Safety &amp;amp; Corrections" label="Louisiana Department of Public Safety &amp;amp; Corrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429942" start="14698" end="14714" title="adjutant general" label="adjutant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689240" start="14722" end="14746" title="Louisiana National Guard" label="Louisiana National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="15103" end="15112" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186769" start="15117" end="15133" title="creation science" label="creation science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="15176" end="15203" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q725955" start="15250" end="15270" title="Edwards v. Aguillard" label="Edwards v. Aguillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199934" start="15373" end="15386" title="Jimmy D. Long" label="Jimmy D. Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q507047" start="15390" end="15409" title="Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana" label="Natchitoches Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689271" start="15495" end="15543" title="Louisiana School for Math, Science, and the Arts" label="Louisiana School for Math, Science, and the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001231" start="15614" end="15643" title="Northwestern State University" label="Northwestern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278195" start="15647" end="15659" title="Natchitoches, Louisiana" label="Natchitoches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858825" start="15962" end="15993" title="Capital punishment in Louisiana" label="Capital punishment in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10271382" start="16083" end="16109" title="1983 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="losing his re-election bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q185639" start="16142" end="16156" title="electric chair" label="electric chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350764" start="16179" end="16200" title="Robert Wayne Williams" label="Robert Wayne Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323798" start="16231" end="16243" title="List of people executed in Louisiana" label="in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660855" start="16362" end="16382" title="Roberts v. Louisiana" label="Roberts v. Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="16431" end="16437" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16176775" start="16442" end="16454" title="commutation of sentence" label="commutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603703" start="16879" end="16895" title="state income tax" label="state income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326572" start="17203" end="17224" title="Early 1980s recession in the United States" label="early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="17395" end="17404" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="17409" end="17420" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17697" end="17743" title="Louisiana Association of Business and Industry" label="Louisiana Association of Business and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17968" end="17985" title="Edward J. Steimel" label="Edward J. Steimel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033679" start="18239" end="18252" title="Woody Jenkins" label="Woody Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q59056267" start="18824" end="18837" title="Speaker of the Louisiana House of Representatives" label="House Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237235" start="18838" end="18850" title="John Hainkel" label="John Hainkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929017" start="19010" end="19032" title="Blue Cross Blue Shield" label="Blue Cross Blue Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q134192" start="19237" end="19243" title="Butane" label="Butane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="19248" end="19259" title="propane gas" label="propane gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="19320" end="19346" title="worker&amp;#x27;s compensation" label="worker&amp;#x27;s compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q311255" start="19852" end="19877" title="unemployment compensation" label="unemployment compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="19945" end="19958" title="convict labor" label="convict labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q464271" start="20136" end="20143" title="AFL-CIO" label="AFL-CIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436394" start="20211" end="20242" title="1984 Louisiana World Exposition" label="1984 Louisiana World Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689083" start="21503" end="21528" title="Louisiana Court of Appeal" label="Louisiana Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013317" start="22582" end="22591" title="Thibodaux, Louisiana" label="Thibodaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="22716" end="22731" title="hazardous waste" label="hazardous waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="22873" end="22881" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680281" start="23042" end="23058" title="James Domengeaux" label="James Domengeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q128891" start="23076" end="23085" title="Lafayette, Louisiana" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994219" start="23106" end="23156" title="Council for the Development of French in Louisiana" label="Council for the Development of French in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q85725527" start="23408" end="23445" title="1984 United States Senate election in Louisiana" label="that year&amp;#x27;s U.S. Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889708" start="23493" end="23512" title="J. Bennett Johnston" label="J. Bennett Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="23576" end="23589" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="23624" end="23676" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="23799" end="23830" title="U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee" label="U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="23871" end="23880" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="23881" end="23890" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246503" start="24125" end="24142" title="John M. Duhé, Jr." label="John M. Duhé, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6689390" start="24217" end="24244" title="1991 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="1991 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q163042" start="24351" end="24361" title="David Duke" label="David Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="24392" end="24404" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978560" start="24419" end="24438" title="perennial candidate" label="perennial candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494581" start="24676" end="24710" title="Louisiana House of Representatives" label="Louisiana House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="24721" end="24761" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="24805" end="24822" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689150" start="24951" end="24962" title="Jim McCrery" label="Jim McCrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689047" start="24970" end="24996" title="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="4th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="25023" end="25033" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49214" start="25132" end="25142" title="Dan Quayle" label="Dan Quayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="25191" end="25203" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893430" start="25316" end="25328" title="Reform Party of the United States of America" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q313697" start="25339" end="25349" title="Ross Perot" label="Ross Perot"/>
<link wikidata="Q270029" start="25550" end="25560" title="Lions Club" label="Lions Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q988156" start="25564" end="25571" title="Slidell, Louisiana" label="Slidell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689290" start="25592" end="25619" title="Louisiana State Legislature" label="Louisiana State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="25627" end="25638" title="Unicameralism" label="single-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q996610" start="25648" end="25668" title="Nebraska Legislature" label="Nebraska Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q855848" start="25744" end="25760" title="crime prevention" label="crime prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q878651" start="25901" end="25913" title="Buddy Roemer" label="Buddy Roemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886708" start="26073" end="26091" title="The Times-Picayune" label="The Times-Picayune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851947" start="26191" end="26227" title="Tulane University School of Medicine" label="Tulane University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22338" start="26358" end="26371" title="Mary Landrieu" label="Mary Landrieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q880111" start="26619" end="26630" title="Mike Foster (American politician)" label="Mike Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q888069" start="27025" end="27039" title="Bob Livingston" label="Bob Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q54951559" start="27094" end="27159" title="1999 Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district special election" label="1999 Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q519780" start="27391" end="27403" title="David Vitter" label="David Vitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="27662" end="27702" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="27740" end="27754" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689398" start="27980" end="28019" title="2003 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="that year&amp;#x27;s gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q295492" start="28114" end="28126" title="Bobby Jindal" label="Bobby Jindal"/>
<link wikidata="Q237786" start="28233" end="28248" title="Kathleen Blanco" label="Kathleen Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="28303" end="28317" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949228" start="28557" end="28588" title="Louisiana&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district special election, 2008" label="March 8, 2008, special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q295492" start="28600" end="28612" title="Bobby Jindal" label="Bobby Jindal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891578" start="28853" end="28878" title="2008 United States Senate election in Louisiana" label="2008 U.S. Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22338" start="28937" end="28950" title="Mary Landrieu" label="Mary Landrieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250211" start="28986" end="29004" title="John Neely Kennedy" label="John Neely Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126661" start="29086" end="29105" title="Metairie, Louisiana" label="Metairie, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507175" start="29119" end="29129" title="Mandeville, Louisiana" label="Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628567" start="29258" end="29273" title="Newcomb College" label="Newcomb College"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="29481" end="29492" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="29532" end="29551" title="respiratory illness" label="respiratory illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328670" start="29555" end="29586" title="East Jefferson General Hospital" label="East Jefferson General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q615998" start="29673" end="29706" title="Southeastern Louisiana University" label="Southeastern Louisiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243569" start="29717" end="29730" title="John L. Crain" label="John L. Crain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783159" start="29880" end="29903" title="Louisiana State Capitol" label="Louisiana State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507175" start="30031" end="30041" title="Mandeville, Louisiana" label="Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q880771" start="30301" end="30321" title="William Pitt Kellogg" label="William Pitt Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868000" start="30325" end="30329" title="1872 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="30342" end="30360" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="30413" end="30442" title="Solid South" label="a de facto political monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q880111" start="30819" end="30830" title="Mike Foster (American politician)" label="Mike Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689393" start="30834" end="30838" title="1995 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689396" start="30843" end="30847" title="1999 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q295492" start="30852" end="30864" title="Bobby Jindal" label="Bobby Jindal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689402" start="30868" end="30872" title="2007 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283285" start="30877" end="30881" title="2011 Louisiana gubernatorial election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="30908" end="30928" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q861999" start="30971" end="30983" title="Bill Cassidy" label="Bill Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250211" start="30988" end="31003" title="John N. Kennedy" label="John N. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886708" start="31050" end="31068" title="The Times-Picayune" label="The Times-Picayune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713567" start="31319" end="31337" title="The American Spectator" label="American Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272061" start="31345" end="31357" title="Quin Hillyer" label="Quin Hillyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q506921" start="31965" end="31983" title="St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Tammany Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507175" start="32118" end="32128" title="Mandeville, Louisiana" label="Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="32190" end="32228" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Development Corporation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706638" wikidata="Q408505" url="?curid=706638" title="Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association">
<text>The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) is a Frederick, Maryland-based American non-profit political organization that advocates for general aviation. AOPA&#x27;s membership consists mainly of general aviation pilots in the United States. AOPA exists to serve the interests of its members as aircraft owners and pilots and to promote the economy, safety, utility, and popularity of flight in general aviation aircraft.

With 384,915 members in 2012, AOPA is the largest aviation association in the world, although it had decreased in membership from 414,224 in 2010, a loss of 7% in two years. AOPA is affiliated with other similar organizations in other countries through membership in the International Council of Aircraft Owner and Pilot Associations (IAOPA). In 2015, AOPA was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.

In September 2024, the AOPA appointed Darren Pleasance as its sixth President and CEO. Pleasance, with extensive experience in aviation and business, is set to officially assume the role on January 1, 2025.

== History ==
The organization started at Wings Field in Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. On 24 April 1932, The Philadelphia Aviation Country Club was founded at Wings Field. The country club was the location of meetings of members that founded AOPA. AOPA incorporated on May 15, 1939, with Charles Townsend Ludington serving as the first president. In 1971 the organization purchased &quot;Airport World Magazine&quot;, moving its operations to Bethesda, Maryland.

On 1 October 2023, Senior Vice President of AOPA Air Safety Institute Richard McSpadden was killed in an aircraft accident near Lake Placid, New York.

In November 2024 Mark Baker, the President and CEO of the AOPA, addressed concerns regarding the negative impact of increased customs fees on businesses in the Bahamas. These fees, which have been imposed on private aircraft flying into the region, have drawn criticism from the AOPA since the summer of 2024. Baker emphasized the potential risks to tourism and local economies, urging policymakers to reconsider the fees to prevent a decline in aviation-driven tourism and business activity in the Bahamas.

==Programs==
AOPA has several programs.

*AOPA Foundation is AOPA&#x27;s 501(c)(3) charitable organization. The foundation&#x27;s four goals are to improve general aviation safety (under the auspices of its Air Safety Institute), grow pilot population, preserve and improve community airports, and provide a positive image of general aviation.
*AOPA Political Action Committee is just for AOPA members. Through lobbying, it represents the interests of general aviation to Congress, the Executive Branch, and state and local governments. The AOPA PAC campaigns in favor of federal, state and local candidates that support their policies and oppose those who do not through advertising and membership grassroots campaigns.
*GA Serves America was created to promote general aviation to the public.
*Legal Services Plan/Pilot Protection Services provides AOPA members with legal defense against alleged FAA enforcement charges as well as assistance obtaining an FAA flight medical. Enrollment in Pilot Protection Services is only open to AOPA members and requires an additional payment above dues. The Legal Services Plan was combined with the former medical program in May 2012 under the name Pilot Protection Services. The Legal Services Plan was created in June 1983.
*Air Safety Institute (formerly the Air Safety Foundation) is a separate nonprofit, tax exempt organization promoting safety and pilot proficiency in general aviation through quality training, education, research, analysis, and the dissemination of information.
*You Can Fly, a program to support flying clubs, encourage best practices in flight training, get lapsed pilots back in the air (Rusty Pilots), bring AOPA&#x27;s resources and expertise to pilot groups across the country, and help high school students learn more about careers in aviation. All while trying to make flying more accessible and affordable.

==Events==
AOPA sponsors its own Fly-In and open house in Frederick, Maryland. The yearly event started in 1991 with 125 aircraft. By 2001, the attendance grew to 760 aircraft. The event was cancelled for five years after the September 11, 2001 attacks and consequent airspace changes, but resumed in 2006.

==See also==
*Canadian Owners and Pilots Association – similar organization established in Canada in 1952
*Experimental Aircraft Association – similar organization focused on homebuilt aircraft

==References==
==External links==
* Official Website
* Records of the AOPA at the Hagley Museum and Library
* AOPA Ukraine (Ukrainian Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408505" start="4" end="42" title="Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association" label="Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q408505" start="44" end="48" title="Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association" label="AOPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q472675" start="55" end="74" title="Frederick, Maryland" label="Frederick, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="90" end="100" title="non-profit" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210356" start="101" end="123" title="political organization" label="political organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="143" end="159" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="701" end="763" title="International Council of Aircraft Owner and Pilot Associations" label="International Council of Aircraft Owner and Pilot Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614528" start="809" end="851" title="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame" label="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308955" start="859" end="891" title="San Diego Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="San Diego Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025269" start="1144" end="1155" title="Wings Field" label="Wings Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q885631" start="1159" end="1182" title="Blue Bell, Pennsylvania" label="Blue Bell, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q26212467" start="1385" end="1411" title="Charles Townsend Ludington" label="Charles Townsend Ludington"/>
<link wikidata="Q122911492" start="1631" end="1648" title="Richard McSpadden" label="Richard McSpadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q192700" start="1689" end="1710" title="Lake Placid, New York" label="Lake Placid, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="1873" end="1880" title="The Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="2295" end="2304" title="501(c)(3)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="2572" end="2598" title="Political Action Committee" label="Political Action Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4332" end="4358" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030409" start="4428" end="4466" title="Canadian Owners and Pilots Association" label="Canadian Owners and Pilots Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384383" start="4521" end="4554" title="Experimental Aircraft Association" label="Experimental Aircraft Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995267" start="4589" end="4607" title="homebuilt aircraft" label="homebuilt aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785686" start="4691" end="4716" title="Hagley Museum and Library" label="Hagley Museum and Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706641" wikidata="Q28195040" url="?curid=706641" title="Inter Cardiff F.C.">
<text>Inter Cardiff F.C. was a Welsh football club based in Leckwith, Cardiff that played in the League of Wales. Founded as Inter Cardiff in 1990, by the merger of A.F.C. Cardiff and Sully F.C, the club changed its name to Inter CableTel in 1996 before reverting to their original name three years later.

==History==
The club has had a chequered history, and has experienced turbulent times and many name changes.

===Formative years===
The club was formed by a series of mergers and name changes. Firstly, Lake United renamed themselves A.F.C. Cardiff in 1984. In 1990, they merged with Sully F.C to form Inter Cardiff FC. In 1996, the club was renamed Inter CableTel A.F.C. (after their sponsors), but reverted to Inter Cardiff FC in 1999.

===A new adventure===
Meanwhile, the team of Cardiff College of Education was developing (now Cardiff Metropolitan University). The team went through a series of name changes, mirroring the name changes of the institution it represented. The team was originally known as Cardiff College of Education F.C.. They became South Glamorgan Institute F.C. in 1979; Cardiff Institute of Higher Education F.C. in 1990 and UWIC in 1996.

===Inter CableTel===
In 2000, Inter Cardiff merged with Cardiff Metropolitan University (UWIC) to form UWIC Inter Cardiff F.C.. The team&#x27;s nicknames by fans included The International, The Sheep (Wales is famous for its sheep) or The s (from Car-DIFF). The Seagull on the team&#x27;s logo originated from the Sully connection (nicknamed &#x27;The Seagulls&#x27;). They changed their name again in the summer of 2012 to Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C.

===Final year===
Following their best season ever the future of the team was left in doubt after their major sponsor CableTel, now operating as ntl, withdrew their sponsorship. Despite their entry into European competition in the 1999–2000 UEFA Cup they finished the season one place above relegation and lost their hold on the Welsh Cup in the Fourth Round.

Following a poor season it was decided to merge with the University of Wales Institute, Cardiff&#x27;s men&#x27;s football team, or UWIC for short, and form a new club, UWIC Inter Cardiff A.F.C. The Inter Cardiff name continued until the 2008–09 season before it was dropped, leaving the team to continue from 2009 to 2010 as U.W.I.C. The Institute itself underwent a name change in 2012, and following suit, so did the team, becoming Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C.

===League and cup history===

1: League games only2One point deducted for non-fulfilment of fixture.
Last updated: 13 January 2015

Q = Qualifying Round; R = Round Proper; P = Position; Pld = Matches played; W = Matches won; D = Matches drawn; L = Matches lost; GF = Goals for; GA = Goals against; GD = Goal difference; Pts = Points

==Honours==

===League===
*League of Wales
**Runners-up: 1992–93, 1993–94, 1996–97, 1998–99
*Welsh Football League Division Three
**Champions (2012/13)

===Cups===
*Welsh Senior Cup
**Champions: 1999
*Welsh Football League Cup
**Champions: 1997

===As Lake United===

====League====
*Welsh Football League Division One
**Champions: 1980–81
*Welsh Football League Division Two
**Champions: 1979–80
*Welsh Women&#x27;s Cup runners up: 1993 (as Inter Cardiff Ladies)
*Welsh Women&#x27;s Cup runners up: 1994 (as Inter Cardiff Ladies)
*Welsh Women&#x27;s Cup: 1995 (as Inter Cardiff Ladies)

They qualified for the 1999–2000 FAW Premier Cup but failed to progress from the group stage.

==European record==
Inter Cardiff represented Wales three times in the UEFA Cup. In the 1994–95 tournament they lost 0–8 over two legs to Katowice of Poland in the preliminary round. They also played Scottish giants Celtic F.C. in the 1997–98 season (when known as Inter Cable Tel), losing 8–0 over the two legs. In 1999–2000 they lost 1–2 to Gorica of Slovenia over two legs in the 1st qualifying round.

All results (home and away) list Cardiff&#x27;s goal tally first.

&quot;Updated 4 July 2019&quot;
;Notes
* PR: Preliminary round
* 1QR: First qualifying round
* QR: Qualifying round

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28195040" start="0" end="18" title="Inter Cardiff F.C." label="Inter Cardiff F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="31" end="39" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511793" start="54" end="62" title="Leckwith" label="Leckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="64" end="71" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="91" end="106" title="Welsh Premier League" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647138" start="159" end="173" title="A.F.C. Cardiff" label="A.F.C. Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="178" end="187" title="Sully F.C" label="Sully F.C"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195040" start="218" end="232" title="Inter Cardiff F.C." label="Inter CableTel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647138" start="534" end="548" title="A.F.C. Cardiff" label="A.F.C. Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="584" end="593" title="Sully F.C" label="Sully F.C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038449" start="784" end="812" title="University of Wales Institute, Cardiff" label="Cardiff College of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096167" start="833" end="864" title="Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C." label="Cardiff Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038449" start="1223" end="1254" title="Cardiff Metropolitan University" label="Cardiff Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q751822" start="1859" end="1877" title="1999–2000 UEFA Cup" label="1999–2000 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="1957" end="1966" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038449" start="2046" end="2084" title="Cardiff Metropolitan University" label="University of Wales Institute, Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096167" start="2424" end="2460" title="Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C." label="Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="2823" end="2838" title="Welsh Premier League" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574638" start="2853" end="2860" title="1992–93 League of Wales" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q282386" start="2862" end="2869" title="1993–94 League of Wales" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574839" start="2871" end="2878" title="1996–97 League of Wales" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132852" start="2880" end="2887" title="1998–99 League of Wales" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981899" start="2889" end="2925" title="Welsh Football League Division Three" label="Welsh Football League Division Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="2961" end="2977" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2991" end="2995" title="Welsh Cup 1998–99" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981896" start="2997" end="3022" title="Welsh Football League Cup" label="Welsh Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592057" start="3036" end="3040" title="1996–97 Northern Premier League" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981898" start="3080" end="3114" title="Welsh Football League Division Two" label="Welsh Football League Division One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3128" end="3135" title="Welsh Cup 1980–81" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981899" start="3137" end="3171" title="Welsh Football League Division Three" label="Welsh Football League Division Two"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3185" end="3192" title="Welsh Cup 1979–80" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420814" start="3194" end="3216" title="Welsh Women&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Welsh Women&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q372196" start="3238" end="3258" title="Cardiff City L.F.C." label="Inter Cardiff Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420814" start="3261" end="3283" title="Welsh Women&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Welsh Women&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q372196" start="3305" end="3325" title="Cardiff City L.F.C." label="Inter Cardiff Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420814" start="3328" end="3350" title="Welsh Women&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Welsh Women&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q372196" start="3361" end="3381" title="Cardiff City L.F.C." label="Inter Cardiff Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119083" start="3417" end="3432" title="FAW Premier Cup" label="FAW Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="3550" end="3558" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="3617" end="3625" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="3695" end="3706" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q918425" start="3822" end="3828" title="HNK Gorica" label="Gorica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706642" wikidata="Q587700" url="?curid=706642" title="Ilford railway station">
<text>Ilford railway station is on the Great Eastern Main Line serving the town of Ilford in the London Borough of Redbridge, east London. It is down the line from London Liverpool Street and is situated between and . Its three-letter station code is IFD and it is in Travelcard zone 4.

The station was opened in 1839 by the Eastern Counties Railway. It is currently managed and served by the Elizabeth line.

==History==
===Eastern Counties Railway (1839-1862)===
Ilford railway station was opened on 20 June 1839 by the Eastern Counties Railway, when the opened their line between a temporary terminus at Mile End and . The line was extended to the London terminus of in 1840 and in stages into Essex where it linked with the Eastern Union Railway at Colchester. This became the main route from London to Norwich and today is known as the Great Eastern Main Line.

The 1839 station had two platforms and a shed like structure on the up side which was believed to be for stabling carriages. The station building was located on Ilford Hill while Cranbrook Road crossed over the line at the eastern end of the station. In 1845 a small goods shed was located at the eastern end on the up side and this was later supplemented by coal drops and a traverser which served a paper mill at the western end of the up line. By the 1850s a small siding existed on the down side although it is not certain what traffic was handled here.

The Bradshaws Railway guide of 1 March 1850 showed Ilford trains on table 33 with eight trains on a weekday (noting that Saturday was then considered a weekday). Compared to today there were few stations on the route and all the down trains from called at Ilford. Of the eight, three services terminated at and two at . These trains were operated by the Eastern Union Railway north of . Two of the remaining services terminated at Brentwood with the other terminating at .

The up direction timetable also had eight weekday trains and five trains in each direction operated on Sunday.

Passengers from the city changed at for services to .

By the 1860s the railways in East Anglia were in financial trouble, and most were leased to the ECR; they wished to amalgamate formally, but could not obtain government agreement for this until 1862, when the Great Eastern Railway was formed by amalgamation. Thus Ilford became a GER station in 1862.

===Great Eastern Railway (1862-1922)===
In 1882 a new goods facility was built on the up side about half a mile east of Ilford station although the earlier sidings in the Ilford area continued operating for some years.

In 1886 the carriage stabling shed was demolished and the up platform widened. Ilford station was completely rebuilt between 1891 and 1893 in advance of the 1894 quadrupling. The new station entrance was in Cranbrook Road and initially only the local lines had platforms. A new bay platform and run round loop were built on the down side.

The period of 1893-1910 was one of great housing growth in the area and in 1895 the York Road entrance was opened at the west end of the station. On 1 July 1898 platforms on the two through lines were bought into service. The original 1839 entrance was re-opened for sundries traffic (as it had level access) at this time to serve the up through platform.

From 1903 trains from Fenchurch Street ran through Ilford to Woodford following the opening of the Fairlop Loop. 200,000 milk churns were being handled by the station in the mid-1900s so A bridge equipped with lifts to platform level was built. Later a dairy siding was located at the 1882 up goods yard on the up side and that received milk traffic from Halesworth and North Elmham in East Anglia meaning the bridge was then used for parcels. The milk traffic ceased in the 1960s.

The July 1922 Bradshaw&#x27;s Guide showed over 120 trains from Liverpool Street and Fenchurch Street calling at Ilford the majority of which were suburban trains, although some longer distance services still called. The majority of the suburban trains were to destinations on the Great Eastern Main Line, some terminating at Ilford and some routed towards the Fairlop Loop.

In 1923, the GER amalgamated with other railways to form the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER).

===London and North Eastern Railway (1923-1947)===
Plans were drawn up in the 1930s to electrify the suburban lines from Liverpool Street to Shenfield at 1,500VDC and work was started on implementing this. However, the outbreak of the Second World War brought the project to a temporary halt and it was not until 1949 that the scheme was completed.

A flyover south of Ilford opened on 6 October 1947 and this enabled local trains to cross over the through lines without a conflicting movement and was a major part of the electrification project.

New signalling using searchlight type colour signals was introduced in 1949 with a single new signal box south of the station replacing the mechanical boxes at Aldersbrook (closed 14 August 1949) , Ilford West Junction (closed 14 August 1949) and Ilford East (closed 15 October 1947) all which dated from 1893/4. North of the station a new box opened to control the entrance to Ilford EMU depot and Ilford Carriage Sidings Junction box was closed on 7 August 1949. The junction at Ilford East was also removed at this time and the running lines were renamed Main (formerly Through) and Electric lines (formerly Local).

The extension of the Central Line in 1947 saw a number of changes that affected Ilford station with the route from Ilford to the Fairlop Loop being closed on 30 November 1947. The other connection to Seven Kings West Junction was goods only and survived until 19 March 1956. This leg of the triangular junction disappeared under expansion of Ilford Depot in 1959.

===British Railways (1948-1994)===
On 1 January 1948, following nationalisation of the railways, Ilford became part of the British Railways Eastern Region.

From February 1949 the Class 306 EMUs operated the service to steam timings but an accelerated all electric schedule was introduced in September 1949.

The 1500 DC electrification system was converted to 25/6.35 KV AC operation between 4 and 6 November 1960.

In 1980 the first Class 315 EMUs were introduced to replace the Class 306s. The 315s were in service until 2022 and were used on passenger trains serving Ilford.

Platform 5 had seen little use in the 2000s and was closed and lifted c 2016.

The stopping services usually call at platforms 3 and 4 whilst platforms 1 and 2 are used by longer distance non-stop services to/from Colchester, Clacton, Ipswich and Norwich. When platforms 3 and 4 are closed to rail traffic then the service will use the other platforms.

The railway was sectorised in 1982 and Ilford and the trains calling at it became part of the London and South-East sector. On 10 June 1986 this was rebranded to become Network South East which was responsible for working services up to privatisation.

===TfL Rail (2004-2022)===
In April 1994 Railtrack became responsible for the maintenance of the infrastructure. Railtrack was succeeded by Network Rail in 2002.

Between privatisation on 1 April 1994 and 4 January 1997 the station was operated by a non-privatised business unit.
Since then passenger services calling at the station have been operated by the following franchises:
* TfL Rail between 31 May 2004 and 23 May 2022
The 1949 signal box was closed on 26 August 1996 with signalling being taken over by Liverpool Street IECC.

===The Elizabeth Line/Crossrail (2022-The Present)===
TfL Rail was rebranded as the Elizabeth line (Crossrail) who are the current operator.

In June 2020, new trains began entering service in preparation for the opening of The Elizabeth Line/Crossrail. Initially Elizabeth line services from Ilford operated into only and on 22 November 2022 services were able to operate through central London and onto .

=== Accidents and incidents ===
On New Year&#x27;s Day of 1915 the station was the scene of a major collision in which 10 people were killed.

Lieutenant-Colonel Frank Heilgers, a Member of Parliament, was one of nine people killed in the 1944 Ilford rail crash.

On 4th December 2024 Jorge Ortega a Customer experience assistant for the Elizabeth Line was killed on duty 

==Layout==
The main entrance, in Cranbrook Road, was heavily rebuilt during the 1980s, with architecture in keeping with other contemporary buildings in Ilford such as the Central Library. This stretch of Cranbrook Road was originally called Station Road but this name was transferred to a short portion of Havelock Street immediately opposite the station. There is also a secondary entrance on York Road, from which the western (London) ends of the platforms can be reached via a footbridge. This entrance was refurbished in 2016.

The station has four operational platforms: two &quot;up&quot; (headed west toward London) and two &quot;down&quot; (towards Shenfield). A bay platform numbered platform 5 remains &quot;in situ&quot; but is disused as the track alongside it was removed in 2016. Regular stopping services typically use platforms 3 and 4 on the electric line between London and Shenfield, while platforms 1 and 2 are used only during engineering work and line disruptions as the two adjacent tracks are used by through-trains on the main line. Immediately to the west of the station is a flyover that allows the main line to cross over from the south side of the electric line to the north, and thus easily access the longer northern platforms at Liverpool Street without having the cross over in the station throat. The tracks cross the River Roding at the same point, and pass under the North Circular Road.

The platforms at Ilford are several metres below street-level, as the road rises up to pass over the railway line. The north side of the station is edged by an embankment lined with housing. The south side is lined with large buildings (the Former Valentine House office building and the former British Gas building now converted to residential use, the new Paragon complex and a large British Telecom building, whose rooftop logo can be seen from passing trains) and platform level approximates to street-level by the far end of the station. Despite the steps to the platforms, step free access via lifts is now available since the reopening of the main station entrance in 2022. There were two access stairways from the concourse to platforms 2 and 3. This served a purpose of segregating arriving and departing passengers. The down staircase went immediately from the concourse to the station platform whilst the up staircase rises from approximately 100 m along the platform and is connected by an elevated walkway to the concourse. However, the new lift to platforms 2 and 3 was built in the place of the down staircase.

The 1980s station building closed on 25 January 2020 and its demolition began the following day. Its replacement opened to the public on 1 September 2022. A third, southern entrance, next to Ilford Hill (top picture) opened on 23 May 2021.

==Services==
All services at Ilford are operated by the Elizabeth line using EMUs.

The typical off-peak service in trains per hour is:
* 8 tph to of which 2 continue to 
* 8 tph to 

During the peak hours, the station is served by a number of additional services between London Liverpool Street and . These services do not call at .

On Sundays, the service to and from Shenfield is reduced to 4 tph, with alternating services running only as far as Gidea Park.


==Connections==
London Buses routes 123, 128, 145, 150, 167, 179, 296, 364, 366, 396, 462, SL2 and school routes 667, 677 and 679 serve the station from Cranbrook Road, while routes 25, 86, 147, 169, 425, EL1, W19 and night routes N25 and N86 serve the station from Ilford Hill/Chapel Road.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q587700" start="0" end="22" title="Ilford railway station" label="Ilford railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502917" start="33" end="56" title="Great Eastern Main Line" label="Great Eastern Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297044" start="77" end="83" title="Ilford" label="Ilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q208955" start="91" end="118" title="London Borough of Redbridge" label="London Borough of Redbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="158" end="181" title="Liverpool Street station" label="London Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q41172231" start="262" end="279" title="List of stations in London fare zone 4" label="Travelcard zone 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q696947" start="320" end="344" title="Eastern Counties Railway" label="Eastern Counties Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="388" end="402" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q696947" start="517" end="541" title="Eastern Counties Railway" label="Eastern Counties Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330541" start="723" end="744" title="Eastern Union Railway" label="Eastern Union Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502917" start="836" end="859" title="Great Eastern Main Line" label="Great Eastern Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330541" start="1775" end="1796" title="Eastern Union Railway" label="Eastern Union Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544279" start="2271" end="2292" title="Great Eastern Railway" label="Great Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q630409" start="3342" end="3350" title="Woodford tube station" label="Woodford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430558" start="3380" end="3392" title="Hainault Loop" label="Fairlop Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502917" start="4045" end="4068" title="Great Eastern Main Line" label="Great Eastern Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092839" start="4201" end="4233" title="London and North Eastern Railway" label="London and North Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430558" start="5540" end="5552" title="Hainault Loop" label="Fairlop Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404800" start="5753" end="5765" title="Ilford Depot" label="Ilford Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q975780" start="5840" end="5855" title="Transport Act 1947" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="5899" end="5915" title="British Railways" label="British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q849794" start="5956" end="5970" title="British Rail Class 306" label="Class 306 EMUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q751888" start="6211" end="6225" title="British Rail Class 315" label="Class 315 EMUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859175" start="6879" end="6897" title="Network South East" label="Network South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="7004" end="7013" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="7103" end="7115" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160926" start="7346" end="7354" title="TfL Rail" label="TfL Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="7584" end="7598" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="7743" end="7752" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997763" start="8000" end="8017" title="Ilford rail crash (1915)" label="a major collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487189" start="8070" end="8084" title="Frank Heilgers" label="Frank Heilgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="8088" end="8108" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228259" start="8147" end="8169" title="1944 Ilford rail crash" label="1944 Ilford rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q877472" start="8954" end="8966" title="bay platform" label="bay platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466408" start="9635" end="9647" title="River Roding" label="River Roding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800584" start="9686" end="9705" title="A406 road" label="North Circular Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="10094" end="10109" title="British Telecom" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="11132" end="11146" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="11153" end="11157" title="Electric multiple unit" label="EMUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="11348" end="11371" title="Liverpool Street station" label="London Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="11557" end="11569" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11577" end="11580" title="London Buses route 123" label="123"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11582" end="11585" title="London Buses route 128" label="128"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11587" end="11590" title="London Buses route 145" label="145"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11592" end="11595" title="London Buses route 150" label="150"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669972" start="11597" end="11600" title="London Buses route 167" label="167"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11602" end="11605" title="London Buses route 179" label="179"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11607" end="11610" title="London Buses route 296" label="296"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11612" end="11615" title="London Buses route 364" label="364"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11617" end="11620" title="London Buses route 366" label="366"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11622" end="11625" title="London Buses route 396" label="396"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11627" end="11630" title="London Buses route 462" label="462"/>
<link wikidata="Q124751123" start="11632" end="11635" title="London Buses route SL2" label="SL2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11654" end="11657" title="London Buses route 667" label="667"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11659" end="11662" title="London Buses route 677" label="677"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11667" end="11670" title="London Buses route 679" label="679"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670025" start="11723" end="11725" title="London Buses route 25" label="25"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11727" end="11729" title="London Buses route 86" label="86"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11731" end="11734" title="London Buses route 147" label="147"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11736" end="11739" title="London Buses route 169" label="169"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11741" end="11744" title="London Buses route 425" label="425"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328865" start="11746" end="11749" title="London Buses route EL1" label="EL1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11751" end="11754" title="London Buses route W19" label="W19"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="11772" end="11775" title="London Buses route N25" label="N25"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="11780" end="11783" title="London Buses route N86" label="N86"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706650" wikidata="Q312753" url="?curid=706650" title="Joan Manuel Serrat">
<text>Joan Manuel Serrat Teresa (; born 27 December 1943) is a Spanish musician, singer, and composer. He is considered one of the most important figures of modern, popular music in both Spanish and Catalan languages.

Serrat&#x27;s lyrical style has been influenced by other poets such as Mario Benedetti, Antonio Machado, Miguel Hernández, Rafael Alberti, Federico García Lorca, Pablo Neruda, and León Felipe. He has also recorded songs by Violeta Parra and Víctor Jara. Serrat was one of the pioneers of what is known in Catalan as &quot;Nova Cançó&quot; (Nueva Canción). Joan Manuel Serrat is also known by the names &quot;El noi del Poble-sec&quot; and &quot;El Nano&quot;.

==Biography==
===Childhood===
Joan Manuel Serrat Teresa was born 27 December 1943 in the Poble-sec neighbourhood of Barcelona, to members of a working family. His father, Josep Serrat, was a Catalan anarchist affiliated with the CNT and his mother, Ángeles Teresa, a housewife, was from Belchite, Zaragoza in the region of Aragon. His childhood and environment in his neighbourhood greatly impacted him, as a great number of his songs described Catalonia after the Spanish Civil War (examples are &quot;La Carmeta&quot;, &quot;La tieta&quot; and &quot;El drapaire&quot; as stereotypical characters from his neighbourhood).

===Early career===
Serrat became involved with music at the age of 17 when he obtained his first guitar to which he dedicated one of his earliest songs, &quot;Una guitarra&quot;. In the early 1960s, the young artist participated in a pop band, playing along with classmates at Barcelona&#x27;s Agronomy School and performing mainly Beatles songs and Italian &#x27;pop-of-the-era&#x27; songs translated to Spanish. In 1965, while singing in a radio show called Radioscope, host Salvador Escamilla helped him secure a record deal with local label Edigsa, from there joining the group Els Setze Jutges which defended the Catalan language during the Spanish State. In that same year, he recorded his first EP &quot;Una guitarra&quot; with the songs &quot;Una guitarra&quot;, &quot;Ella em deixa&quot;, &quot;La mort de l&#x27;avi&quot; and &quot;El mocador&quot;. In 1966 appeared his second EP &quot;Ara que tinc vint anys&quot; with the songs &quot;Ara que tinc vint anys&quot;, &quot;Quan arriba el fred&quot;, &quot;El drapaire&quot; and &quot;Sota un cirerer florit&quot;. In 1967 his first LP was released &quot;Ara que tinc vint anys&quot; which included some songs from previous EP recordings, as well as &quot;Balada per a un trobador&quot;, &quot;Els vells amants&quot; and &quot;Els titelles&quot;. Joan Manuel Serrat&#x27;s first live stage performance in 1967 at the Palau de la Música Catalana, served to establish him as one of the most important artists inside the Nova cançó movement in Catalonia.

The following year, Televisión Española (TVE) entered Serrat in the Eurovision Song Contest 1968 to sing &quot;La, la, la&quot;, but he demanded to sing it in Catalan, to which the broadcaster did not agree. This would be the first time he would come into conflict with the language politics of Francoist Spain, because of his decision to sing in his native language. Ultimately, Serrat participation was cancelled, and was hurriedly replaced by Massiel, who went on to win the contest with her performance in Spanish.

===1969–1976===
Serrat&#x27;s first son Queco was born in 1969, and in that same year he made his first tour to South America. He released an album containing songs with texts of Antonio Machado, a well-known Spanish poet of late 19th-early 20th century. This album brought him immediate fame in all Spain and Latin America though, in spite of this, his decision to sing in Spanish was criticized in some Catalan nationalist circles. Regarding this and other times when his choice of language (sometimes Spanish, sometimes Catalan) raised controversy on either side of the political sphere, he once explained: &quot;I sing better in the language they forbid me.&quot; He participated and won the song festival of Rio de Janeiro in 1970 with his single &quot;Penélope&quot;.

The release of the &quot;Mediterráneo&quot; LP in 1971 consolidated the artist&#x27;s reputation worldwide. During that year, Serrat sang a seminal concert at the theater of the University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus, which was highly influential in the Puerto Rican music community of the time, and which had repercussions as late as 2006.

In late 1974, Serrat was exiled in Mexico due to his condemnation of capital punishment in Francoist Spain. It wasn&#x27;t until Franco&#x27;s death on 20 November 1975 that Serrat was able to return to his homeland. In 1976, Joan Manuel Serrat was acclaimed for the first time in the United States, while performing in Los Angeles, San Francisco, and New York.

===1977–1994===
===1995 to present===
In January 1995, the Spanish government awarded him a medal for his contribution to Hispanic culture. That same year, a tribute album called &quot;Serrat, eres único&quot; was made to honour his career, featuring artists such as Diego Torres, Ketama, Rosario Flores, Joaquín Sabina, and Antonio Flores. In the same year, he toured &quot;Nadie es Perfecto&quot;, through several countries in Latin America. In February 1995, Serrat gave a concert at University of Lima, in Lima, Peru. On 28 November 1998, Serrat performed the &quot;Cant del Barça&quot; during the FC Barcelona Centenary festival at the Camp Nou.

In 2000, the Spanish Association of Authors and Editors (SGAE) awarded him with one of ten Medals of the Century.

Serrat revealed in October 2004 that he had been undergoing treatment for cancer of the urinary bladder and in November that year he had to cancel a tour of Latin America and the US in order to undergo surgery in Barcelona, where he still lives.
His signature song &quot;Mediterráneo&quot; was selected as the most important song of the 20th century in Spain.

His recovery was satisfactory, and in 2005 he went on tour again (&quot;Serrat 100×100&quot;) around Spain and Latin America with his lifelong producer and arranger, Ricard Miralles. During the tour Serrat played symphonic versions of his songs with local symphony orchestras.

A second volume of &quot;Serrat, eres único&quot; was also released this year, featuring Alejandro Sanz, Estopa, and Pasión Vega. Around the same time, Cuban artists such as Silvio Rodríguez, Pablo Milanés, Chucho Valdés, and Ibrahim Ferrer came together to make another tribute CD, &quot;Cuba le canta a Serrat&quot;.

By 2006, the theater of the University of Puerto Rico in Río Piedras where Serrat sang in 1970 had undergone a multimillion-dollar renovation, after being closed for ten years. The university planned to reopen the theater with Serrat as its first popular culture act, thus recalling his first performance there. However, student protests over the university conceding private entities control over some theater administration functions ended up in a physical confrontation between some student leaders and patrons attending the theater&#x27;s inaugural gala, the day before Serrat&#x27;s first scheduled performance. As a result, the concerts had to be postponed and changed to another venue. Serrat felt particularly uneasy about the whole situation; when he was pressed to take sides in the controversy he opted to remain neutral.

In 2006, Serrat also released Mô, his first album completely in Catalan in 17 years. The album title refers to the city of Mahón, capital of the Spanish island of Menorca, where he likes to get away from it all during long touring seasons.

In 2017 and 2018, he carried a tour named &quot;Mediterraneo da Capo&quot; to commemorate the 47th anniversary of his mythical record &quot;Mediterraneo&quot;.


Serrat is a part owner of the Mas Perinet winery producing both DO Montsant and DOC Priorat wines in La Morera de Montsant.

== Legacy ==
There are many artists and authors of songs that have paid homage to the figure and work of Joan Manuel Serrat. Among the most noteworthy are &quot;Ahí te mando mi guitarra, Juan Manuel&quot;, composed by Manuel Alejandro and played by Blanca Villa while Serrat was in exile for his statements against the death penalty; the recent &quot;Maldito Serrat&quot; by the Argentine singer-songwriter Ignacio Copani; &quot;Mi primo el Nano&quot;, composed by his friend Joaquín Sabina, and the &quot;Canción para un maño&quot;, a song by Georges Brassens adapted by Paco Ibáñez.

Apart from these songs that deal exclusively with the figure of Joan Manuel Serrat, there are others that mention the name of Joan Manuel Serrat or some of his songs. These are the cases of Alberto Cortez in his live version of &quot;No soy de aquí&quot;, by Joaquín Sabina himself when he recorded &quot;No hago otra cosa que pensar en ti&quot; on the album &quot;Serrat, eres único&quot;, of Presuntos Implicados in &quot;Ser de agua&quot; or of singer-songwriters like Juan Carlos Baglietto, Fito Páez , Javier Ruibal, Víctor Heredia, Fernando Delgadillo, Ricardo Arjona, Amaury Pérez, Vicente Feliú, Alejandro Filio, Kiko Tovar, Cacho Duvanced, Ramiro Segrelles, Joan Isaac, Guillermina Motta, Gerardo Peña, Hernaldo Zúñiga, Liuba María Hevia, Alejandro Nardecchia, Miquel Pujadó, Joan Baptista Humet, among others.

You can also quote in this section the lyrics of &quot;Sóc el millor&quot;, which Francesc Pi de la Serra composed, although more than in homage was a harsh criticism towards Serrat for his decision of Joan Manuel to sing also in Spanish. Also noteworthy is the humorous version of the song &quot;Ara que tinc vint anys&quot;, which La Trinca recorded with a change in title: &quot;Ara que tinc 80 anys&quot;.

== Political views ==
In 1974, during a visit to Mexico, an arrest warrant was issued for Serrat in Spain after he criticised the death penalty and the &quot;established and official violence&quot; of the dictatorship of Francisco Franco. Serrat lived in exile for the remainder of the Francoist dictatorship, returning after the death of Franco in 1975 and Spain&#x27;s return to democracy.

In several of his statements. Serrat has criticized the independence movement of Catalonia, as well as the 1 October 2017 Catalan independence referendum, becoming a figure for Catalans who choose the union of Spain. He has also criticized several times the economic corruption of the independentist Catalan government and the national government of Mariano Rajoy. Serrat holds the view that the unilateral 2017 Catalan declaration of independence and the reaction from the government of Rajoy served the purpose of &quot;covering up years of cuts and economic corruption&quot; from both the Catalan regional government and Spanish national government. On several occasions, some in the independence movement called for a boycott against Serrat.

==Select discography==

===Albums===
* 1967: &quot;Ara que tinc Vint Anys&quot;
* 1968: &quot;Cançons Tradicionals&quot;
* 1969: &quot;Com ho fa el Vent&quot;
* 1969: &quot;La Paloma&quot;
* 1969: &quot;Dedicado a Antonio Machado, poeta&quot;
* 1970: &quot;Serrat IV&quot;
* 1971: &quot;Mediterráneo&quot;
* 1972: &quot;Vagabundear&quot;
* 1972: &quot;Miguel Hernández&quot;
* 1973: &quot;Per al meu Amic&quot;
* 1974: &quot;Canción Infantil&quot;
* 1975: &quot;...Para Piel de Manzana&quot;
* 1976: &quot;Retratos&quot;
* 1977: &quot;Res no és Mesquí&quot;
* 1978: &quot;1978&quot;
* 1979: &quot;Mi Niñez&quot;
* 1980: &quot;Tal com Raja&quot;
* 1981: &quot;En Tránsito&quot;
* 1983: &quot;Cada Loco con su Tema&quot;
* 1984: &quot;Fa Vint Anys que tinc Vint Anys&quot;
* 1984: &quot;En Directo&quot;
* 1985: &quot;El Sur También Existe&quot;
* 1986: &quot;Sinceramente Teu&quot;
* 1987: &quot;Bienaventurados&quot;
* 1989: &quot;Material Sensible&quot;
* 1992: &quot;Utopía&quot; List of number-one albums of 1992 (Spain)
* 1994: &quot;Nadie es Perfecto&quot;
* 1996: &quot;Banda Sonora d&#x27;un Temps d&#x27;un País&quot;
* 1996: &quot;El Gusto Es Nuestro&quot;
* 1998: &quot;Sombras de la China&quot;
* 2000: &quot;Cansiones (Tarrés)&quot;
* 2002: &quot;Versos en la Boca&quot;
* 2003: &quot;Serrat Sinfónico&quot;
* 2006: &quot;Mô&quot;
* 2007: &quot;Dos Pájaros de un Tiro&quot;
* 2010: &quot;Hijo de la Luz y de la Sombra&quot;
* 2012: &quot;La orquesta del Titanic&quot;
*2012: Serrat &amp; Sabina En El Luna Park
*2015: En Bellas Artes

===Tribute albums===
* 1969: Tete Montoliu – &quot;Tete Montoliu Interpreta a Serrat&quot; (Discmedi)
* 1977: Tete Montoliu – &quot;Catalonian Folksongs&quot; (Timeless)
* 1995: Varios – &quot;Serrat, eres único&quot; (BMG Ariola)
* 2002: Ricardo León – &quot;Antes que lleguen los perros&quot; (Whitehill)
* 2004: Ricardo León – &quot;Levementeodioso&quot; (Whitehill)
* 2005: Varios – &quot;Serrat, eres único (volumen 2)&quot; (BMG Ariola)
* 2005: Varios – &quot;Cuba le canta a Serrat&quot; (Discmedi)
* 2006: Varios – &quot;Per al meu amic Serrat&quot; (Discmedi)
* 2007: Varios – &quot;Cuba le canta a Serrat (volumen 2)&quot; (Discmedi)

== Some awards and recognitions received ==
* Fotogramas de Plata for the best musical activity (1970 and 1972)
* Premios Ondas special award of the Organization for his professional career in the history of Spanish popular music in 1995.
* Doctor honoris causa by National University of Comahue (Neuquén, Argentina) in 1999.
* Honorary Doctorate from the Autonomous University of the State of Morelos of Cuernavaca (Morelos, Mexico), 16 May 2003.
* Doctor honoris causa by National University of Córdoba (Argentina), 25 November 2005.
* Doctor honoris causa for the Meritorious Autonomous University of Puebla (Mexico), 12 January 2006.
* Doctor honoris causa by the Complutense University of Madrid, on 15 March 2006.
* Doctor honoris causa by Miguel Hernández University of Elche, on 21 May 2010.
* Doctor honoris causa by Pompeu Fabra University of Barcelona, on 14 June 2011.
* Honorary Doctorate from the National Autonomous University of Mexico, on 22 September 2011.
* Honorary Doctorate from the Autonomous University of Mexico State, on 13 October 2015
* Premios Micrófono de Oro award of Castile and León (Spain), in 2003.
* Gold Medal of the city of Barcelona, on 24 March 2006.
* His Mediterráneo song was chosen as the best song of the 20th century Spanish language by the &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine, in 2006.
* Spanish Gold Medal of Merit in Labour for his entire career, on 25 March 2006.
* Medal of Honor of Parliament of Catalonia, in 2007.
* Premio Nacional de Músicas Actuales award, in 2010.
* Order of the Aztec Eagle in insignia degree, by the federal government of Mexico in 2010.
* City of Barcelona Award for music, for his work &quot;Hijo de la luz y de la sombra&quot; (2010).
* Premio Luna del Auditorio Nacional award as the best Ibero-American show next to Joaquín Sabina. (2013).
* Latin Grammy, honorary award as 2014 Person of the Year. (2014).
* Premios Ondas award, For his artistic career. (2014).
* Premio Cortes de Cádiz award, 2015.
* High Distinction of the Generalitat Valenciana
* Grand Cross of the Order of James I the Conqueror, 2017.
* Doctor Honoris Causa by the National University of Rosario (UNR) (Argentina), on 7 October 2017
* Grand Cross of the Civil Order of Alfonso X, the Wise, on 8 December 2021.
* Princess of Asturias Award for the Arts.

==See also==
*List of best-selling Latin music artists

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Joan Manuel Serrat – Desde siempre y para siempre
* Joan Manuel Serrat discography, at Music City
* Idiomatic English translations of Serrat&#x27;s songs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312753" start="0" end="25" title="Joan Manuel Serrat" label="Joan Manuel Serrat Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="193" end="200" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16285" start="284" end="299" title="Mario Benedetti" label="Mario Benedetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q243771" start="301" end="316" title="Antonio Machado" label="Antonio Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q332088" start="318" end="334" title="Miguel Hernández" label="Miguel Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q118936" start="336" end="350" title="Rafael Alberti" label="Rafael Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="352" end="373" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="375" end="387" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076131" start="393" end="404" title="León Felipe" label="León Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q230499" start="436" end="449" title="Violeta Parra" label="Violeta Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q125133" start="454" end="465" title="Víctor Jara" label="Víctor Jara"/>
<link wikidata="Q254890" start="535" end="545" title="Nova Cançó" label="Nova Cançó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151259" start="553" end="566" title="Nueva Canción" label="Nueva Canción"/>
<link wikidata="Q980253" start="763" end="772" title="Poble-sec" label="Poble-sec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="790" end="799" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q550420" start="903" end="906" title="Confederación Nacional del Trabajo" label="CNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q815339" start="961" end="969" title="Belchite" label="Belchite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55180" start="971" end="979" title="Province of Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="997" end="1003" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="1119" end="1128" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="1139" end="1156" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333388" start="1880" end="1896" title="Els Setze Jutges" label="Els Setze Jutges"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="1944" end="1957" title="Spanish State" label="Spanish State"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="2390" end="2392" title="Long Play" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q327940" start="2674" end="2701" title="Palau de la Música Catalana" label="Palau de la Música Catalana"/>
<link wikidata="Q254890" start="2775" end="2785" title="Nova cançó" label="Nova cançó"/>
<link wikidata="Q544560" start="2830" end="2849" title="Televisión Española" label="Televisión Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q204010" start="2878" end="2906" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1968" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q939890" start="2921" end="2931" title="La La La (Massiel song)" label="La, la, la"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486783" start="3084" end="3120" title="Language policies of Francoist Spain" label="language politics of Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q230544" start="3256" end="3263" title="Massiel" label="Massiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q243771" start="3509" end="3524" title="Antonio Machado" label="Antonio Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="4043" end="4057" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896167" start="4283" end="4328" title="University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus" label="University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4489" end="4495" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="4545" end="4560" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q704160" start="5084" end="5096" title="Diego Torres (singer)" label="Diego Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q637380" start="5098" end="5104" title="Ketama" label="Ketama"/>
<link wikidata="Q251210" start="5106" end="5120" title="Rosario Flores" label="Rosario Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q363577" start="5122" end="5136" title="Joaquín Sabina" label="Joaquín Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333569" start="5142" end="5156" title="Antonio Flores" label="Antonio Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360101" start="5387" end="5401" title="Cant del Barça" label="Cant del Barça"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="5419" end="5431" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q159848" start="5458" end="5466" title="Camp Nou" label="Camp Nou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571772" start="5526" end="5530" title="Sociedad General de Autores y Editores" label="SGAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="5672" end="5687" title="urinary bladder" label="urinary bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q276170" start="6312" end="6326" title="Alejandro Sanz" label="Alejandro Sanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q773703" start="6328" end="6334" title="Estopa" label="Estopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q377956" start="6397" end="6413" title="Silvio Rodríguez" label="Silvio Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q560953" start="6415" end="6428" title="Pablo Milanés" label="Pablo Milanés"/>
<link wikidata="Q918872" start="6430" end="6443" title="Chucho Valdés" label="Chucho Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q309913" start="6449" end="6463" title="Ibrahim Ferrer" label="Ibrahim Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49550" start="7500" end="7505" title="Mahón" label="Mahón"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="7540" end="7547" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286742" start="8123" end="8139" title="Manuel Alejandro" label="Manuel Alejandro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8154" end="8166" title="Blanca Villa" label="Blanca Villa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8312" end="8326" title="Ignacio Copani" label="Ignacio Copani"/>
<link wikidata="Q363577" start="8381" end="8395" title="Joaquín Sabina" label="Joaquín Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q449" start="8449" end="8465" title="Georges Brassens" label="Georges Brassens"/>
<link wikidata="Q981236" start="8477" end="8488" title="Paco Ibáñez" label="Paco Ibáñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831760" start="8681" end="8695" title="Alberto Cortez" label="Alberto Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8856" end="8874" title="Serrat, eres único" label="Serrat, eres único"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326145" start="8885" end="8905" title="Presuntos Implicados" label="Presuntos Implicados"/>
<link wikidata="Q6299184" start="8963" end="8984" title="Juan Carlos Baglietto" label="Juan Carlos Baglietto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393935" start="8986" end="8995" title="Fito Páez" label="Fito Páez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350689" start="8998" end="9011" title="Javier Ruibal" label="Javier Ruibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q513668" start="9013" end="9027" title="Víctor Heredia" label="Víctor Heredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444679" start="9029" end="9048" title="Fernando Delgadillo" label="Fernando Delgadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q719841" start="9050" end="9064" title="Ricardo Arjona" label="Ricardo Arjona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9066" end="9078" title="Amaury Pérez" label="Amaury Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9080" end="9093" title="Vicente Feliú" label="Vicente Feliú"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9095" end="9110" title="Alejandro Filio" label="Alejandro Filio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9112" end="9122" title="Kiko Tovar" label="Kiko Tovar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9124" end="9138" title="Cacho Duvanced" label="Cacho Duvanced"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9140" end="9156" title="Ramiro Segrelles" label="Ramiro Segrelles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9158" end="9168" title="Joan Isaac" label="Joan Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9170" end="9187" title="Guillermina Motta" label="Guillermina Motta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9189" end="9201" title="Gerardo Peña" label="Gerardo Peña"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742142" start="9203" end="9218" title="Hernaldo Zúñiga" label="Hernaldo Zúñiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10319220" start="9220" end="9237" title="Liuba María Hevia" label="Liuba María Hevia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9239" end="9259" title="Alejandro Nardecchia" label="Alejandro Nardecchia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9261" end="9274" title="Miquel Pujadó" label="Miquel Pujadó"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9276" end="9295" title="Joan Baptista Humet" label="Joan Baptista Humet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9394" end="9417" title="Francesc Pi de la Serra" label="Francesc Pi de la Serra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9645" end="9654" title="La Trinca" label="La Trinca"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="9944" end="9960" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="10009" end="10031" title="Francoist dictatorship" label="Francoist dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q893331" start="10172" end="10206" title="independence movement of Catalonia" label="independence movement of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27145747" start="10223" end="10269" title="1 October 2017 Catalan independence referendum" label="1 October 2017 Catalan independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10819" start="10466" end="10479" title="Mariano Rajoy" label="Mariano Rajoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796018" start="10523" end="10563" title="2017 Catalan declaration of independence" label="2017 Catalan declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008926" start="11150" end="11162" title="Mediterráneo" label="Mediterráneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163948" start="11845" end="11886" title="List of number-one albums of 1992 (Spain)" label="List of number-one albums of 1992 (Spain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967686" start="12313" end="12336" title="La orquesta del Titanic" label="La orquesta del Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q727862" start="12439" end="12452" title="Tete Montoliu" label="Tete Montoliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646316" start="12542" end="12562" title="Catalonian Folksongs" label="Catalonian Folksongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439650" start="13101" end="13120" title="Fotogramas de Plata" label="Fotogramas de Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q786357" start="13169" end="13182" title="Premios Ondas" label="Premios Ondas"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="13296" end="13316" title="Doctor honoris causa" label="Doctor honoris causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315122" start="13320" end="13350" title="National University of Comahue" label="National University of Comahue"/>
<link wikidata="Q44239" start="13352" end="13359" title="Neuquén" label="Neuquén"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="13361" end="13370" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156367" start="13411" end="13456" title="Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos" label="Autonomous University of the State of Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q204245" start="13460" end="13470" title="Cuernavaca" label="Cuernavaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="13472" end="13479" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="13481" end="13487" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570489" start="13529" end="13559" title="Universidad Nacional de Córdoba" label="National University of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="13561" end="13570" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q495032" start="13622" end="13665" title="Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla" label="Meritorious Autonomous University of Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="13667" end="13673" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q219694" start="13723" end="13755" title="Universidad Complutense de Madrid" label="Complutense University of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q24676" start="13801" end="13837" title="Miguel Hernández University of Elche" label="Miguel Hernández University of Elche"/>
<link wikidata="Q24543" start="13881" end="13904" title="Pompeu Fabra University" label="Pompeu Fabra University"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="13966" end="14006" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q18360632" start="14060" end="14097" title="Autonomous University of Mexico State" label="Autonomous University of Mexico State"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14120" end="14144" title="Premios Micrófono de Oro" label="Premios Micrófono de Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="14348" end="14361" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008386" start="14402" end="14426" title="Medal of Merit in Labour" label="Medal of Merit in Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q135630" start="14488" end="14511" title="Parliament of Catalonia" label="Parliament of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93956" start="14578" end="14602" title="Order of the Aztec Eagle" label="Order of the Aztec Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="14652" end="14658" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14670" end="14693" title="Premi Ciutat de Barcelona" label="City of Barcelona Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14770" end="14804" title="Premio Luna del Auditorio Nacional" label="Premio Luna del Auditorio Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q363577" start="14851" end="14865" title="Joaquín Sabina" label="Joaquín Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q921469" start="14877" end="14889" title="Latin Grammy Award" label="Latin Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496471" start="14914" end="14932" title="Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year" label="Person of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q786357" start="14944" end="14957" title="Premios Ondas" label="Premios Ondas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15000" end="15022" title="Premio Cortes de Cádiz" label="Premio Cortes de Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15038" end="15084" title="Decorations of the Generalitat Valenciana" label="High Distinction of the Generalitat Valenciana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15106" end="15136" title="Order of James I the Conqueror" label="Order of James I the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255905" start="15174" end="15204" title="National University of Rosario" label="National University of Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551695" start="15263" end="15297" title="Civil Order of Alfonso X, the Wise" label="Civil Order of Alfonso X, the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="15321" end="15347" title="Princess of Asturias Awards" label="Princess of Asturias Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180430" start="15377" end="15417" title="List of best-selling Latin music artists" label="List of best-selling Latin music artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706651" wikidata="Q14950" url="?curid=706651" title="Sinsheim">
<text>Sinsheim (, South Franconian: &quot;Sinse&quot;) is a town in southwestern Germany, in the Rhine Neckar Area of the state Baden-Württemberg about southeast of Heidelberg and about northwest of Heilbronn in the district Rhein-Neckar.

==Geography==

===Overview===
Sinsheim consists of a town centre and 12 suburbs with a total population of 36,780 (as of March 2023). Its area encompasses . The Elsenz, an unnavigable left-bank tributary of the Neckar, flows through the town, reaching the Neckar at Neckargemünd.

===Subdivisions===
The list below shows the 12 suburban villages (&quot;Stadtteile&quot;). Population data was as of 31 December 2020 and the one of Sinsheim (the town proper) was of 12,914.

==History==
The region around Sinsheim has been settled since 700,000 BC, as shown by the finding of the fossil &quot;Homo heidelbergensis&quot; in the village of Mauer, about 12 km (7 miles) north of Sinsheim. The Romans ruled the area from 90 AD to 260 AD. The city was possibly founded in about 550 AD by the Frankish nobleman Sunno. It was first historically mentioned in 770 AD in the Codex of the cloister Lorsch. Since 1192, the town had city rights, a privilege first granted by Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor.

Sinsheim was affected by wars and poverty from the 1500s to the 1700s. Sinsheim-born revolutionary Franz Sigel became a famous Union general in the American Civil War.

The Elsenz Valley Railway and Sinsheim station were opened in 1868 and the nearby Steinsfurt–Eppingen line was opened in 1900; electricity and public water pipes were introduced into the city from 1910 on. The World Wars and the Great Depression kept Sinsheim from growing until the A6 Autobahn was built in 1968. It connected Sinsheim to national and international roads, with Mannheim, Stuttgart, Frankfurt am Main, Heilbronn, Heidelberg, Ludwigshafen all now within an hour by car. While traditionally being an agricultural town, the highway made it into a small industrial centre, but it has been hit by recession and international outsourcing in recent years.

==Demographics==
The numbers are estimates, census results(¹) or official data of the statistical offices (only primary residences).

¹ census results

==Main sights==

Sinsheim&#x27;s main tourist attraction is the Sinsheim Auto &amp; Technik Museum situated in the suburb Steinsfurt, displaying a collection of historic vehicles to over 1 million visitors per year. In 1989, a trade fair area was established that features various industrial and popular events.

Additionally, Sinsheim has a medieval city core; the &quot;Altes Rathaus&quot; (old Town Hall) is a museum for the town and its role in the 1848 revolution. An old fortress, &quot;Burg Steinsberg&quot; in the village of Weiler, overlooks Sinsheim. With its octagonal tower, dating back to the 13th century, the fortress has sometimes been called the &quot;compass&quot; of the Kraichgau region, and nowadays contains a restaurant.

==Sport==
===Stadium===

On September 19, 2006, the mayor of Sinsheim announced a stadium would be built not far from the Sinsheim Auto &amp; Technik Museum, for the town&#x27;s most successful football club TSG 1899 Hoffenheim. Construction of the €100 million stadium, which seats 30,164, was funded by Dietmar Hopp, a co-founder and major share holder of software giant SAP and a former player in the youth system of TSG 1899 Hoffenheim. The club christened their new stadium &quot;Rhein Neckar-Arena&quot; on 31 January 2009 with a 2–0 win over Energie Cottbus.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Sinsheim is twinned with:
* Barcs, Hungary
* Longué-Jumelles, France

==Notable people==
*Hans Seyffer (c.1460–1509), stone sculptor and wood carver
*Franz Sigel (1824–1902), U.S. Army General in the American Civil War.
*Franz Bachelin (1895–1980), a German art director.
*Walter Horn (1908–1995), German-American medievalist scholar
*Volker Kauder (born 1949), politician (CDU)

=== Sport ===
*Christian Eichner (born 1982), football player and manager, played 230 games
*Matthias Krieger (born 1984), a paralympic judoka and bronze medallist at the 2012 Summer Paralympics.
*Sarai Linder (born 1999), footballer, played 12 games for the Germany women&#x27;s national football team
=== Music ===
*Liquido (1996-2009), rock band

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14950" start="0" end="8" title="Sinsheim" label="Sinsheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q71632" start="12" end="28" title="South Franconian German" label="South Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="75" end="82" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q559125" start="91" end="108" title="Rhine Neckar Area" label="Rhine Neckar Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="122" end="139" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="159" end="169" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q715" start="193" end="202" title="Heilbronn" label="Heilbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8177" start="210" end="231" title="Rhein-Neckar-Kreis" label="district Rhein-Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8315" start="395" end="401" title="Elsenz (Fluss)" label="Elsenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q105784" start="825" end="845" title="Homo heidelbergensis" label="Homo heidelbergensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="922" end="928" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1019" end="1027" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q538377" start="1097" end="1125" title="Lorsch codex" label="Codex of the cloister Lorsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60094" start="1194" end="1222" title="Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190" start="1324" end="1335" title="Franz Sigel" label="Franz Sigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1373" end="1391" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q802839" start="1398" end="1419" title="Elsenz Valley Railway" label="Elsenz Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289576" start="1424" end="1440" title="Sinsheim Central Station" label="Sinsheim station"/>
<link wikidata="Q778332" start="1476" end="1500" title="Steinsfurt–Eppingen railway" label="Steinsfurt–Eppingen line"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="1604" end="1613" title="World War" label="World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1623" end="1639" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="1680" end="1688" title="Autobahn" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119" start="1772" end="1780" title="Mannheim" label="Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="1782" end="1791" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="1793" end="1810" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q715" start="1812" end="1821" title="Heilbronn" label="Heilbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="1823" end="1833" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="1835" end="1847" title="Ludwigshafen" label="Ludwigshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="2002" end="2011" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="2030" end="2041" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q374459" start="2276" end="2310" title="Sinsheim Auto &amp;amp; Technik Museum" label="Sinsheim Auto &amp;amp; Technik Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305" start="2439" end="2449" title="trade fair" label="trade fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="2665" end="2680" title="The Revolutions of 1848 in the German states" label="1848 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q835695" start="2902" end="2911" title="Kraichgau" label="Kraichgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q374459" start="3079" end="3113" title="Sinsheim Auto &amp;amp; Technik Museum" label="Sinsheim Auto &amp;amp; Technik Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="3151" end="3159" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q22707" start="3165" end="3184" title="TSG 1899 Hoffenheim" label="TSG 1899 Hoffenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="3206" end="3207" title="euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q62543" start="3262" end="3274" title="Dietmar Hopp" label="Dietmar Hopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q552581" start="3330" end="3333" title="SAP AG" label="SAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q107818" start="3506" end="3521" title="FC Energie Cottbus" label="Energie Cottbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="3568" end="3575" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q790370" start="3584" end="3589" title="Barcs" label="Barcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q819364" start="3601" end="3616" title="Longué-Jumelles" label="Longué-Jumelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582512" start="3646" end="3658" title="Hans Seyffer" label="Hans Seyffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190" start="3706" end="3717" title="Franz Sigel" label="Franz Sigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q118366" start="3777" end="3791" title="Franz Bachelin" label="Franz Bachelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965164" start="3829" end="3840" title="Walter Horn" label="Walter Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q119190" start="3870" end="3881" title="Medieval studies" label="medievalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q67164" start="3891" end="3904" title="Volker Kauder" label="Volker Kauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q702762" start="3951" end="3968" title="Christian Eichner" label="Christian Eichner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910083" start="4029" end="4045" title="Matthias Krieger" label="Matthias Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q182798" start="4107" end="4130" title="2012 Summer Paralympics" label="2012 Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27824497" start="4133" end="4145" title="Sarai Linder" label="Sarai Linder"/>
<link wikidata="Q154408" start="4195" end="4238" title="Germany women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Germany women&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q679508" start="4254" end="4261" title="Liquido" label="Liquido"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706664" wikidata="Q2865801" url="?curid=706664" title="Artisan Entertainment">
<text>Artisan Entertainment (formerly known as U.S.A. Home Video, International Video Entertainment (IVE) and LIVE Entertainment) was an American film studio and home video company. It was considered one of the largest mini-major film studios until it was merged by later mini-major film studio Lions Gate Entertainment in 2003. At the time of its acquisition, Artisan had a library of thousands of films developed through acquisition, original production, and production and distribution agreements. Its headquarters and private screening room were located in Santa Monica, California. It also had an office in Tribeca in Manhattan, New York.

The company owned the home video rights to the film libraries of Republic Pictures, ITC Entertainment, Gladden Entertainment, Miramax Films, Hemdale Film Corporation, The Shooting Gallery, and Carolco Pictures before it went defunct.

Artisan&#x27;s releases included &quot;Requiem for a Dream&quot;, &quot;Pi&quot;, &quot;Killing Zoe&quot;, &quot;The Blair Witch Project&quot;, &quot;Grizzly Falls&quot;, &quot;Startup.com&quot;, &quot;Novocaine&quot;, and &quot;National Lampoon&#x27;s Van Wilder&quot;.

==History==
Artisan, unlike most movie studios, had its roots in the home video industry.

===1980s===
Artisan Entertainment was founded in 1980 by Noel C. Bloom as Family Home Entertainment, Inc., and it was initially operated as a subsidiary of adult film distributor Caballero Control Corporation. It received a distribution pact with Wizard Video. In 1982, the latter had sold &quot;The Texas Chainsaw Massacre&quot; 10,000 copies a week. Also that year, the label started distributing titles by Monterey Home Video. Later on, it received a distribution deal with MGM/UA Home Video to distribute the library. In 1983, it received a new agreement with Filmation in order to distribute the library on videocassette.

In 1983, FHE began operating its new subsidiary U.S.A. Home Video, when tapes were usually packaged in large boxes and included non-family films such as &quot;Supergirl&quot;, &quot;Silent Night, Deadly Night&quot;, several Lorimar titles and many B-movies, including those that begin and end with B-actress Sybil Danning talking about the film that is being shown under the Adventure Video label. U.S.A. also released sports videos under the U.S.A. Sports Video label.

In 1984, FHE and U.S.A. became part of Noel Bloom&#x27;s NCB Entertainment Group (which also included Bloom&#x27;s other labels Caballero Home Video, Monterey Home Video and Thriller Video), and then later on that year, both were consolidated into International Video Entertainment, Inc., formed under NCB and also taking ownership of Monterey and Thriller Video. The IVE name was used for non-family releases (although the U.S.A. name continued until 1987) and the FHE name was used for family releases. Also that year, Bloom launched Concept Productions to develop live programming. In the late 1980s, the company also branched out into film distribution for television.

In 1987, IVE was acquired by Carolco Pictures from NCB Entertainment after Carolco had taken a minority interest in the latter a year earlier. That year, it secured a deal with MCA Distributing Corporation to handle distribution of its titles. The unrated release of &quot;Angel Heart&quot; was the first Carolco film released by IVE on video. The studio hired José Menendez, previously of RCA, as head of IVE; he was responsible for creating product deals with Sylvester Stallone&#x27;s White Eagle Enterprises and producer Edward Pressman. In 1989, Menendez and his wife were murdered by their two sons. Also in 1987, Noel C. Bloom left IVE, following disputes with Carolco, to start out Celebrity Home Entertainment, with some of IVE&#x27;s employees defecting to Celebrity. Later that year, the company had acquired the assets of home video distributor Vista Home Video from The Vista Organization for $38 million.

In 1988, IVE and FHE consolidated into LIVE Entertainment after a merger with wholesale media distributor Lieberman Enterprises. LIVE formed new ventures outside the home video business, including ownership of retail music and video chains across the East Coast, after the acquisitions of such stores as Strawberries and Waxie Maxie, and its Lieberman subsidiary acquired Navarre Corporation. Also that year, it partnered with distributor Radio Vision International to launch a music-oriented label, Radio Vision Video.

===1990–1997===
In 1990, IVE became LIVE Home Video. Carolco formed its own home video division under a partnership with LIVE. The company also formed Avid Home Entertainment, which reissued older LIVE product, as well as ITC Entertainment&#x27;s back catalogue, on videocassette at discount prices (held to a $15 price point); this division was based out of Denver, CO and had their own sales force, to better distinguish themselves from their parent company. Also in 1990, LIVE acquired German video distributor VCL.

LIVE Entertainment also branched out into film production. The company spent more than a million dollars to finance the 1992 film &quot;Reservoir Dogs&quot;, which marked the directorial debut of Quentin Tarantino. Other films included Paul Schrader&#x27;s &quot;Light Sleeper&quot;.

On January 11, 1991, Live announced that it would acquire Vestron, Inc. for $24 million after its downfall; Vestron had been known best for &quot;Dirty Dancing&quot;, which had been the second highest-grossing independent film of all time. Vestron releases continued into 1992.

Much of LIVE&#x27;s earnings were partially thanks to Carolco&#x27;s investment in the company, but by 1991, the studio was in such debt that a plan to merge the two companies was called off that December; around this time, the Lieberman assets were sold to another video distributor, Handleman, in an effort to stem LIVE&#x27;s financial bleeding. In May 1992, its distribution agreement with Uni Distribution Corporation expired, and LIVE signed a deal with Warner-Elektra-Atlantic. The following month, LIVE defaulted on their debt payments; Carolco reduced their stake in LIVE concurrently (from a majority share of 53% to 49.9%), selling minority shares in LIVE to a group of investors led by Pioneer Electronic Corporation. 

In February 1993, LIVE, despite their best efforts, was forced to file for chapter 11 bankruptcy from insufficient cash flow; as a part of this deal, Pioneer acquired 30% of LIVE&#x27;s voting stock (Carolco was also restructuring and their stake in LIVE was further reduced to 35%). In August 1994, Carolco and LIVE plotted another merger attempt, but the plans fell apart once again that October. Under new CEO Roger Burlage, the unprofitable retail assets were sold and more focus was placed upon film production (Burlage took inspiration for this new business plan from his previous employer, Trimark Pictures). In 1996, when Carolco ceased to exist as a company, StudioCanal got full rights to their film library; LIVE, under a new deal with the French-based production company, continued to distribute Carolco&#x27;s films for video. LIVE also took control of its video sales at this time from WEA; WEA continued to handle distribution of its products.

===1997–2003===
In July 1997, LIVE was acquired by Bain Capital and was taken private. Though Burlage was retained as chairman initially, a new trio of executives took power: former International Creative Management agent Bill Block and former October Films partner Amir Malin became co-presidents, while former Bain Capital financial consultant Mark Curcio handled financial matters. Their goal was to utilize the large video library and the consistent profit from that area to invest in independent film production, which they saw as a market in flux in the wake of several notable independent film companies, including Orion Pictures, Miramax Films and others being subsumed into larger corporate organizations; going along with this, LIVE&#x27;s existing film production unit was shuttered. As part of the restructuring process, in April 1998, LIVE was rebranded as Artisan Entertainment; the rebranding was in part motivated by LIVE&#x27;s reputation for mediocre product and lingering memories of their connection to the Menendez brothers case. The company headquarters was moved from Van Nuys, CA to oceanfront offices in Santa Monica, while the company&#x27;s New York branch office relocated to the TriBeCa neighborhood.

On December 18, 1997, LIVE entered into a domestic home video deal with Hallmark Entertainment to handle the distribution of products from its Hallmark Home Entertainment subsidiary, including Crayola-branded releases and Hallmark Hall of Fame movies. These releases would be distributed under Family Home Entertainment, while Hallmark Home Entertainment would retain marketing rights. By 1998, products from Cabin Fever Entertainment were added to the deal after Hallmark purchased and folded the company in March of that year.

In August 1998, the distribution deal with WEA expired and was replaced by a new distribution deal with 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.

In addition to adding more theatrical releases, the company&#x27;s home video subsidiary, Artisan Home Entertainment, continued to expand with more home video deals. The company began releasing products from TSG Pictures around this time, and by September 1998, Artisan signed a deal with Spelling Entertainment Group to distribute films from its Republic Pictures unit for home video release throughout a five-ten year period. This was followed in October 1999 with a four-year home video deal with Discovery Communications to release programming from the Discovery Channel, Animal Planet and TLC networks through dedicated labels under Family Home Entertainment.

On February 10, 2000, Artisan acquired a minority stake in The Baby Einstein Company in exchange for a three-year North American home video distribution agreement for the &quot;Baby Einstein&quot; catalog. The deal was eventually revoked early at the end of 2001 following The Walt Disney Company&#x27;s purchase of The Baby Einstein Company.

In May 2000, Marvel Studios negotiated a deal with Artisan Entertainment for a co-production joint venture that included rights to 15 Marvel characters including Captain America, Thor, the Black Panther, Iron Fist, and Deadpool. Artisan would finance and distribute while Marvel would developing licensing and merchandising tie-ins. The resulting production library, which would also include TV series, direct-to-video films and internet projects, would be co-owned.

On September 13, 2000, Artisan launched Artisan Digital Media and iArtisan. The last major deal Artisan undertook that year was their renewal of a distribution pact with Canadian media firm Alliance Atlantis, which included distribution rights to Artisan product in Canada, and theatrical distribution of Artisan films in Britain via AAC&#x27;s Momentum Pictures unit.

In 2001, the company acquired Canadian film and TV company Landscape Entertainment.

In May 2003, Artisan and Microsoft jointly announced the first release of a high definition DVD, &quot;Terminator 2: Judgment Day (Extreme Edition)&quot;. The release was a promotion for the Windows Media version 9 format; it could only be played on a personal computer with Windows XP. Artisan had released the movie in 2002 on D-VHS.

In the summer of 2003, Marvel Enterprises placed an offer for Artisan, with then-Disney-owned and Weinstein-operated Miramax Films to provide backing for Marvel&#x27;s bid. On December 15, 2003, Lions Gate Entertainment Corporation would merge Artisan for $220 million and video releases through Artisan have now been re-released under the Lionsgate Home Entertainment banner. 

==Filmography==

===As LIVE Entertainment===

===As Artisan Entertainment===
===Television films===
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2865801" start="0" end="21" title="Artisan Entertainment" label="Artisan Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865801" start="41" end="58" title="Artisan Entertainment" label="U.S.A. Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865801" start="60" end="93" title="Artisan Entertainment" label="International Video Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865801" start="95" end="98" title="Artisan Entertainment" label="IVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865801" start="104" end="122" title="Artisan Entertainment" label="LIVE Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q375336" start="140" end="151" title="film studio" label="film studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="156" end="174" title="Home video" label="home video company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="213" end="236" title="Major film studio#Mini-majors" label="mini-major film studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q515869" start="289" end="313" title="Lionsgate" label="Lions Gate Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="555" end="579" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q766014" start="606" end="613" title="Tribeca" label="Tribeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="617" end="626" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="628" end="636" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q774682" start="704" end="721" title="Republic Pictures" label="Republic Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149951" start="723" end="740" title="ITC Entertainment" label="ITC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017480" start="742" end="763" title="David Begelman" label="Gladden Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="765" end="778" title="Miramax Films" label="Miramax Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784765" start="780" end="804" title="Hemdale Film Corporation" label="Hemdale Film Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110649" start="806" end="826" title="TSG Pictures" label="The Shooting Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044291" start="832" end="848" title="Carolco Pictures" label="Carolco Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q487181" start="913" end="932" title="Requiem for a Dream" label="Requiem for a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q937762" start="946" end="948" title="Pi (film)" label="Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500287" start="962" end="973" title="Killing Zoe" label="Killing Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q644554" start="987" end="1010" title="The Blair Witch Project" label="The Blair Witch Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q319143" start="1024" end="1037" title="Grizzly Falls" label="Grizzly Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q540473" start="1051" end="1062" title="Startup.com" label="Startup.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q611535" start="1076" end="1085" title="Novocaine (2001 film)" label="Novocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18967" start="1103" end="1137" title="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Van Wilder" label="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Van Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="1215" end="1225" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105855" start="1294" end="1307" title="Noel C. Bloom" label="Noel C. Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015198" start="1416" end="1445" title="Caballero Home Video" label="Caballero Control Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028740" start="1484" end="1496" title="Wizard Video" label="Wizard Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q886597" start="1533" end="1560" title="The Texas Chain Saw Massacre" label="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905320" start="1646" end="1665" title="Monterey Media" label="Monterey Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981249" start="1714" end="1731" title="MGM Home Entertainment" label="MGM/UA Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q283134" start="2024" end="2033" title="Supergirl (1984 film)" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438893" start="2047" end="2073" title="Silent Night, Deadly Night" label="Silent Night, Deadly Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152955" start="2089" end="2096" title="Lorimar Television" label="Lorimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="2113" end="2121" title="B-movies" label="B-movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q89554" start="2173" end="2186" title="Sybil Danning" label="Sybil Danning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015198" start="2464" end="2484" title="Caballero Home Video" label="Caballero Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905320" start="2486" end="2505" title="Monterey Home Video" label="Monterey Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044291" start="3039" end="3055" title="Carolco Pictures" label="Carolco Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q493807" start="3283" end="3294" title="Angel Heart" label="Angel Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="3400" end="3403" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="3472" end="3490" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q357726" start="3535" end="3550" title="Edward Pressman" label="Edward Pressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q899048" start="3600" end="3614" title="Lyle and Erik Menendez" label="their two sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057740" start="3700" end="3728" title="Celebrity Home Entertainment" label="Celebrity Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108641" start="4302" end="4321" title="Navarre Corporation" label="Navarre Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149951" start="4673" end="4690" title="ITC Entertainment" label="ITC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q72962" start="5107" end="5121" title="Reservoir Dogs" label="Reservoir Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="5167" end="5184" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="5207" end="5220" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q676928" start="5234" end="5247" title="Light Sleeper" label="Light Sleeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q658608" start="5314" end="5327" title="Vestron Video" label="Vestron, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q253978" start="5402" end="5415" title="Dirty Dancing" label="Dirty Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894018" start="5929" end="5957" title="Universal Music Distribution" label="Uni Distribution Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="5995" end="6018" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner-Elektra-Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156034" start="6233" end="6263" title="Pioneer Corporation" label="Pioneer Electronic Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853294" start="6864" end="6880" title="Trimark Pictures" label="Trimark Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450848" start="6935" end="6946" title="StudioCanal" label="StudioCanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="7278" end="7290" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806125" start="7409" end="7442" title="ICM Partners" label="International Creative Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880776" start="7471" end="7484" title="October Films" label="October Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q891732" start="7849" end="7863" title="Orion Pictures" label="Orion Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="7865" end="7878" title="Miramax Films" label="Miramax Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q899048" start="8254" end="8271" title="Lyle and Erik Menendez" label="Menendez brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q769446" start="8318" end="8330" title="Van Nuys" label="Van Nuys, CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="8356" end="8368" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q766014" start="8435" end="8442" title="Tribeca" label="TriBeCa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067892" start="8530" end="8552" title="Sonar Entertainment" label="Hallmark Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139197" start="8651" end="8658" title="Crayola" label="Crayola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247468" start="8680" end="8701" title="Hallmark Hall of Fame" label="Hallmark Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="9092" end="9127" title="20th Century Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110649" start="9338" end="9350" title="TSG Pictures" label="TSG Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721586" start="9419" end="9447" title="Spelling Television" label="Spelling Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q774682" start="9477" end="9494" title="Republic Pictures" label="Republic Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q621592" start="9630" end="9654" title="Discovery Communications" label="Discovery Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="9687" end="9704" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43429" start="9706" end="9719" title="Animal Planet" label="Animal Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q130866" start="9724" end="9727" title="TLC (TV network)" label="TLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q637164" start="9855" end="9880" title="Baby Einstein" label="The Baby Einstein Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="10069" end="10092" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q367466" start="10153" end="10167" title="Marvel Studios" label="Marvel Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q190679" start="10302" end="10317" title="Captain America" label="Captain America"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="10319" end="10323" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q998220" start="10329" end="10342" title="Black Panther (comics)" label="Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194243" start="10344" end="10353" title="Iron Fist (character)" label="Iron Fist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631090" start="10359" end="10367" title="Deadpool" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748653" start="10798" end="10815" title="Alliance Atlantis" label="Alliance Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622197" start="10953" end="10970" title="Momentum Pictures" label="Momentum Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="11088" end="11097" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="11139" end="11154" title="High-definition television" label="high definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="11155" end="11158" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11166" end="11192" title="Terminator 2: Judgment Day" label="Terminator 2: Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q280761" start="11254" end="11284" title="Windows Media Video" label="Windows Media version 9 format"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="11315" end="11332" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="11338" end="11348" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q960192" start="11392" end="11397" title="D-VHS" label="D-VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200552" start="11423" end="11441" title="Marvel Entertainment" label="Marvel Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="11517" end="11530" title="Miramax" label="Miramax Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q515869" start="11595" end="11619" title="Lionsgate" label="Lions Gate Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q126193019" start="11740" end="11768" title="Lionsgate Home Entertainment" label="Lionsgate Home Entertainment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706674" wikidata="Q1666589" url="?curid=706674" title="IFEX (organization)">
<text>IFEX, formerly International Freedom of Expression Exchange, is a global network of more than 119 independent non-governmental organisations that work at a local, national, regional, or international level to defend and promote freedom of expression as a human right.

==History==
IFEX was first proposed in 1992 in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, by a group of 12 non-governmental organisations who met to discuss how they could collaborate on responding to free expression violations around the world. The meeting was organised by the Canadian Committee to Protect Journalists (now Canadian Journalists for Free Expression). Over the next four years, IFEX consolidated its structure, built outreach programs, and established a web presence. By 2007 IFEX had established strategic free expression campaigns and programmes, and IFEX has over 120 network members located in 62 countries worldwide.

==Operations==
The day-to-day operations of the organisation are run by the IFEX Secretariat based in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

IFEX&#x27;s mandate is to raise awareness by sharing information online and mobilising action on issues such as press freedom, Internet censorship, freedom of information legislation, criminal defamation and insult laws, media concentration and attacks on the free expression rights of all people, including journalists, writers, artists, musicians, filmmakers, academics, scientists, human rights defenders and Internet users.

==Campaigns and advocacy==
IFEX works with its members by creating and participating in advocacy coalitions and working groups and releasing joint statements and petitions.

In 2011, IFEX launched the International Day to End Impunity campaign. In 2013, the United Nations designated 2 November as the International Day to End Impunity for Crimes Against Journalists. 
The Tunisia Monitoring Group (IFEX-TMG), launched in 2004 by 21 IFEX members to raise awareness of censorship and other human rights violations in Tunisia, is IFEX&#x27;s largest campaign to date. IFEX-TMG was dissolved in January 2013 in response to improved conditions for local NGOs, media independence and free expression rights.

In 2015, Francisco Medina, brother of two journalists murdered in Paraguay in 1997, went before the United Nations (UN) to speak out against the &quot;deterioration of freedom of expression in his country&quot;. The deputy executive director of IFEX, Rachael Kay, also attended in support of Medina.

To mark the 2020 International Day to End Impunity on 2 November 2020, IFEX launched its Faces of Free Expression illustration series, profiling over 90 free-expression advocates working in countries across the globe. The Pittsburgh, US-based nonprofit International Free Expression Project created a physical exhibit of the series in Pittsburgh to celebrate the 2021 World Press Freedom Day on 3 May 2021. The exhibit ran until 4 July 2021.

==Online information==
IFEX brings attention to free expression stories and events through its website, e-newsletters and special reports. The content is available in multiple languages (English, French, Spanish and Arabic), and addresses pressing free expression stories. The website hosts a searchable online archive of free expression violations going back to 1995.

==See also==
* Freedom of speech
* Freedom of the press
* Internet censorship

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1666589" start="0" end="4" title="IFEX (organization)" label="IFEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666589" start="15" end="59" title="IFEX (organization)" label="International Freedom of Expression Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="110" end="139" title="non-governmental organisation" label="non-governmental organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="228" end="249" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="255" end="266" title="human right" label="human right"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="316" end="324" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955316" start="578" end="618" title="Canadian Journalists for Free Expression" label="Canadian Journalists for Free Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="1133" end="1146" title="press freedom" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="1148" end="1167" title="Internet censorship" label="Internet censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q329497" start="1169" end="1203" title="freedom of information legislation" label="freedom of information legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="1214" end="1224" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q571571" start="1229" end="1235" title="insult" label="insult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="1242" end="1261" title="media concentration" label="media concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476215" start="1406" end="1427" title="human rights defender" label="human rights defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050084" start="1651" end="1684" title="International Day to End Impunity for Crimes Against Journalists" label="International Day to End Impunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117790" start="1823" end="1847" title="Tunisia Monitoring Group" label="Tunisia Monitoring Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="1966" end="1973" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017523" start="2106" end="2124" title="media independence" label="media independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050084" start="2472" end="2505" title="International Day to End Impunity for Crimes Against Journalists" label="International Day to End Impunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="2677" end="2687" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2708" end="2745" title="International Free Expression Project" label="International Free Expression Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q592588" start="2823" end="2846" title="World Press Freedom Day" label="World Press Freedom Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="3283" end="3300" title="Freedom of speech" label="Freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="3303" end="3323" title="Freedom of the press" label="Freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="3326" end="3345" title="Internet censorship" label="Internet censorship"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706677" wikidata="Q6595967" url="?curid=706677" title="Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police">
<text>The commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police () is the professional head of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP). The commissioner exercises control and management of the RCMP under the direction of the minister of public safety. The position is a Governor in Council appointment made on the advice of the prime minister of Canada.

In addition to his or her role in the management of the RCMP, the commissioner serves as Principal Commander of the Order of Merit of the Police Forces. Under the &quot;Firearms Act&quot;, the RCMP commissioner also serves as the commissioner of firearms, the chief executive of the Canadian Firearms Program.

Michael Duheme is the 25th commissioner of the RCMP, having taken office in an interim capacity on March 17, 2023, and permanently as of the Change Command ceremony held on May 25, 2023.

Queen Elizabeth II was commissioner-in-chief from 2012 to 2022, and King Charles III was honorary commissioner of the RCMP from 2012 until 2023. In recognition of the RCMP&#x27;s 150th anniversary and the upcoming coronation, on April 28, 2023, King Charles III consented to assume the title of the RCMP Commissioner-in-Chief. However, neither appointment (commissioner-in-chief or honorary commissioner) exercises a substantive role in the operation of the organization.

==List of commissioners==
There have been 25 commissioners, including one acting commissioners and one interim commissioner, and excluding one unofficial acting commissioner since the founding of the North-West Mounted Police in 1873: 
==References==
== External links ==
* RCMP Executive Committee
* Former RCMP commissioners
* Diary of Commissioner George French</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6595967" start="4" end="53" title="Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="89" end="118" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q131535190" start="216" end="241" title="Minister of Public Safety" label="minister of public safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="261" end="280" title="Governor-in-Council" label="Governor in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="319" end="343" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="prime minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q94141" start="462" end="497" title="Order of Merit of the Police Forces" label="Order of Merit of the Police Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595967" start="576" end="600" title="Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="commissioner of firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030002" start="629" end="654" title="Canadian Firearms Program" label="Canadian Firearms Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q118709937" start="657" end="671" title="Michael Duheme" label="Michael Duheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="845" end="863" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="913" end="929" title="King Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706710" wikidata="Q5506818" url="?curid=706710" title="Ftn (TV channel)">
<text>FTN (Flextech Television Network) was a television channel owned by Virgin Media Television (formerly known as Flextech). The channel&#x27;s main purpose was to exist as a highlights network for Flextech to showcase Freeview viewers the programmes from their paid channels, although it also aired its own programming.

It originally launched on 15 January 2003, airing from 6:00pm-6:00am as it timeshared with UKTV Bright Ideas. It also transitioned on Virgin Media, and as a subscription channel on Sky.

== History ==
The channel was announced on 3 October 2002 as part of a preparation of networks on the Freeview service. The channel&#x27;s initial launch programming was announced on 1 January 2003, with a launch prepared for the 15th.

FTN +1 launched on Sky and Virgin Media on 9 August 2007. Despite being a one-hour timeshift, FTN +1 only broadcast from 7 pm until 1 am, as &quot;Live Roulette TV&quot; which broadcast on FTN from 12 am to 3 am, couldn&#x27;t be rebroadcast one hour later, for legal reasons.

It was announced in the summer of 2007 that Virgin Media Television was to launch a new channel, Virgin 1. The new channel launches on . The channel was Virgin Media&#x27;s attempt to rival Sky One.

As a result of this new channel, it was revealed the Ftn would close, leaving its EPG positions on Sky, Virgin Media and Freeview to Virgin 1.

Ftn closed at 6 am on Monday 1 October 2007, with Virgin 1 launching at 9:00 pm on the same day.

==Programming==
FTN&#x27;s schedule featured entertainment and reality programming, and also programming from other Virgin Media Television cable channels, such as Living, Living2, Bravo, Bravo 2, Trouble, and Challenge. This provided a preview to Freeview viewers of what the Virgin Media channels offered, in a similar fashion to BSkyB&#x27;s Sky Three, a channel which was also on Freeview.

==Participation TV==
Previously &quot;The Great Big British Quiz&quot; broadcast nightly between the hours of 00:00 and 03:00am. (&quot;Big Game TV&quot; took this spot until April 2007) Between November 2005 and November 2006 &quot;Quiz Night Live&quot; broadcast from 22.00 - 01.00 daily only to be replaced by Ostrich Media&#x27;s &quot;Quiz Call&quot; which ceased broadcasting on FTN on 1 January 2007.

In June 2007, &quot;Live Roulette TV&quot; began broadcasting on FTN between the hours of midnight and 03:00am.

==References== </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5506818" start="0" end="3" title="Ftn (TV channel)" label="FTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506818" start="5" end="32" title="Ftn (TV channel)" label="Flextech Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001305" start="40" end="58" title="television channel" label="television channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659302" start="68" end="91" title="Living TV Group" label="Virgin Media Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156823" start="216" end="224" title="Freeview (UK)" label="Freeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q11871462" start="410" end="427" title="UKTV Bright Ideas" label="UKTV Bright Ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199764" start="453" end="465" title="Virgin Media" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="500" end="503" title="Sky UK" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072436" start="1118" end="1126" title="Channel One (British and Irish TV channel)" label="Virgin 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q909662" start="1211" end="1218" title="Sky One" label="Sky One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072436" start="1415" end="1423" title="Channel One (British and Irish TV channel)" label="Virgin 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659302" start="1579" end="1602" title="Living TV Group" label="Virgin Media Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132337" start="1627" end="1633" title="Sky Witness" label="Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537398" start="1635" end="1642" title="Real Lives (TV channel)" label="Living2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924139" start="1644" end="1649" title="Bravo (British TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958443" start="1651" end="1658" title="Bravo 2" label="Bravo 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846398" start="1660" end="1667" title="Trouble (TV channel)" label="Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068886" start="1673" end="1682" title="Challenge (TV channel)" label="Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="1795" end="1800" title="Sky UK" label="BSkyB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289316" start="1808" end="1817" title="Pick (TV channel)" label="Sky Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737663" start="1896" end="1922" title="The Great Big British Quiz" label="The Great Big British Quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905756" start="1994" end="2005" title="Big Game TV" label="Big Game TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272702" start="2198" end="2207" title="Quiz Call" label="Quiz Call"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706713" wikidata="Q3176321" url="?curid=706713" title="Jeans (film)">
<text>Jeans is a 1998 Indian Tamil-language romantic comedy film directed by S. Shankar, and produced by Ashok Amritraj and Murali Manohar. The film stars Prashanth and Aishwarya Rai, while Lakshmi, Radhika Sarathkumar, Nassar, Senthil and Raju Sundaram play supporting roles. The background score and soundtrack were composed by A. R. Rahman, while Ashok Kumar and the duo B. Lenin and V. T. Vijayan handled the cinematography and editing, respectively.

&quot;Jeans&quot; had a wide release on 24 April 1998 and was the most expensive film to be made in Indian cinema at that time. The film won four Tamil Nadu State Film Awards, the Filmfare Award for Best Music Director – Tamil (Rahman) and the National Film Award for Best Special Effects. It was also India&#x27;s official submission for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.

== Plot ==
Nachiappan is a widowed, wealthy, and successful Indian American restaurateur based in Los Angeles. He has two sons – Viswanathan &quot;Visu&quot; and Ramamoorthy &quot;Ramu&quot; – who are identical twins. They both are medical students and spend their evenings helping out their father alongside the restaurant&#x27;s chief cook, Juno. One evening, when Visu &amp; Ramu go to the airport to do their lunch supply, Visu sees an Indian Tamil family from Chennai – Madhumitha &quot;Madhu&quot;, her younger brother Madhesh, and their grandmother Krishnaveni – having some problems with the immigration authorities. Visu pitches in to help and learns that they just flew in from India so that Krishnaveny can undergo a surgery to remove her brain tumour. After many confusions, the trio meets with Ramu also. The twins arrange for the three to reach their host.

Krishnaveni is admitted in the hospital where Visu works as a resident doctor and the surgery is performed. Visu soon realises that Krishnaveni is paralysed as she was operated on the wrong side of her brain due to a mix-up with another patient. He appeals aggressively to the doctors and has the error corrected by another surgery, then spearheads an angry fight for compensation. The hospital compensates US$2 million to avoid a court case. Due to these actions, Madhu soon falls in love with Visu.

Krishnaveni soon realises that Madhu and Visu are in love and extends the family&#x27;s stay in the US. However, Nachiappan objects to the romance as he wants his sons to marry identical twin girls. In a flashback, it is shown that Nachiappan had an identical twin brother Pechiappan, who lives in Karaikudi and is a simpleton. They both married for love in their youth, but Pechiappan&#x27;s wife Sundarambal tortured and abused Nachiappan&#x27;s pregnant wife Meiyaththa so badly that the latter died after giving birth to Visu and Ramu. Nachiappan eventually left the house along with Visu and Ramu to prevent Pechiappan and Sundarambal from separating over Meiyaththa&#x27;s death.

Krishnaveni decides to solve the problem by lying to Nachiappan that Madhu does have an identical twin named Vaishnavi, who was raised separately in an orthodox Brahmin household. The reason for their separation is claimed that &quot;having twins would bring bad luck on their family&quot;. Nachiappan falls for the lie and leaves for India along with Visu, Ramu, Juno, Krishnaveni, Madhu and Madhesh in order to &quot;meet&quot; Vaishnavi and fix the marriages of Visu and Ramu with Madhu and Vaishnavi respectively. Krishnaveni has Madhu pose as Vaishnavi, who contrary to Madhu, is very demure and traditional in nature. Ramu immediately falls in love with Vaishnavi, unaware that she is Madhu. Meanwhile, Pechiappan, whose marriage with Sundarambal has worsened due to the latter&#x27;s inability to have children, attempts suicide. Nachiappan rescues him and hatches a plan to unite both the families through Visu&#x27;s and Ramu&#x27;s marriage plan. Nachiappan impersonates Pechiappan and leaves for Karaikudi, where with his business sense and practical nature, he rescues Pechiappan&#x27;s failing restaurant business and eventually reforms Sundarambal as well. Pechiappan takes Nachiappan&#x27;s place and stays with Visu and Ramu.

Eventually, Madhu, realising that Ramu is madly in love with her alter-ego, decides to stop acting as Vaishnavi as she feels she is hurting Ramu&#x27;s as well as Visu&#x27;s feelings through her act. Visu too finds out in parallel that Vaishnavi does not exist. He then yells at Madhu and Lakshmi for deceiving him and subsequently immediately leave Madhu&#x27;s house along with his family, but Ramu tells him that Madhu had lied due to her love for him and convinces him to reconcile with her. Ramu further manages to convince his father, unaware that he is his uncle Pechiappan, to get Visu and Madhu married. When Nachiappan realises the truth and finds out that Visu and Madhu are getting married, he immediately rushes to Chennai with Sundarambal and stops the wedding. At this point, it is revealed that both Nachiappan and Pechiappan had impersonated each other in order to reunite both the families. Sundarambal manages to convince Nachiappan to get Visu and Madhu married since Madhu, by posing as Vaishnavi, had done the same thing that Nachiappan and Pechiappan did. Visu and Madhu get married. Later, at their reception, Madhesh entertains the couple and guests with computer-generated special effects.

== Cast ==
== Production ==

=== Development ===

Made on a then-record budget of , the film was completed in a year and a half. &quot;Jeans&quot;, unlike Shankar&#x27;s other films, was the first to be shot outside of India for major portions of the film. The producers of the film were Ashok Amritraj and J. Murali Manohar, both of whom made their Tamil film debuts with &quot;Jeans&quot;. Amritraj did not work on any Tamil film afterwards. The film reunited Shankar with his award-winning technical crew from his previous film &quot;Indian&quot;, whilst the cast was finalised by him after he had completed the story.

A difference of opinion exists regarding how the film got its name. According to Amritraj, the title &quot;Jeans&quot; was selected due to being a homophone of &quot;genes&quot;, and &quot;seem[ed] very appropriate to the movie&quot;, while Shankar said, &quot;Young people are associated with denim wear and so &quot;Jeans&quot; is an apt title&quot;.

The film&#x27;s launch was held at the AVM Studios in Vadapalani, Chennai in December 1996. The &quot;Jeans&quot; invitation was printed, wrapped in denim and hand-delivered by Shankar to his close colleagues and friends in Chennai, which included prominent actors in the Tamil film industry. The cast and crew of the film wore their favourite pair of blue jeans to the launch, as requested by the film&#x27;s producers.

=== Casting ===
The original actor considered for the dual roles of Viswanathan and Ramamoorthy was Abbas, who rejected the project citing that his dates were booked for the full year of 1997. The second choice for the lead role, Ajith Kumar, also opted out due to call sheet problems. The role eventually went to Prashanth, who sacrificed seven films in the process, and chose to work exclusively on the project during the period. Aishwarya Rai, Miss World 1994, was the original choice for the roles of Madhumitha and Vaishnavi and collaborated with Shankar after she had been unable to work with him in his previous venture &quot;Indian&quot;. Rai initially attempted to dub in her own voice, but was later dubbed over by Savitha Radhakrishnan. The supporting cast included Senthil and Raju Sundaram, with the latter making his debut as an actor. Prominent supporting actresses Lakshmi and Radhika were signed up for the film, whilst Geetha agreed to appear in a guest appearance. Another supporting role was taken by S. Ve. Sekhar after playback singer S. P. Balasubrahmanyam opted out of the role. Shankar wanted Goundamani to appear in a dual role, but due to the actor&#x27;s unavailability, the genre of the film was changed from comedy to romance; the roles offered to Goundamani went to Nassar.

The other substitution in the project involved the cinematographer. Despite reports that Shankar would again sign-on Jeeva, whom he had worked within &quot;Kadhalan&quot;, &quot;Gentleman&quot; and &quot;Indian&quot;, Santhosh Sivan was announced as the cinematographer for the film. Though between the time of the announcement and the finishing stages of the film, cinematographer Ashok Kumar was publicised as the official cinematographer for the film. In mid-1997, the Film Employees Federation of South India (FEFSI) went on strike and in the midst of this, the film&#x27;s art director Thota Tharani, a FEFSI supporter, refused to sacrifice his position in FEFSI and stopped working in &quot;Jeans&quot;. Without much choice, Shankar signed a newcomer Bala to take over the set design and artwork for the film. The film&#x27;s art direction is credited to both Thota Tharani and Bala. S. T. Venky was signed up to deal with the special effects in the film, with &quot;Jeans&quot;. The film also was assisted in graphics effects created by Pentafour Software.

=== Filming ===

The actual present scenes of the story are filmed in United States and few Tamil Nadu cities especially in Chennai, Karaikudi and Madurai. the fantasy song scenes set in the United States, the team toured various American cities with a tour party of 35 technicians, including eight from Hollywood. The initial scenes of the Nachiyappan family&#x27;s catering company were filmed in Las Vegas, whilst other scenes were shot in California at the Universal Studios, where the shooting of foreign films is usually not permitted. However, with influence from the film&#x27;s producer Ashok Amritraj they were able to obtain special permission to film a few scenes inside. Besides the King Kong set, &quot;Jeans&quot; was also shot in the &quot;simulated earthquake experience&quot; sets.

The filming in Los Angeles received much publicity as well as the filming at the Grand Canyon in Arizona. Other &quot;Jeans&quot; shooting locations in the United States of America included the Valley of Fire, Manhattan Beach, Malibu Lake and many scenic spots throughout California. The song &quot;Columbus&quot; was picturised as it at the shores of Venice Beach, California with some foreign male and female dancers. Shankar also filmed in New Jersey and New York City at the World Trade Center when co-producer Michael Salomon and his wife, Luciana Paluzzi visited the sets of &quot;Jeans&quot;. The subplot about a botched brain surgery was noted by some critics to have been inspired by a true incident involving actress Sridevi&#x27;s mother, though the makers did not confirm this.

After a 45-day schedule in the United States, Shankar and the team returned to India to film a couple of scenes in the climax. The team then visited several other countries to picturise the song &quot;Poovukkul&quot;, with featured scenes with seven prominent buildings in the world, dubbing Rai as the &quot;eighth wonder of the world&quot;. Shankar admitted that due to no real list being present, thought had been put into which wonders were selected. The team made a thirty-day trip around the world stopping to can scenes at the Leaning Tower of Pisa, the Empire State Building, the Great Wall of China, the Taj Mahal, the Egyptian pyramids, the Colosseum and the Eiffel Tower. Prashanth&#x27;s costumes for this song were designed by Anu Parthasarathy.

During the shooting in Paris, Diana, Princess of Wales had died and shooting was delayed as a result of her death. The team initially wanted to capture a top angle shot of the Statue of Liberty which got cancelled due to snowfalls in afternoon. For the song &quot;Anbe Anbe&quot;, Kasi designed the costumes of Rai based on the paintings drawn by Raja Ravi Varma as suggested by Shankar. That song was shot on an elaborate set with hundreds of actors and according to Ashok Kumar, &quot;Ten generators were put to use, and we did special lighting, deliberately exaggerating the reds, yellows and blues with fog and smoke effects&quot;. Three weeks prior to the release of the film, on 1 April 1998 a screening was held labelled the &quot;Making of Jeans&quot; with prominent personalities invited; however, the short film showed the real manufacture of jeans courtesy of a company named Diana Garments. The prank was claimed by a Tamil journal who utilised an April Fools joke.

== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack of &quot;Jeans&quot; was composed by A. R. Rahman, with lyrics by Vairamuthu. The song &quot;Anbe Anbe&quot; is set to the raga Kapi, &quot;Kannodu Kanbathellam&quot; is set to Abheri, &quot;Poovukkul&quot; is set to Sankarabharanam, and &quot;Varayo Thozhi&quot; is set to Mohanam. The audio launch took place in March 1998. To make the audio cassettes more &quot;elegant and memorable&quot;, cassette store owners were told to wrap the cassettes in jeans clothing before giving them to customers.



== Release ==

&quot;Jeans&quot; had a limited release on 14 April 1998, and a wide release on 24 April. With 240 prints, it holds the 1998 record for a Tamil film. The team also released 35 prints of the film in Malaysia, a record at the time. The film completed 100 days of screening in the theatres in the state of Tamil Nadu, and the Tamil version was commercially successful. Shankar later revealed that the film&#x27;s box office performance improved with time. The film performed well in Malaysia, running for over 100 days in cinemas. The film was dubbed in Telugu as &quot;Jeans&quot; and released on 9 May 1998, which was also commercially successful. The film was later dubbed that same year and released in Hindi under the same title, which performed poorly at the Mumbai box office.
=== Critical reception ===
Rajitha from &quot;Rediff.com&quot; praised the characters of Prashanth, Aishwarya Rai and Nassar as &quot;ever dependable&quot;, whilst singling out praise for Radhika whom she describes that &quot; with her startling cameo, sweeps the acting honours&quot;. The reviewer praised the technical crew describing Venky&#x27;s FX as a &quot;virtual reality&quot;, Ashok Kumar&#x27;s cinematography as &quot;throughout and outstanding&quot;, Raju Sundaram&#x27;s choreography as &quot;memorable&quot; and A. R. Rahman&#x27;s score as &quot;entirely hummable&quot;. Shankar&#x27;s directorial attributes were described to be to a &quot;perfect flow of narrative and a penchant for demanding and getting perfection out of every element of his cast and crew&quot; and that the film was an &quot;easy fit&quot;. V. Maheshwara Reddy of &quot;The Indian Express&quot; called the film a &quot;hilarious comedy&quot; and drew significant praise to the performance of Aishwarya Rai and the music of Rahman.

D. S. Ramanujam of &quot;The Hindu&quot; said, &quot;Many historic landmarks in the world are captured, and director Shanker employs all these factors gainfully in Amritraj Solomon Communications&#x27; &quot;Jeans&quot;, but gives a go-by to the storyline (story and screenplay are also his)&quot;. VRR of &quot;Deccan Herald&quot; described the film as a &quot;colossal waste&quot;, criticising Shankar&#x27;s story and direction and the performances of Prashanth and Lakshmi. R. P. R. of &quot;Kalki&quot; wrote Shankar in this film may have understood how the story can get bogged down if there is too much desire to scare with grandeur and felt love between Prashanth and Aishwarya and relationship between brothers has been needlessly dragged though he praised Rahman&#x27;s music; however he felt the cinematographer failed to capture locations thrillingly.
=== Accolades ===
&quot;Jeans&quot; was submitted by India as its entry for the Best Foreign Language Film for the 71st Academy Awards, but did not make the final shortlist. The decision to submit &quot;Jeans&quot; met with widespread criticism as it was seen as a populist film. The film won four Tamil Nadu State Film Awards: Best Comedian (Senthil), Best Female Playback Singer (Nithyasree Mahadevan), Best Choreographer (Raju Sundaram) and Best Costume Designer (Kasi). It also won the Filmfare Award for Best Music Director – Tamil (Rahman), and the National Film Award for Best Special Effects.

== Possible sequel ==
In November 2013, Prashanth announced that he had registered the title &quot;Jeans 2&quot; and was completing the pre-production works of a sequel to the 1998 film. The film was set to be directed and produced by Prashanth&#x27;s father Thiagarajan, who revealed that production would begin in May 2014 and that they were trying to bring members of the original team back for the venture. In January 2014, Ashok Amritraj stated that he was not involved in the sequel and questioned the viability of the project, citing that he did not believe that Prashanth and his father had the rights to make a sequel. In February 2016, Prashanth reaffirmed that the sequel was in development.

== See also ==
* List of submissions to the 71st Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film

== References ==
== Bibliography ==

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="23" end="28" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="38" end="53" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156039" start="71" end="81" title="S. Shankar" label="S. Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350423" start="99" end="113" title="Ashok Amritraj" label="Ashok Amritraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638823" start="118" end="132" title="Sunanda Murali Manohar" label="Murali Manohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534190" start="149" end="158" title="Prashanth" label="Prashanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q47059" start="163" end="176" title="Aishwarya Rai Bachchan" label="Aishwarya Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q277698" start="184" end="191" title="Lakshmi (actress)" label="Lakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522039" start="193" end="212" title="Radhika Sarathkumar" label="Radhika Sarathkumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521977" start="214" end="220" title="Nassar (actor)" label="Nassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536358" start="222" end="229" title="Senthil" label="Senthil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286479" start="234" end="247" title="Raju Sundaram" label="Raju Sundaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="324" end="336" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200868" start="344" end="355" title="Ashok Kumar (cinematographer)" label="Ashok Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834096" start="368" end="376" title="B. Lenin" label="B. Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906274" start="381" end="394" title="V. T. Vijayan" label="V. T. Vijayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891449" start="516" end="563" title="List of most expensive Indian films" label="most expensive film to be made in Indian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681353" start="596" end="624" title="Tamil Nadu State Film Awards" label="Tamil Nadu State Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="630" end="676" title="Filmfare Award for Best Music Director – Tamil" label="Filmfare Award for Best Music Director – Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q143430" start="694" end="738" title="National Film Award for Best Special Effects" label="National Film Award for Best Special Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116900" start="765" end="784" title="List of Indian submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film" label="official submission"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="793" end="837" title="Academy Award for Best International Feature Film" label="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="900" end="915" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="1229" end="1240" title="Los Angeles International Airport" label="the airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="1305" end="1312" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q256698" start="1774" end="1789" title="Residency (medicine)" label="resident doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023693" start="2512" end="2521" title="Karaikudi" label="Karaikudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350423" start="5650" end="5664" title="Ashok Amritraj" label="Ashok Amritraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638823" start="5669" end="5686" title="Sunanda Murali Manohar" label="J. Murali Manohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q926324" start="5712" end="5722" title="Tamil cinema" label="Tamil film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111799" start="5899" end="5905" title="Indian (1996 film)" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="6132" end="6141" title="homophone" label="homophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523697" start="6378" end="6381" title="AVM Productions" label="AVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537400" start="6393" end="6403" title="Vadapalani" label="Vadapalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="6405" end="6412" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q312092" start="6861" end="6866" title="Abbas (actor)" label="Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q339896" start="6991" end="7002" title="Ajith Kumar" label="Ajith Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635649" start="7208" end="7223" title="Miss World 1994" label="Miss World 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111799" start="7394" end="7400" title="Indian (1996 film)" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428358" start="7486" end="7507" title="Savitha Radhakrishnan" label="Savitha Radhakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536358" start="7538" end="7545" title="Senthil" label="Senthil"/>
<link wikidata="Q277698" start="7642" end="7649" title="Lakshmi (actress)" label="Lakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522039" start="7654" end="7661" title="Radhika Sarathkumar" label="Radhika"/>
<link wikidata="Q277336" start="7698" end="7704" title="Geetha (actress)" label="Geetha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387964" start="7782" end="7795" title="S. Ve. Sekhar" label="S. Ve. Sekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049688" start="7818" end="7840" title="S. P. Balasubrahmanyam" label="S. P. Balasubrahmanyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522069" start="7879" end="7889" title="Goundamani" label="Goundamani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173025" start="8184" end="8189" title="Jeeva (director)" label="Jeeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615641" start="8285" end="8299" title="Santhosh Sivan" label="Santhosh Sivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200868" start="8449" end="8460" title="Ashok Kumar (cinematographer)" label="Ashok Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052888" start="8539" end="8579" title="Film Employees Federation of South India" label="Film Employees Federation of South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763990" start="8658" end="8671" title="Thota Tharani" label="Thota Tharani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374896" start="9111" end="9129" title="Pentamedia Graphics" label="Pentafour Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="9224" end="9234" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="9256" end="9263" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023693" start="9265" end="9274" title="Karaikudi" label="Karaikudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="9279" end="9286" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="9436" end="9445" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="9531" end="9540" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="9593" end="9610" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="9828" end="9837" title="King Kong" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q118841" start="10014" end="10026" title="Grand Canyon" label="Grand Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="10030" end="10037" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q920014" start="10127" end="10141" title="Valley of Fire" label="Valley of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q568610" start="10143" end="10158" title="Manhattan Beach, California" label="Manhattan Beach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10285" end="10297" title="Venice, Los Angeles#Venice Beach" label="Venice Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="10376" end="10386" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="10412" end="10430" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q437806" start="10478" end="10493" title="Luciana Paluzzi" label="Luciana Paluzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270691" start="10660" end="10667" title="Sridevi" label="Sridevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228913" start="10925" end="10934" title="Poovukkul" label="Poovukkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265619" start="11033" end="11059" title="Eighth Wonder of the World" label="eighth wonder of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q39054" start="11258" end="11279" title="Leaning Tower of Pisa" label="Leaning Tower of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="11285" end="11306" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="11312" end="11331" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141" start="11337" end="11346" title="Taj Mahal" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q175582" start="11352" end="11369" title="Egyptian pyramids" label="Egyptian pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="11375" end="11384" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="11393" end="11405" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q101413222" start="11464" end="11481" title="Anu Parthasarathy" label="Anu Parthasarathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="11514" end="11538" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193276" start="11543" end="11547" title="Death of Diana, Princess of Wales" label="died"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="11660" end="11677" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q333453" start="11831" end="11846" title="Raja Ravi Varma" label="Raja Ravi Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="12444" end="12455" title="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day" label="April Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="12532" end="12544" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522642" start="12561" end="12571" title="Vairamuthu" label="Vairamuthu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366590" start="12623" end="12627" title="Kapi (raga)" label="Kapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429246" start="12672" end="12678" title="Abheri" label="Abheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522322" start="12712" end="12727" title="Sankarabharanam (raga)" label="Sankarabharanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893630" start="12769" end="12776" title="Mohanam" label="Mohanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="13315" end="13325" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q140676" start="13839" end="13849" title="Rediff.com" label="Rediff.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954843" start="14652" end="14670" title="The Indian Express" label="The Indian Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q926175" start="14839" end="14848" title="The Hindu" label="The Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181753" start="15126" end="15139" title="Deccan Herald" label="Deccan Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353406" start="15310" end="15315" title="Kalki (magazine)" label="Kalki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116900" start="15718" end="15749" title="List of Indian submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film" label="submitted by India as its entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="15758" end="15784" title="Academy Award for Best International Feature Film" label="Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q263239" start="15793" end="15812" title="71st Academy Awards" label="71st Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681353" start="15976" end="16004" title="Tamil Nadu State Film Awards" label="Tamil Nadu State Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16168" end="16214" title="Filmfare Award for Best Music Director – Tamil" label="Filmfare Award for Best Music Director – Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q143430" start="16233" end="16277" title="National Film Award for Best Special Effects" label="National Film Award for Best Special Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799555" start="16539" end="16550" title="Thiagarajan" label="Thiagarajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641710" start="17001" end="17078" title="List of submissions to the 71st Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film" label="List of submissions to the 71st Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706717" wikidata="Q4866452" url="?curid=706717" title="1937 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting">
<text>The 1937 process of selecting inductees to the Baseball Hall of Fame was markedly different from the initial elections the previous year. As only half of the initial goal of 10 inductees had been selected in 1936, members of the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America (BBWAA) were once again given authority to select any players active in the 20th century; but the unsuccessful 1936 Veterans Committee election for 19th-century players led to a smaller Centennial Commission choosing a handful of inductees whose contributions were largely as non-players.

In the BBWAA election, voters were again instructed to cast votes for 10 candidates, but were now discouraged from casting votes for active players, although some player-managers whose playing days were largely over, such as Rogers Hornsby, received votes. Any candidate receiving votes on at least 75% of the ballots would be honored with induction to the Hall upon its opening in the sport&#x27;s supposed centennial year of 1939. Again, individuals who had been barred from baseball were not formally ineligible; Hal Chase received some votes, although Shoeless Joe Jackson did not. Balloting by the BBWAA resulted in the election of three players: Nap Lajoie, Tris Speaker, and Cy Young.

==BBWAA vote==
A total of 201 ballots were cast, with 1,949 individual votes for 113 specific candidates, an average of 9.70 per ballot; 151 votes were required for election. Selections were announced on January 19, 1937. The three candidates who received at least 75% of the vote and were elected are indicated in bold italics; candidates who have since been selected in subsequent elections are indicated in &quot;italics&quot;.




==Centennial Commission==
After the error-ridden 1936 Veterans election failed to select any 19th-century players, the Hall opted in 1937 to have a small committee select inductees &quot;for outstanding service to base ball apart from playing the game.&quot; The Commission&#x27;s members were: Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis; National League president Ford Frick; American League president Will Harridge; Judge William G. Bramham, president of the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues (the minor league overseeing body); former NL president John Heydler; and George Trautman, president of the minor league American Association and chairman of the National Association&#x27;s executive committee. At the December 1937 major league winter meetings in Chicago, Frick announced that the Commission had elected five people. The selections were:

*Connie Mack and John McGraw, who had been excellent players in the 1890s and had gone on to be the winningest managers in their respective leagues – Mack with nine American League pennants and five World Series titles, and McGraw with ten National League pennants and three World Series titles;
*Morgan Bulkeley, the NL&#x27;s first president (1876), and Byron &quot;Ban&quot; Johnson, the AL&#x27;s founder and first president (1900–1927); and
*George Wright, who formed baseball&#x27;s first professional team in 1869 and became the game&#x27;s first outstanding shortstop. He was also a successful manager and led a number of global barnstorming tours.

Of the five selectees, only Mack was still living when the selections were made.

==References==
==External links==
*1937 Election at www.baseballhalloffame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q980964" start="4" end="8" title="1937 in sports" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="47" end="68" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866451" start="97" end="118" title="Baseball Hall of Fame balloting, 1936" label="the initial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="229" end="274" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521285" start="391" end="409" title="Veterans Committee" label="Veterans Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q379533" start="728" end="742" title="player-manager" label="player-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q262945" start="790" end="804" title="Rogers Hornsby" label="Rogers Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640726" start="1081" end="1090" title="Hal Chase" label="Hal Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q955322" start="1121" end="1141" title="Shoeless Joe Jackson" label="Shoeless Joe Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335869" start="1217" end="1227" title="Nap Lajoie" label="Nap Lajoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205542" start="1229" end="1241" title="Tris Speaker" label="Tris Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="1247" end="1255" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106481" start="2001" end="2024" title="Kenesaw Mountain Landis" label="Kenesaw Mountain Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="2026" end="2041" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077090" start="2052" end="2062" title="Ford Frick" label="Ford Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="2064" end="2079" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568684" start="2090" end="2103" title="Will Harridge" label="Will Harridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664203" start="2111" end="2129" title="William G. Bramham" label="William G. Bramham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239162" start="2258" end="2270" title="John Heydler" label="John Heydler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545300" start="2276" end="2291" title="George Trautman" label="George Trautman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867334" start="2323" end="2343" title="American Association (20th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126349" start="2559" end="2570" title="Connie Mack" label="Connie Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q712153" start="2575" end="2586" title="John McGraw" label="John McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186921" start="2669" end="2677" title="manager (baseball)" label="managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="2723" end="2738" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="2757" end="2769" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="2798" end="2813" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q888580" start="2855" end="2870" title="Morgan G. Bulkeley" label="Morgan Bulkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q766590" start="2914" end="2943" title="Ban Johnson" label="Byron &amp;quot;Ban&amp;quot; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252827" start="3005" end="3018" title="George Wright (sportsman)" label="George Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115062" start="3074" end="3078" title="1869 in sports" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="3124" end="3133" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706718" wikidata="Q2289943" url="?curid=706718" title="La Roue, Brussels">
<text>&#x27; (French, ) or &#x27; (Dutch, ), meaning &quot;The Wheel&quot;, is a district of Anderlecht, a municipality of Brussels, Belgium. Located in the south of Anderlecht, it is one of this municipality&#x27;s largest districts of and one of Brussels&#x27; main garden cities. Built in the 1920s, with its modest and picturesque houses, it offers a great vision of an early 20th-century working class neighbourhood. It is also home to one of the largest agribusiness industry campuses in Belgium: the Food and Chemical Industries Education and Research Center (CERIA/COOVI), as well as popular department stores.

The district is crossed by the last end of the / in Brussels, and is bounded to the east by the Brussels–Charleroi Canal and to the south by the Flemish municipality of Sint-Pieters-Leeuw, in the Pajottenland. It is served by the metro stations Bizet, La Roue/Het Rad and CERIA/COOVI on line 5.

==Sights==
* The Church of St. Joseph, an Art Deco Roman Catholic church built in 1938–39
* The Food and Chemical Industries Education and Research Center (CERIA/COOVI)
* The headquarters of Coca-Cola Belgium and Luxembourg, at 1424, /

==See also==

* History of Brussels

==References==
==External links==
* La Roue — quartier historique, a unique document about La Roue/Het Rad by Florent Van Hoey, November 1984 (PDF)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8" end="14" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="29" end="34" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12886" start="87" end="97" title="Anderlecht" label="Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q678140" start="101" end="113" title="List of municipalities of the Brussels-Capital Region" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="117" end="125" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="262" end="275" title="Garden city movement" label="garden cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="387" end="400" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="454" end="466" title="agribusiness" label="agribusiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723575" start="710" end="734" title="Brussels–Charleroi Canal" label="Brussels–Charleroi Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="759" end="766" title="Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q688790" start="783" end="801" title="Sint-Pieters-Leeuw" label="Sint-Pieters-Leeuw"/>
<link wikidata="Q640303" start="810" end="822" title="Pajottenland" label="Pajottenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q506298" start="844" end="849" title="Brussels Metro" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132820" start="859" end="864" title="Bizet metro station" label="Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q745104" start="866" end="881" title="La Roue/Het Rad metro station" label="La Roue/Het Rad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931286" start="886" end="897" title="CERIA/COOVI metro station" label="CERIA/COOVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q957143" start="901" end="907" title="Brussels Metro line 5" label="line 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="952" end="960" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="961" end="975" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="1101" end="1110" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1163" end="1182" title="History of Brussels" label="History of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="1327" end="1330" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706728" wikidata="Q1395496" url="?curid=706728" title="Robert Abbott (game designer)">
<text>Robert Abbott (March 2, 1933February 20, 2018) was an American game inventor, sometimes referred to by fans as &quot;The Official Grand Old Man of Card Games&quot;. Though early in his life he worked as a computer programmer with the IBM 360 assembly language, he began designing games in the 1950s.

Two of his more popular creations include the chess variant Baroque chess (also known as Ultima) and Crossings, which later became Epaminondas. Eleusis was also successful, appearing in several card game collections, such as &quot;Hoyle&#x27;s Rules of Games&quot; and &quot;New Rules for Classic Games&quot;, among others. In 1963, Abbott himself released a publication, &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot;, which included instructions for all of his card games, in addition to Baroque chess. Abbott also invented logic mazes, the first of which appeared in Martin Gardner&#x27;s &quot;Mathematical Games&quot; column in the October 1962 issue of &quot;Scientific American&quot;. One of the more prominent of these is &quot;Theseus and the Minotaur&quot;, which was originally published in the book &quot;Mad Mazes&quot;. His game &quot;Confusion&quot; was named &quot;Best New Abstract Strategy Game&quot; for 2012 by GAMES Magazine.

== Biography ==
Abbott was born in St. Louis, Missouri, and attended St. Louis Country Day School. Abbott went to Yale for two years, then attended the University of Colorado for another two, but never graduated. Soon after, Abbott moved to New York, where he and his games were discovered by Martin Gardner. In 1963, after Abbott&#x27;s book, &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot;, received only moderate success, he &quot;got tired of being poor&quot; and moved back to St. Louis. There, he became a computer programmer at the Washington University in St. Louis Computer Research Laboratory. In 1965, he moved back to New York, where he continued to work as a computer programmer, mostly with the IBM 360 assembly language.

Abbott created all of his card games during the 1950s, starting with Babel in 1951, and ending with Auction in 1956. Soon after, he moved to New York City, where the rules for his game Eleusis were first published by Martin Gardner in his &quot;Mathematical Games&quot; column. Motivated by the article, Abbott self-published the rules for four of his card games in the book &quot;Four New Card Games&quot; in 1962, which he sold by mail. In 1963, the book &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot; was published by Sol Stein of Stein and Day, containing the rules for all eight of his card games and the rules for his chess variant, Baroque chess. In 1968, the publisher Funk &amp; Wagnalls published a paperback edition of &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot;, in which Abbott slightly modified the rules of Baroque chess, but these changes never became popular. Around the same time that &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot; was published, Abbott sent his maze, &quot;Traffic Maze in Floyd&#x27;s Knob&quot;, to Martin Gardner. This was the first logic maze to be published, appearing in Gardner&#x27;s &quot;Mathematical Games&quot; column.

After that time, Abbott created various mazes, most of which appeared in the books &quot;SuperMazes&quot; and &quot;Mad Mazes&quot;. In 2008, RBA Libros published a Spanish version of his book &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot;, under the title &quot;Diez juegos que no se parecen a nada&quot;, which translates to &quot;Ten games that do not resemble anything&quot;. This version was not just a Spanish translation of the original, however; the most up-to-date rules for the various games were used; in addition, the rules for Eleusis Express and Confusion were included. In 2010, his &quot;Where are the Cows?&quot; maze was published by the Oxford University Press in Ian Stewart&#x27;s book &quot;Cows in the Maze&quot;. In 2011, his game Confusion was published by Stronghold Games. The game was named &quot;Best New Abstract Strategy Game&quot; for 2012 by GAMES Magazine.

== Logic mazes ==
Abbott was the inventor of a style of maze called logic mazes. A logic maze has a set of rules, ranging from the basic (such as &quot;you cannot make left turns&quot;) to the extremely complicated. These mazes are also called &quot;Multi-State mazes&quot;. The reason for this name is that sometimes you can return to a position you were in before, but be traveling in a different direction. That change in direction can put you in a different state and open up different choices for you. One example, from the book &quot;SuperMazes&quot;, would be a rolling-die maze. Where you can move from a particular square depends on what number is facing up on the die. If you return to that same square, the die may be in a different state, with a different number on top. Thus, you would have different options than the first time.

=== Traffic Maze in Floyd&#x27;s Knob ===

The first logic maze ever published, &quot;Traffic Maze in Floyd&#x27;s Knob&quot;, appeared in the October 1962 issue of &quot;Scientific American&quot; in the &quot;Mathematical Games&quot; column.

The maze looks like a street grid, with arrows pointing down various roads at each intersection. When one comes to an intersection, only arrows leading from the road you are on to another road can be followed. One must continue in this fashion, following the arrows at the intersection, until the end is reached. When you come to an intersection from one direction, you have different options for which road to take than you would coming into the intersection from another direction; therefore, this can be defined as a &quot;multi-state&quot; or &quot;logic&quot; maze.

=== Where Are the Cows? ===
&quot;Where are the Cows?&quot; was one of Abbott&#x27;s most difficult mazes. It first appeared in his book &quot;SuperMazes&quot;. Abbott warns readers that it &quot;may be too difficult for anyone to solve.&quot; Since then, it has also appeared as the titular maze in the book &quot;Cows in the Maze&quot;.

The complexity in &quot;Where are the Cows?&quot; includes self-reference, changing rules, and flow charts. It is also worded so as to provoke confusion between an object (such as red text), a reference to an object (such as the word &quot;red&quot;), and even more subtle references (the word &quot;word&quot;). The maze ends up being so complicated that it can even be difficult to work out the next move, let alone the end. In this maze, you have to use two hands, each starting at a different place. The instructions in one box might have to do with the box that the other hand is in, boxes you have already left, or complex combinations of the two.

=== Theseus and the Minotaur ===

&quot;Theseus and the Minotaur&quot; is another of Abbott&#x27;s better-known mazes. It first appeared in his book &quot;Mad Mazes&quot;. Like &quot;Where are the Cows?&quot; in &quot;SuperMazes&quot;, Abbott said that this &quot;is the hardest maze in the book; in fact, it is possible that no one will solve it.&quot; Since then, several different versions of it have appeared, made by others, following the same theme, both on paper and in electronic forms.

== Games ==
Abbott has created several games, including card games, board games, and one equipment game. As a whole, his games are not of particular fame, although they have some unique elements that set them apart from mainstream games. For instance, the card game Metamorphosis is a complex trick-taking game. As you play the game, the rules change three times, so it is as if you are playing four different games that are threaded together.

=== Baroque chess ===

Baroque chess, or Ultima, was the only board game in the book &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot;. Abbott&#x27;s reasoning for including this non-card game in a card game book was that chess pieces are as plentiful as playing cards, and in this book, he wanted to introduce new games that did not require special equipment. Abbott&#x27;s friends, once he started teaching it to them, began to call the game &quot;Abbott&#x27;s Ultima,&quot; which he did not like at all. However, the publisher, Sol Stein, preferred the name &quot;Ultima,&quot; so that is the title that was used in the book.

=== Eleusis ===

Eleusis is probably Abbott&#x27;s most prominent game, due to its metaphors and its suitability for use as a teaching tool. He invented it in 1956, and it appeared in his self-published book &quot;Four New Card Games&quot;. It was also published in the book &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot; a year later. Martin Gardner wrote about it in his &quot;Mathematical Games&quot; column in the June 1959 issue of &quot;Scientific American&quot;. Basically, the gameplay consists of the dealer choosing a secret rule dictating how cards are to be played, and the players playing cards in an attempt to figure out the rule through inductive reasoning. In 1973, Abbott decided to improve Eleusis; the result was considered to be far better than the original, with various improvements to the layouts and gameplay making it work quite a bit better. Martin Gardner wrote about this version in the October 1977 issue of &quot;Scientific American&quot;. Abbott also self-published a pamphlet in 1977 with the rules for the improved version, titled &quot;The New Eleusis&quot;. It has appeared in several card game collections, such as &quot;Hoyle&#x27;s Rules of Games&quot; and &quot;New Rules for Classic Games&quot;, among others.

===Confusion===
Abbott initially created the game Confusion in the 1970s, and had it in finished form by 1980. The game was published in Germany by Franjos in 1992; Abbott was not satisfied with this version, however, due to several flaws in it. The rules were published in the Spanish translation of his book &quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot; in 2008, but the game did not get published in North America until 2011. This Stronghold Games version was named &quot;Best New Abstract Strategy Game&quot; for 2012 by GAMES Magazine. The game is based on the idea of not knowing what your pieces are or what they do at the beginning of the game. His game Eleusis uses a similar idea, in that you do not know how cards are to be played at the beginning; George Brancaccio, someone Abbott worked with at the Bank of New York, commented on this, saying &quot;In your game Eleusis, you don&#x27;t know what cards can be played. Why don&#x27;t you make a board game where you don&#x27;t know how pieces move?&quot; This is what gave Abbott the idea, and he began work on it soon after.

== Published work ==
*&quot;Four New Card Games&quot; (1962)
*&quot;Abbott&#x27;s New Card Games&quot; (1963, again in paperback in 1968)
*&quot;The New Eleusis&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Mad Mazes&quot; (1990)
*&quot;SuperMazes&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Auction 2002 and Eleusis&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Diez juegos que no se parecen a nada [Ten games that do not resemble anything]&quot; (2008, translated by Marc Figueras)

== Notes ==
== References ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
== External links ==

* Robert Abbott&#x27;s website
* Remembering Robert Abbott Gathering4Gardner 
* Chess Variants interview
* Theseus and the Minotaur mazes
* Sliding Door maze</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1395496" start="0" end="13" title="Robert Abbott (game designer)" label="Robert Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="234" end="241" title="IBM 360" label="IBM 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="242" end="259" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="347" end="352" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863050" start="361" end="374" title="Baroque chess" label="Baroque chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188696" start="402" end="411" title="Crossings (game)" label="Crossings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060669" start="432" end="443" title="Epaminondas (game)" label="Epaminondas"/>
<link wikidata="Q905339" start="445" end="452" title="Eleusis (game)" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667463" start="821" end="832" title="logic mazes" label="logic mazes"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="865" end="879" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355344" start="887" end="917" title="Mathematical Games (column)" label="&amp;quot;Mathematical Games&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="960" end="979" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783435" start="1031" end="1055" title="Theseus and the Minotaur" label="Theseus and the Minotaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="1226" end="1240" title="GAMES Magazine" label="GAMES Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1278" end="1297" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779832" start="1312" end="1340" title="St. Louis Country Day School" label="St. Louis Country Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1357" end="1361" title="Yale" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206658" start="1395" end="1417" title="University of Colorado system" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="1536" end="1550" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="1775" end="1809" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="1945" end="1952" title="IBM 360" label="IBM 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="1953" end="1970" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2114" end="2127" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q905339" start="2158" end="2165" title="Eleusis (card game)" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="2190" end="2204" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355344" start="2218" end="2236" title="Mathematical Games (column)" label="Mathematical Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298182" start="2488" end="2497" title="Sol Stein" label="Sol Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606787" start="2501" end="2514" title="Stein and Day" label="Stein and Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863050" start="2606" end="2619" title="Baroque chess" label="Baroque chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403686" start="2644" end="2663" title="Funk &amp;amp; Wagnalls" label="Funk &amp;amp; Wagnalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="2995" end="3009" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3268" end="3278" title="RBA Libros" label="RBA Libros"/>
<link wikidata="Q905339" start="3660" end="3675" title="Eleusis Express" label="Eleusis Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="3776" end="3799" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q372182" start="3803" end="3814" title="Ian Stewart (mathematician)" label="Ian Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3902" end="3918" title="Stronghold Games" label="Stronghold Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="3995" end="4009" title="GAMES Magazine" label="GAMES Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q606777" start="4068" end="4072" title="maze" label="maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667463" start="4080" end="4091" title="logic mazes" label="logic mazes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667463" start="4909" end="4919" title="logic maze" label="logic maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="5027" end="5046" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355344" start="5060" end="5090" title="Mathematical Games (column)" label="&amp;quot;Mathematical Games&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783435" start="6707" end="6731" title="Theseus and the Minotaur" label="Theseus and the Minotaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="7429" end="7442" title="Metamorphosis" label="Metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863050" start="7631" end="7644" title="Baroque chess" label="Baroque chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="7821" end="7826" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298182" start="8131" end="8140" title="Sol Stein" label="Sol Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q905339" start="8247" end="8254" title="Eleusis (card game)" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="8560" end="8574" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355344" start="8597" end="8627" title="Mathematical Games (column)" label="&amp;quot;Mathematical Games&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="8667" end="8686" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="8877" end="8896" title="inductive reasoning" label="inductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="9168" end="9187" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9624" end="9631" title="Franjos" label="Franjos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9905" end="9921" title="Stronghold Games" label="Stronghold Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="9996" end="10010" title="GAMES Magazine" label="GAMES Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q589288" start="10284" end="10300" title="Bank of New York" label="Bank of New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706736" wikidata="Q619505" url="?curid=706736" title="Elland Road">
<text>Elland Road, also called Elland Road Football Stadium or Elland Road Stadium, is a football stadium in Beeston, Leeds, West Yorkshire, England, which has been the home of Championship club Leeds United since the club&#x27;s formation in 1919. The stadium is the 13th largest football stadium in England.

The ground has hosted FA Cup semi-final matches as a neutral venue, and England international fixtures, and was selected as one of eight Euro 96 venues. Elland Road was used as home ground by rugby league clubs Holbeck (pre-1905) and Hunslet (in the 1980s and 90s) and has hosted numerous rugby league cup finals and semi-finals, internationals and other important matches.

Elland Road has four stands – the Don Revie (North) Stand (also known as the kop), the Jack Charlton (East) Stand (which was once known as the Lowfields Road stand), the Norman Hunter South Stand and the John Charles (West) Stand – and an all-seated capacity of 37,792 Elland Road had recorded its record league attendance on 27 December 1932, where a capacity of 56,796 watched Leeds played Arsenal and then the record attendance of 57,892 was set on 15 March 1967 in an FA Cup fifth round replay against Sunderland. This was before the stadium became an all-seater venue as stipulated by the Taylor Report and the modern record is 40,287 for a Premiership match against Newcastle United on 22 December 2001. Plans are currently afoot to increase the capacity of Elland Road to 55,000, to be achieved by demolishing the West Stand and rebuilding the area.

The stadium has hosted concerts, including performances by bands such as Queen, U2, Happy Mondays and the Kaiser Chiefs.

==History==

===Early history===
The site, at the foot of Beeston Hill beside the A643 road to Elland, was owned by Bentley&#x27;s Brewery and was called the Old Peacock Ground, after the pub which faced the land, hence the nickname the Peacocks associated with both Leeds City and United. An urban myth claims that the ground was cursed by gypsies whom had been forced off the land to allow for the construction of the stadium. In 1971 after a run of poor form, the Leeds manager Don Revie hired Gypsy Rose Lee to lift the alleged curse.

The first occupants were Holbeck Rugby Club (rugby league) who moved from Holbeck Recreation Ground after buying the Old Peacock Ground from Bentley&#x27;s for £1,100. The first competitive football match at the ground was as a neutral venue for the West Yorkshire Cup final on 23 April 1898 between Hunslet and Harrogate, with Hunslet winning 1–0. Holbeck erected a new stand in readiness for the 1898–99 rugby season. The ground eventually became known simply as Elland Road. For the 1902–03 season the Association football team, Leeds Woodville of the Leeds League, shared the ground with Holbeck RLFC in the 1902–03 season, but Holbeck went under in 1904 after losing a play-off against St. Helens and the ground was put on the market. After a meeting at the Griffin Hotel in Boar Lane in August, a new club, Leeds City, was formed and it was agreed that the Elland Road ground would be rented for the upcoming season. The lease was signed on 13 October 1904, for a rent of £75 per year. The club had an option to buy the ground for £5,000 in March 1905, but in November, the price was reduced to £4,500.

After City&#x27;s first season in the Football League, the club built a 5,000-seater covered stand on the west side at a cost of £1,050. Attendances were rising, culminating in over 22,500 people cramming into the stadium to watch a local derby with Bradford City on 30 December, bringing in £487 of gate receipts. An expansion programme continued, and the club&#x27;s directors ensured that the initial success was built upon, employing a &quot;ground committee&quot; to oversee developments. In February 1906, 3,961 square yards of land on the Churwell and Gelderd Road side of the ground was bought from the Monk&#x27;s Bridge Iron Company at a cost of £420. The committee built a 4,000-seater grandstand which the Lord Mayor, Joseph Hepworth, unveiled before a match against Chelsea on 17 November. The project cost £3,000 and over half a mile of steel was used. There was a training track for the players that ran the length of the stand, dressing and official&#x27;s rooms and a motor garage. Drainage work was carried out on the pitch to prevent it from becoming waterlogged.

City experienced financial hardships jeopardising the club&#x27;s future but after much uncertainty, an offer of £1,000 and an annual rental of £250 was accepted for the ground. The ground was used during the Great War as a venue for drill and shooting practice until the 1919–20 season commenced. City started that season brightly, but scandal arose involving illegal payments to players during the war years and the club was expelled from the Football League after only eight games. This led some local businessmen to contemplate digging up the clay deposits under the pitch and turning Elland Road into a brickyard. Yorkshire Amateurs became the tenants, and that club played there for a brief spell saving the ground from development.

In 1920, Yorkshire Amateurs sold Elland Road to the newly formed Leeds United for £250.

===1920–1974===

In the 1920s, the South Stand terrace was covered with a wooden barrel-shaped roof and came to be known as the Scratching Shed. Another stand was built on the east side terracing called the Lowfields. Behind the goal at the north end was a terrace known as the Spion Kop, or simply Kop, from a hill in South Africa on which 322 British soldiers died in the Battle of Spion Kop, in January 1900, in the Boer War.

No significant changes were made to Elland Road in the 1930s, and 1940s, although it did see some large attendances. On 27 December 1932, 56,796 spectators attended for the visit of eventual champions Arsenal – a record that would last for almost 35 years. The last game of that season saw Leeds play Middlesbrough at home in front of 9,006 spectators. The stadium was chosen to host the all city of Leeds Rugby Football League Championship Final between Leeds and Hunslet in 1938, when a crowd of 54,112 saw Hunslet win the title. In the Second World War, the ground was requisitioned by the War Office for administrative purposes.

Floodlights were first used on 9 November 1953 for a match against Hibernian when the £7,000 lights, claimed to be the most expensive in the country at the time, were switched on. The game attracted 31,500 spectators who saw two goals each from John Charles and manager Raich Carter as Leeds beat the Scottish side 4–1. It was the first of several Monday night games against teams from north of the border and in successive weeks, Dundee and Falkirk were the visitors to Elland Road.
In the early hours of Tuesday 18 September 1956, a fire gutted the West Stand and scorched large sections of the pitch. The blaze consumed the entire structure, including offices, kit, club records, physiotherapy equipment, dressing rooms, directors&#x27; rooms, the press box and the generators for the floodlighting system. The roof of the stand collapsed into the seating area before the fire brigade arrived and the total damage was estimated to be £100,000, but the club&#x27;s insurance cover was inadequate. The players helped clear rubble and wreckage, but the 2,500-seater stand could not be salvaged. After a board meeting, the directors decided to launch a public appeal to build a new stand with assistance from Leeds City Council. The appeal raised £60,000 and a £180,000 West Stand was opened at the start of the following season.

The new stand had of 4,000 seats mounted behind a paddock, which could hold 6,000 standing spectators. Two years later another fire started after a Central League match against Preston North End affecting the West Stand. Fortunately, Cyril Williamson, the club secretary, and several directors were on hand and the fire was extinguished and no significant damage was caused.

The 1960s saw the arrival of Don Revie as manager and the club were promoted to the First Division. The club finished in the top four places for the next ten seasons and Elland Road hosted its first televised game – a league fixture against Everton on 20 March 1965 – and Leeds were 4–1 winners. Great advances were made on the stadium during Revie&#x27;s reign and a new attendance record of 57,892 was set on 15 March 1967, in a fifth-round replay of the FA Cup against Sunderland. In April 1968, the Spion Kop terracing was stripped away to make way for a new stand at a cost of £250,000. The roofed structure was built in less than six weeks and became known as the Gelderd End. When completed it left around of land behind the goal which was turfed, and the pitch moved north.

Further improvements in 1970 included the coupling of the West Stand and the Kop with a £200,000 corner stand, the North-West corner. To complement the upgrade, an almost identical stand was built, linking the Lowfields stand and the Kop, which cost £200,000. In 1972, when the Leeds United Sports and Souvenir Shop opened, featuring a programme collection. In 1974, Leeds won the league for the second time and the Scratching Shed was dismantled and replaced by the South Stand at a cost of £500,000. This state of the art development comprised a standing paddock capable of holding 4,000 fans, a row of 16 executive boxes, above which was an all-seater 3,500 capacity stand. Plans to link the South Stand with the Lowfields were curtailed when Leeds ran out of money. In the same year, the floodlights were replaced by the tallest floodlights in Europe, measuring . Initially, three floodlights were erected – two at either side of the Kop and another in the South-West corner – and the other was erected four years later.

===1982–2000===
The first match televised live was the rugby league Challenge Cup final replay between Hull FC and Widnes played on 19 May 1982. In summer 1982, Leeds sold Elland Road to Leeds City Council for £2.5 million, and the council granted the club a 125-year lease and the homeless Hunslet RLFC also moved in. Ambitious plans to improve the stadium and neighbouring sporting facilities were designed in 1987 by Newcastle upon Tyne architects and promoted by developers Baltic Consortium and W. H. White. The estimated costs were between £50 million and £75 million to re-build the Lowfields with a 7,500 all-seater stand and construct a peripheral 2,000-seater sports stadium adjacent to the stand. Other plans included a shopping centre, ice rink, cricket hall, cinema, nightclub, café, restaurant, waterpark, leisure centre and shops. None of the designs were acted on.
In September 1991, the South-East corner was opened, joining the South and Lowfields Stands providing a full corner stand for away supporters. This section was used as the &quot;family stand&quot; until membership proved too big for its 1,710 capacity and a new home found in the East Stand. It is prominent because of its yellow seats, which have given its nickname, the &quot;cheese wedge&quot;. A banqueting suite at the rear of the west stand, with a conference centre, was opened in April 1992. The biggest renovation project to date began in the summer of 1992, when the Lowfields was demolished and replaced by a new East Stand – a 17,000-seater stand with two tiers and no restricted views. On completion in 1993, at a cost of £5.5 million, it housed 25 executive boxes, 10,000 seats in the bottom tier, part of which formed the members-only family section, and a further 7,000 seats in the upper tier. The East Stand was then the biggest cantilever stand in the world. This coincided with the completion of the South Leeds Stadium, a new home for Hunslet RLFC, who now left Elland Road.

For the 1994–95 season Elland Road became an all-seater stadium, with nearly 7,000 seats replacing the terracing in the Kop, as directed by the Taylor Report. The new-look Kop was officially opened in October by the club&#x27;s president, George Lascelles, 7th Earl of Harewood and Elsie Revie, widow of the late Don Revie. The Gelderd End was renamed the Don Revie Stand in honour of the club&#x27;s former manager.

On 16 November 1997, the third and deciding match of the Super League Test series between Great Britain and Australia was played at Elland Road before a crowd of 39,337.

In December 1997, £11.3 million plans to improve the West and South Stands were unveiled which would have raised capacity to around 45,000. A new structure mirroring the East Stand would have seated around 12,000 people. A three-tier structure would focus on hospitality with a 15,000-seater indoor arena at the rear of the West Stand. This venue would have accommodated basketball, ice hockey, pop concerts and other events. However, after naming an ice hockey team, Leeds Lasers, to play at the arena, the project was shelved. Earlier plans to create a 65,000-seater &quot;Wembley of the North&quot; at Elland Road also failed to materialise.

Leeds received the ownership of Elland Road once again in 1998, when the new owners, Leeds Sporting Company agreed to pay £10 million to buy back the stadium from Leeds City Council.

===2001–2010===
On 16 August 2001, chairman Peter Ridsdale sent a letter to season ticket holders and shareholders regarding the future of the club outlining two options, to improve Elland Road or to relocate. A ballot form was included but the letter was biased in favour of relocation. Less than 13% voted to stay at Elland Road and 87.6% of the 18,500 who voted were in favour of the move. On 7 September 2001, Ridsdale announced his intention to move the club to a 50,000-seat stadium at Skelton in time for the 2004–05 season. The plans never came to fruition as Ridsdale resigned in March 2003, leaving financial disarray and the PLC was soon to follow in March 2004.

Later that year, Elland Road was sold with a 25-year lease and buy-back clause to raise funds to pay an instalment of a loan to Jack Petchey. It emerged on 27 December 2006 that the stadium had been sold to the British Virgin Islands-based Teak Trading Corporation 15 months before.

In summer 2006, the South Stand was updated and closed for the first few games of the 2006–07 season while work was completed. The refurbishment included boxing in the concrete columns and alcoves; overhaul of the kitchen concourse area, a mezzanine-level office area, modernisation of the corporate facilities above and a restaurant, Billy&#x27;s Bar, named after former club captain Billy Bremner.

Plans for development at Elland Road to include hotels, a shopping centre and health club were featured in the programme for the match against Huddersfield Town on 8 December 2007. There would be hotels on the site of the shop. Possible adjacent developments could include an arena, casino, police headquarters, cafés, bars and parking for 2,700 cars. On 27 October 2008, the club released plans for redevelopment behind the East Stand containing a 350-room hotel, a covered arcade with shops, bars, and restaurants; extended and improved facilities for business conferences and events, a megastore, office block and nightclub. On 6 November 2008, the city council announced it would not be building the proposed Leeds Arena on council owned land adjacent to the ground.

On 16 December 2009, the host cities and stadia to be used if England won the right to host the 2018 World Cup were revealed. Leeds was chosen and had the bid been successful the John Charles and Don Revie stands would have been rebuilt, increasing capacity to over 50,000. However, England did not host the 2018 tournament.

On 28 December 2009, chairman Ken Bates spoke about future plans to increase the capacity of the South Stand in the future by around 2–3,000. This would be achieved by removing the executive boxes and replacing them with seating. This work never started as Ken Bates sold the club in 2012.

===2010–present===

In March 2011, the East Stand Development began phase one of a five-phase redevelopment project which included an extension to the East Stand Upper&#x27;s main concourse along with the addition of 25 executive boxes and a modern upgrade to the external appearance of the stand; whilst this created extra corporate facilities and more room on the concourse, it in-turn reduced the East Stand Upper&#x27;s capacity by around 2,500 seats, thus leaving the overall capacity of the ground to stand at just under 38,000 seats. An arcade, hotel and megastore were planned to be built as part of the four further phases, however these plans did not take place following the sale of the club to GFH Capital who then sold the club to Massimo Cellino.
In June 2017, new Leeds United owner Andrea Radrizzani bought the stadium back from Jacob Adler&#x27;s company Teak Commercial Limited for £20 million, using his own company Greenfield Investment Pte Ltd. The first game taking back control of the stadium was against Oxford United in a pre-season friendly on Saturday 29 July 2017 in which Leeds United won 2–0.

In July 2017 the club announced a number of internal and external improvements were in the process of being made to Elland Road to improve the general appearance of the stadium. The improvements consisted of a partial new roof and cladding on the West Stand, banners on either side of the East Stand, South Stand and Northeast Corner of the ground featuring Leeds United legends past and present. In addition, the inside of the West Stand, dressing rooms and hospitality suites all underwent cosmetic improvement.

In April 2020, following the death of Leeds legend Norman Hunter, the South Stand of Elland Road was renamed &quot;The Norman Hunter Stand&quot;.

In January 2021, the club announced its plans to transform the adjoining &#x27;Centenary Pavilion&#x27; into a large vaccination centre to counteract the COVID-19 pandemic, as part of the COVID-19 vaccination programme in the United Kingdom.

In July 2024, Leeds United announced it had again taken full ownership of Elland Road, in March 2024, having sold it in 2004. The stadium is also listed as an asset of community value after an application by the Leeds United Supporters&#x27; Trust was approved by Leeds City Council.
==Layout==

===Don Revie North Stand===
Capacity: 7,000 (including north-east and north-west corners)

The Don Revie Stand is at the north end of the ground. It was previously known as the Gelderd End or Kop and was originally a standing terrace, it was renamed in 1994 in honour of the club&#x27;s most successful manager and former player, Don Revie. The Revie Stand was officially opened in October by the club&#x27;s president, George Lascelles, 7th Earl of Harewood and Mrs E. Revie, the widow of Don Revie. The design has 7,000 seats as stipulated by the Taylor Report, making Elland Road an all-seater stadium. There is a &quot;ground control box&quot; in the north-west corner which is the most advanced in Europe. Videos and photographs taken of everyone entering the ground are monitored and security operations are synchronised. Images and video footage are obtained by the security cameras located around the ground.

===Jack Charlton East Stand===
Capacity: 14,900

The East Stand is the most recently constructed stand in the stadium. The two-tiered structure was built in the 1992–93 season to replace the Lowfields stand and was opened in the 1993–94 season at a cost of £5.5 million. On completion, it was the largest cantilever stand in the world, holding 10,000 spectators in the lower tier and a further 7,000 in the upper tier. The family area was moved from the South Stand and originally spanned the full lower tier; however, this was altered by Ken Bates and there are now two sections, one at either end of the lower tier for club members and season ticket holders attending matches with children. Sandwiched in between are 25 executive boxes and a large concourse with merchandise outlets, food shops, betting booths and a restaurant. Due to the redevelopment, the capacity of the East Stand was reduced and the words Leeds United AFC were taken off the seats.

===Norman Hunter South Stand===
Capacity: 5,000 (including South-East and South-West corners)

The South Stand was built in 1974 at a cost of £500,000 to replace the Scratching Shed, which had been there since the 1920s. It comprises two small tiers intersected with a row of 32 executive boxes and an executive restaurant. There are a few seats in the South-West Corner, and a large video screen for the 2009–10 season. The South-East Corner seats 1,710 fans and was used to house the away fans until they were moved to the West Stand. In summer 2006, the stand was redeveloped and closed for the first few games of the 2006–07 season. The refurbishment included boxing in the concrete columns and alcoves to give the stand a more modern exterior; an overhaul of the kitchen concourse area; a mezzanine-level office area; a total modernisation of the corporate facilities above and a restaurant called Billy&#x27;s Bar, named after former captain Billy Bremner. The club&#x27;s superstore is nearby. On 23 April 2020 the club announced that the stand would be named after Norman Hunter, who had died on 20 April.

===John Charles West Stand===
Capacity: 11,000

The John Charles Stand is on the west side of the pitch and was known as the West Stand until the fans demanded a tribute to former player John Charles, following his death on 21 February 2004. It is currently the oldest two-tiered stand at Elland Road, having been built in 1957 after the previous stand burnt down, ironically forcing Charles&#x27; sale as the club needed the funds to pay for a new stand. The corporate seats are located here and there is a commentary gantry and walkway for TV personnel. The radio and press have facilities in this stand. The West Stand houses the tunnel and the directors&#x27; box, where home and away team directors view the match, along with the club doctor. There are many suites incorporated within the stand and a banqueting suite and conference centre are attached to the rear, having been opened in April 1992. As of September 2011, parts of the West Stand became the new home for away fans following a £300,000 refurbishment. Future plans would see the John Charles Stand redeveloped to hold a two-floored, three-tiered 3500 square metre site along with executive boxes as part of the ambitions of turning Elland Road into a stadium further capable of hosting world class matches and events.

===The pitch===
The pitch measures approximately long by wide, with run-off space on each side. There is an under-soil heating system installed beneath the surface, consisting of of piping. This, together with a good drainage system, means that only heavy fog, a blizzard or flooding would force the club to cancel a match. There are wells sunk approximately beneath the West Stand and the North Stand and a pumping system is situated under the South Stand, meaning that the club can draw on its own supply of water, should the need arise. However, the first time the club used it, the pitch turned black as the water was too cold.

==Billy Bremner and Don Revie statues==
A statue for legendary captain Billy Bremner was erected outside the ground in 1999. A statue for Leeds&#x27; most successful manager Don Revie was also built in 2012, celebrating the 40th anniversary of the club winning the FA Cup.

===Bremner Square XI===
As part of the renovation towards the Bremner statue to take place in the summer of 2018, the following team was voted by the fans as 11 Legendary players (including Billy Bremner). They were voted to each have a stone engraved around the Billy Bremner statue outside Elland Road. They were described as &#x27;10 legend stones&#x27; in the area around the famous statue. Each stone will be engraved with the legends keys stats and achievements during their career&#x27;s with Leeds United.
* Billy Bremner (statue)
* John Charles
* Jack Charlton
* Allan Clarke
* Johnny Giles
* Eddie Gray
* Norman Hunter
* Peter Lorimer 
* Lucas Radebe
* Gary Speed
* Gordon Strachan

==Future==
In August 2001, when Leeds were still a leading Premier League side, chairman Peter Ridsdale unveiled plans for the club to relocate to a 50,000-seat stadium in Skelton. The following month, the club&#x27;s 33,250 season ticket holders were asked to vote on the proposed relocation. 87.6% of them voted in favour of relocation, but the plans were abandoned within two years following the onset of the club&#x27;s financial crisis and decline in fortunes on the field.

More recently in October 2019, Leeds United&#x27;s managing director Angus Kinnear suggested that Elland Road&#x27;s capacity could be expanded to 55,000 should they be promoted to the Premier League.

==Other uses==

===Football===
====FA Cup semi-finals====
Elland Road has hosted FA Cup semi-final matches as a neutral venue on nine occasions, the first being a tie between Barnsley and Everton on 26 March 1910 and the last on 9 April 1995 in a game between Everton and Tottenham Hotspur. Other FA Cup semi-finals to have taken place at Elland Road had included Arsenal v. Hull City in 1930, Birmingham City v. Sunderland in 1931, West Bromwich Albion v. Bolton Wanderers in 1935, Charlton Athletic v. Newcastle United in 1947, Newcastle United v. Blackburn Rovers in 1952, Leicester City v. Sheffield United in 1961 and West Ham United v. Everton in 1980. In addition when Sheffield Wednesday faced Sheffield United in the 1993 FA Cup semi-final the venue was originally planned to be Elland Road but was switched to Wembley Stadium following protests from both clubs and their supporters that the stadium was too small to host such a fixture, the risk of crowd trouble were the fixture to be played at Elland Road and due to London clubs Tottenham Hotspur and Arsenal having their semi-final at Wembley it was perceived the London clubs would receive an unfair advantage for the FA Cup final.

====Football internationals====
The ground has hosted three England men&#x27;s international fixtures and three England women&#x27;s international. On 8 June 1995, England drew 3–3 with Sweden. This was the first England home international played away from Wembley in 22 years, and the first time since 1946 that a new ground had hosted an England international game. The second game was a friendly match against Italy on 27 March 2002 while the new Wembley was being built. In addition, Elland Road would have been a potential host stadium for the football tournament at the 2000 Summer Olympics had Manchester won its bid to host the 2000 Summer Olympics as well as in the failed English bid to host the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

England women defeated the Netherlands 5–1 at Elland Road in their final preparation match before winning UEFA Women&#x27;s Euro 2022 as the host nation.

When England were picked to host Euro 96, the most recent men&#x27;s international tournament held in the country, Elland Road was selected as one of the eight venues. It staged three Group B matches, all of them involving Spain. The first two were 1–1 draws with Bulgaria on 9 June 1996 and France on 15 June 1996. The third was a 2–1 win over Romania on 18 June 1996.

====Temporary venue====
Two of Leeds&#x27; West Yorkshire rivals have also used Elland Road as their temporary &#x27;home&#x27;. The first club to benefit from the facilities was Huddersfield Town, when a fire struck their ground on 3 April 1950. Leeds offered its services and Huddersfield played the last two games of the 1949–50 season there before returning to Leeds Road the next season, following extensive work to revamp the burnt main stand. Bradford City used Elland Road for three matches after 11 May 1985 when a fire consumed a stand at Valley Parade during a match against Lincoln City. Two months after the Bradford City stadium fire, the 1966 World Cup Final teams from England and West Germany met in a rematch at Elland Road and raised £46,000 for the Fire Disaster Fund, with England winning the game, 6–4.

When non-league team, Farsley Celtic, reached the first round of the FA Cup in 1974, the game was played at Elland Road. Farsley&#x27;s opposition was Division Three side Tranmere Rovers and a crowd of 10,337 saw the League club win, 2–0. In 1990 Elland Road hosted the replay to the final of the FA Vase which Yeading F.C. won 1–0 against Bridlington Town A.F.C.

Former Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson said that Elland Road was &quot;the most intimidating venue in Europe&quot;.

===Rugby league===
Originally the home of Holbeck RLFC between 1897 and 1904, Elland Road has hosted rugby league throughout its history (at least 385 matches at present). The 1938 Championship Final between Leeds and Hunslet was hosted at the ground as a neutral venue; as was the 1982 Challenge Cup final replay between Widnes and Hull FC. 10 Challenge Cup semi-finals have been played at the ground as were Yorkshire Cup finals between 1988 and 1993.

Having previously used the ground for a few fixtures in the weekday evening BBC2 Floodlit Trophy due to their Parkside home not being floodlit, Hunslet rugby league club shared the stadium full time between 1983–1995 after leaving Parkside and subsequently playing at the Elland Road Greyhound Stadium (closed 1982).

International Rugby League has often been played at Elland Road, including matches in two World Cups, Ashes Tests and competition finals.

The stadium hosted the Tri-Nations Final in 2004, when a capacity crowd saw Australia beat Great Britain, 44–4, and again in 2005, in a match where 26,534 people watched New Zealand beat Australia 24–0. The 2009 Rugby League Four Nations Final between England and Australia was played there with a 16–46 win for Australia. On 19 November 2011 the 2011 Rugby League Four Nations Final between England and Australia was also played at the stadium resulting in an 8–30 win for Australia.

Leeds Rhinos have played several matches at Elland Road. They played tour matches there against New Zealand in 1908 and 1926. Due to the redevelopment of their traditional home of Headingley Stadium, the Rhinos began the 2018 Super League campaign with two league fixtures at Elland Road. They have also used the ground to host World Club Challenge matches.

The record attendance for a rugby league match at Elland Road of 54,112 was set on 30 April 1938 for the Championship Final between Leeds and Hunslet. The record for a Rugby League international of 39,468 was set on 20 November 1994 for the deciding 3rd Test of the 1994 Ashes series between Great Britain and Australia.

====Rugby league internationals====
Elland Road has hosted 16 rugby league internationals. New Zealand&#x27;s win over Australia in the 2005 Tri-Nations Final was Australia&#x27;s first series or tournament loss since being defeated 2–0 by France at the end of the 1978 Kangaroo tour. Elland Road played host to a semi-final match in the 2021 Rugby League World Cup.

====Super League====
Elland Road hosted two of Leeds Rhinos&#x27; home Super League games during the redevelopment of Headingley Stadium. On 21 November 2023, it was announced that Elland Road would be the venue for the 2024 Magic Weekend.

====Challenge Cup====
The first Challenge Cup match at Elland Road was a home match for Holbeck on 18 March 1899.

Beyond staging home matches for Holbeck and Hunslet, Elland Road has hosted the 1982 Challenge Cup Final replay after the final at Wembley ended in a draw between Widnes and Hull FC. Challenge Cup semi-finals followed in 1983, 1984, 1985. It hosted both semi-finals in 1986 and a semi-final replay in 1988. Further semi-finals followed in 1993 and 1995.

Having left for South Leeds Stadium in 1995, Hunslet returned for a round 4 fixture against Bradford Bulls in 1997 due to Elland Road&#x27;s higher capacity.

In 2021, Elland Road was selected to host the 2022 Challenge Cup triple header on the men&#x27;s semi-finals and women&#x27;s final.

====World Club Challenge====
Elland Road has also hosted four of Leeds Rhinos World Club Challenge matches. The results were as follows;
* Melbourne Storm stripped of their 2010 WCC title in the wake of their salary cap breach.

===Other sports===

Three rugby union matches have been played at Elland Road. The first was between the South Africa national rugby union team and the North of England rugby union team on 10 November 1992 which saw South Africa beat the North of England in front of an audience of 14,000. 

Elland Road hosted two matches of the 2015 Rugby Union World Cup.

American football made a brief appearance at the ground when the Leeds Cougars of the British American Football League switched from their old ground at Bramley to play at Elland Road in May 1986. The following year they had to relocate because improvements to the stadium were required. The ground hosted a Gaelic football match between Dublin and Mayo, organised by the Yorkshire County Board of the Gaelic Athletic Association, in 1987.

Elland Road was to host a Twenty20 cricket game on 31 July 2009. The game was to be contested between a Leeds United International XI and the Lashings World XI, however was cancelled when a suitable artificial pitch could not be found.

On 23 January 2018, it was confirmed that Boxer Josh Warrington would fight IBF world champion Lee Selby (26–1) in his first world title fight on 19 May. On 30 January Elland Road was confirmed as the venue for the fight. Josh Warrington secured a split-decision victory over Selby by thoroughly outworking him for the majority of the twelve rounds to claim the title, and hand Selby his second career loss. The match featured ex Leeds United legend Lucas Radebe as part of Warrington&#x27;s ringwalk and band Kaiser Chiefs also played songs at the event.

===Other sports venues on Elland Road===
There was a greyhound stadium on Elland Road to the south-west of the football ground which opened on 16 July 1927. It was owned by the Greyhound Racing Association and they eventually sold it to the Totalisators and Greyhound Holdings (T.G.H) who were bought out by Ladbrokes in 1974.

In 1979, the track kennels were closed followed by the track itself on 1 March 1982.

There was also a speedway track known as Fullerton Park, which operated between the two world wars, attracted audiences in the range of 10,000–20,000 people. Fullerton Park also held greyhound racing from 1927 to 1938.

Leeds Knights Ice Hockey team play at a Planet Ice venue to the south-west of the ground adjacent to where Elland Road passes under the Leeds-Wakefield railway line.

===Film and television===

Older parts of the stadium were used in the 2009 film &quot;The Damned United&quot;, which was centred on the 44-day reign of Brian Clough (played by Michael Sheen) at the club in 1974. Some shots of the 1974 Elland Road were shot at other locations to make the film look more in keeping with that era.

Elland Road was used as a substitute for the old Wembley Stadium for scenes in the 2010 film &quot;The King&#x27;s Speech&quot;, which was nominated for 12 Oscars, three of which were for its stars Colin Firth, Geoffrey Rush and Helena Bonham Carter.

The ground was also featured in a 1975 episode of BBC sitcom &quot;Porridge&quot;, &quot;Happy Release&quot;, in which prisoners Fletcher and Blanco gain revenge on a fellow prisoner, Norris, by giving him a fake treasure map before his release. The episode ends with Norris being arrested by the police after being found digging up a section of the Elland Road pitch in the middle of the night; the scenes were actually filmed at QPR&#x27;s Loftus Road ground.

===Concerts===

===Religious events===
In 1987, 15,000 Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses held a three-day convention at Elland Road stadium. Elland Road hosted the annual Jehovah&#x27;s Witness conventions until 2013 when they moved to the new First Direct Arena.

==Transport==
The nearest railway station is Cottingley, although fans travelling will be more likely to arrive at Leeds Station, which is approximately from the stadium. This is around a 35-minute walk, but taxis and buses run from outside the station to the ground. Visitors travelling by car can park in the ground&#x27;s nearby car parks near M621 junction 1 or make use of limited space in surrounding streets. On match days there are special bus services direct to and from the stadium, usually departing from Sovereign Street near Leeds Station as well as regular local bus services.

Leeds City Council have raised plans for a railway station on the Wakefield Line serving Elland Road but there are no time frames since capacity issues on the Wakefield Line and funding for a new station would need addressing.

==Attendance==

===Leeds City===
In Leeds City&#x27;s brief history, attendances were among the worst in the league. The club competed in the league for 15 years, from the 1905–06 season until its expulsion in the 1919–20 season. The club was poorly financed throughout that period. Association football was a new concept in the area, which as traditionally a rugby league region. Nonetheless, the club were, until the 2009 relegation of Luton Town, the highest-placed team not currently in the league in the all-time average attendance figures for the Football League and Premier League. In total, 1,944,365 people attended Elland Road for all the matches played by the club, giving an average figure of 10,234.

===Leeds United===

Leeds United was formed shortly after City&#x27;s dissolution and entered the league in the 1920–21 season. By this time, football had established itself and in its first season, the average attendance was over 16,000. As of the 2021–22 season, 51,495,892 have attended all of Leeds United&#x27;s matches combined, which gives an average of 25,956. This figure is the 10th highest average in England. The table gives a summary of the attendance figures of all Leeds United&#x27;s league games in every season since the turn of the century.

==In popular media==
The stadium was licensed in 2020 for EA SPORTS FIFA 21 video-game for the first time.

==Gallery==

==Notes==
==See also==
*List of stadiums in the United Kingdom by capacity
*Lists of stadiums

==References==
; General

; Specific
==External links==

* Official Leeds United website
* BBC Leeds 360 – Elland Road Stadium
* Photos of Elland Road – wafll.com
* Stadium Guide Article
* A brief history of Elland Road</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q619505" start="0" end="11" title="Elland Road" label="Elland Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q619505" start="25" end="53" title="Elland Road" label="Elland Road Football Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q619505" start="57" end="76" title="Elland Road" label="Elland Road Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162582" start="103" end="117" title="Beeston, Leeds" label="Beeston, Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046346" start="163" end="167" title="Home (sports)" label="home"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="171" end="183" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="189" end="201" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q532993" start="262" end="274" title="List of football stadiums in England" label="13th largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="327" end="333" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424533" start="334" end="344" title="FA Cup semi-finals" label="semi-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="377" end="384" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="442" end="449" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="497" end="509" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143339" start="539" end="546" title="Hunslet R.L.F.C." label="Hunslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="714" end="723" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q313674" start="767" end="780" title="Jack Charlton" label="Jack Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q430746" start="850" end="863" title="Norman Hunter (footballer)" label="Norman Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q312404" start="884" end="896" title="John Charles" label="John Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="1072" end="1079" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q794589" start="1171" end="1177" title="Replay (sports)" label="replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="1186" end="1196" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348518" start="1274" end="1287" title="Taylor Report" label="Taylor Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="1352" end="1368" title="Newcastle United FC" label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="1611" end="1616" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="1618" end="1620" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141495" start="1622" end="1635" title="Happy Mondays" label="Happy Mondays"/>
<link wikidata="Q192308" start="1644" end="1657" title="Kaiser Chiefs" label="Kaiser Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162582" start="1718" end="1730" title="Beeston Hill, Leeds" label="Beeston Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649556" start="1742" end="1751" title="A643 road" label="A643 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265847" start="1755" end="1761" title="Elland" label="Elland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="1848" end="1851" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="1953" end="1963" title="urban myth" label="urban myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="2141" end="2150" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q267186" start="2157" end="2171" title="Gypsy Rose Lee" label="Gypsy Rose Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994142" start="2225" end="2243" title="Holbeck Rugby Club" label="Holbeck Rugby Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="2245" end="2257" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874457" start="2500" end="2507" title="Hunslet F.C. (association football)" label="Hunslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219286" start="2512" end="2521" title="Harrogate Town F.C." label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439896" start="2812" end="2826" title="1902–03 in English football" label="1902–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092315" start="2874" end="2882" title="One-game playoff" label="play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134319" start="2891" end="2901" title="St Helens R.F.C." label="St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q111938112" start="2980" end="2989" title="Boar Lane" label="Boar Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q157171" start="3091" end="3097" title="renting" label="rented"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="3348" end="3363" title="The Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q117530683" start="3543" end="3554" title="local derby" label="local derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q48879" start="3560" end="3573" title="Bradford City A.F.C." label="Bradford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796966" start="4007" end="4017" title="grandstand" label="grandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11902879" start="4028" end="4038" title="Lord Mayor" label="Lord Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283955" start="4040" end="4055" title="Joseph Hepworth" label="Joseph Hepworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="4089" end="4096" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="4309" end="4317" title="Drainage" label="Drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4603" end="4612" title="World War I" label="Great War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413045" start="4628" end="4633" title="Military parade" label="drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q964650" start="4666" end="4680" title="1919–20 in English football" label="1919–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="4941" end="4945" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q31073494" start="5002" end="5011" title="brickyard" label="brickyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055674" start="5013" end="5031" title="Yorkshire Amateur A.F.C." label="Yorkshire Amateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="5043" end="5050" title="leasehold estate" label="tenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577534" start="5270" end="5277" title="Terrace (stadium)" label="terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="5304" end="5310" title="barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="5568" end="5584" title="British Army" label="British soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072592" start="5597" end="5616" title="Battle of Spion Kop" label="Battle of Spion Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="5642" end="5650" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q532723" start="5844" end="5853" title="English football champions" label="champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="5854" end="5861" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="5954" end="5967" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641640" start="6059" end="6093" title="Rugby Football League Championship" label="Rugby Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202117" start="6108" end="6113" title="Leeds Rhinos" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143339" start="6118" end="6125" title="Hunslet R.L.F.C." label="Hunslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="6246" end="6256" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q381704" start="6287" end="6297" title="Floodlights (sport)" label="Floodlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q192597" start="6354" end="6363" title="Hibernian F.C." label="Hibernian"/>
<link wikidata="Q312404" start="6532" end="6544" title="John Charles" label="John Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622596" start="6557" end="6569" title="Raich Carter" label="Raich Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q335483" start="6718" end="6724" title="Dundee F.C." label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q219241" start="6729" end="6736" title="Falkirk F.C." label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381731" start="6951" end="6954" title="Football kit" label="kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576612" start="6956" end="6968" title="Leeds United A.F.C. club records" label="club records"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="6970" end="6983" title="physiotherapy" label="physiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241635" start="7038" end="7047" title="press box" label="press box"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="7056" end="7066" title="Electrical generator" label="generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="7162" end="7174" title="fire brigade" label="fire brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515870" start="7495" end="7513" title="Leeds City Council" label="Leeds City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721916" start="7765" end="7779" title="Central League (England)" label="Central League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="7794" end="7811" title="Preston North End F.C." label="Preston North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="8022" end="8031" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="8077" end="8091" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="8192" end="8201" title="televised" label="televised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="8234" end="8241" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="8450" end="8456" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="8465" end="8475" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508646" start="9112" end="9121" title="Event programme" label="programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q532723" start="9149" end="9163" title="English football champions" label="won the league"/>
<link wikidata="Q329338" start="9283" end="9299" title="state of the art" label="state of the art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515870" start="9989" end="10007" title="Leeds City Council" label="Leeds City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143339" start="10093" end="10105" title="Hunslet RLFC" label="Hunslet RLFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="10222" end="10241" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="10550" end="10558" title="ice rink" label="ice rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="10560" end="10567" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="10582" end="10591" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q740326" start="10611" end="10620" title="waterpark" label="waterpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q30313989" start="10622" end="10636" title="leisure centre" label="leisure centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q626066" start="11083" end="11090" title="banquet" label="banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207465" start="11138" end="11155" title="Conference hall" label="conference centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="11630" end="11640" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225736" start="11703" end="11722" title="South Leeds Stadium" label="South Leeds Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461745" start="11788" end="11802" title="1994-95 in English football" label="1994–95 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348518" start="11924" end="11937" title="Taylor Report" label="Taylor Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q336609" start="12019" end="12057" title="George Lascelles, 7th Earl of Harewood" label="George Lascelles, 7th Earl of Harewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="12093" end="12102" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642521" start="12255" end="12279" title="Super League Test series" label="Super League Test series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590223" start="12288" end="12301" title="Great Britain national rugby league team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="12306" end="12315" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815825" start="12628" end="12639" title="hospitality" label="hospitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="12661" end="12673" title="indoor arena" label="indoor arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="12752" end="12762" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071833" start="13243" end="13257" title="Peter Ridsdale" label="Peter Ridsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739035" start="13275" end="13288" title="season ticket" label="season ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q905151" start="13411" end="13417" title="ballot" label="ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991598" start="13691" end="13698" title="Skelton, York" label="Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q960028" start="13715" end="13729" title="2004–05 in English football" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114587" start="14002" end="14014" title="Jack Petchey" label="Jack Petchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305" start="14085" end="14107" title="British Virgin Islands" label="British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028129" start="14244" end="14258" title="2006–07 in English football" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q958148" start="14398" end="14407" title="Mezzanine (architecture)" label="mezzanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202867" start="14543" end="14556" title="Billy Bremner" label="Billy Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065656" start="14637" end="14648" title="health club" label="health club"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="14842" end="14848" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="15034" end="15040" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="15148" end="15157" title="megastore" label="megastore"/>
<link wikidata="Q182060" start="15159" end="15171" title="office block" label="office block"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="15176" end="15185" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515833" start="15272" end="15283" title="First Direct Arena" label="Leeds Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="15427" end="15441" title="2018 World Cup" label="2018 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q312404" start="15510" end="15522" title="John Charles" label="John Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="15527" end="15536" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934896" start="16746" end="16763" title="Andrea Radrizzani" label="Andrea Radrizzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q430746" start="17638" end="17651" title="Norman Hunter (footballer)" label="Norman Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="17888" end="17905" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104527900" start="17922" end="17974" title="COVID-19 vaccination programme in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 vaccination programme in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971076" start="18136" end="18160" title="asset of community value" label="asset of community value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891050" start="18465" end="18468" title="Spion Kop (stadiums)" label="Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="18603" end="18612" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q336609" start="18693" end="18731" title="George Lascelles, 7th Earl of Harewood" label="George Lascelles, 7th Earl of Harewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348518" start="18822" end="18835" title="Taylor Report" label="Taylor Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q242256" start="19146" end="19162" title="Closed-circuit television" label="security cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997332" start="19352" end="19366" title="1992–93 in English football" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365269" start="19420" end="19434" title="1993–94 in English football" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="19496" end="19506" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q852359" start="19913" end="19926" title="executive box" label="executive box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506462" start="19989" end="19996" title="Sports betting" label="betting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306907" start="20635" end="20639" title="Road (sports)" label="away"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028129" start="20770" end="20784" title="2006–07 in English football" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q958148" start="20943" end="20952" title="Mezzanine (architecture)" label="mezzanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="21128" end="21138" title="superstore" label="superstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q430746" start="21222" end="21235" title="Norman Hunter (footballer)" label="Norman Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q312404" start="21451" end="21463" title="John Charles" label="John Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="21772" end="21782" title="Play-by-play" label="commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131878" start="22660" end="22685" title="Under-soil heating" label="under-soil heating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q205418" start="22815" end="22823" title="blizzard" label="blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="22886" end="22891" title="Water well" label="wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q134574" start="22960" end="22974" title="Pump" label="pumping system"/>
<link wikidata="Q202867" start="23256" end="23269" title="Billy Bremner" label="Billy Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="23359" end="23368" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="23450" end="23456" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q202867" start="23649" end="23662" title="Billy Bremner" label="Billy Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="23959" end="23971" title="Leeds United" label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q202867" start="23975" end="23988" title="Billy Bremner" label="Billy Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q312404" start="24000" end="24012" title="John Charles" label="John Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q313674" start="24015" end="24028" title="Jack Charlton" label="Jack Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q706058" start="24031" end="24043" title="Allan Clarke (footballer)" label="Allan Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q444329" start="24046" end="24058" title="Johnny Giles" label="Johnny Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q111770" start="24061" end="24071" title="Eddie Gray (footballer, born 1948)" label="Eddie Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q430746" start="24074" end="24087" title="Norman Hunter (footballer)" label="Norman Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q463985" start="24090" end="24103" title="Peter Lorimer" label="Peter Lorimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q349473" start="24107" end="24119" title="Lucas Radebe" label="Lucas Radebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202153" start="24122" end="24132" title="Gary Speed" label="Gary Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q314095" start="24135" end="24150" title="Gordon Strachan" label="Gordon Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071833" start="24241" end="24255" title="Peter Ridsdale" label="Peter Ridsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="24915" end="24921" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424533" start="24922" end="24932" title="FA Cup Semi-finals" label="semi-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19442" start="25009" end="25017" title="Barnsley FC" label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="25022" end="25029" title="Everton FC" label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="25106" end="25123" title="Tottenham Hotspur FC" label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="25198" end="25205" title="Arsenal FC" label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="25209" end="25218" title="Hull City AFC" label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="25228" end="25243" title="Birmingham City FC" label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="25247" end="25257" title="Sunderland AFC" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="25267" end="25287" title="West Bromwich Albion FC" label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="25291" end="25307" title="Bolton Wanderers FC" label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="25317" end="25334" title="Charlton Athletic FC" label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="25338" end="25354" title="Newcastle United FC" label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="25384" end="25400" title="Blackburn Rovers FC" label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="25410" end="25424" title="Leicester City FC" label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="25428" end="25444" title="Sheffield United FC" label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="25457" end="25472" title="West Ham United FC" label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="25510" end="25529" title="Sheffield Wednesday FC" label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="25654" end="25669" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="26092" end="26124" title="England national football team" label="England men&amp;#x27;s international"/>
<link wikidata="Q204204" start="26144" end="26178" title="England women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="England women&amp;#x27;s international"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="26218" end="26224" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="26289" end="26296" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="26422" end="26430" title="Exhibition game" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="26445" end="26450" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="26482" end="26489" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q754589" start="26581" end="26628" title="Football at the 2000 Summer Olympics" label="football tournament at the 2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="26633" end="26643" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747575" start="26644" end="26655" title="Manchester bid for the 2000 Summer Olympics" label="won its bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="26668" end="26688" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377961" start="26714" end="26725" title="England 2018 FIFA World Cup bid" label="English bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="26738" end="26757" title="2018 FIFA World Cup" label="2018 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q36110353" start="26866" end="26893" title="UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Euro 2022" label="UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Euro 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="26948" end="26955" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 96"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27099" end="27106" title="UEFA Euro 1996#Group B" label="Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="27138" end="27143" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q180845" start="27179" end="27187" title="Bulgaria national football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="27207" end="27213" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="27260" end="27267" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="27329" end="27343" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473" start="27465" end="27482" title="Huddersfield Town AFC" label="Huddersfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436142" start="27610" end="27624" title="1949–50 in English football" label="1949–50 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q548439" start="27651" end="27661" title="Leeds Road, Huddersfield" label="Leeds Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q48879" start="27736" end="27749" title="Bradford City AFC" label="Bradford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116681" start="27810" end="27814" title="Bradford City stadium fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q969279" start="27835" end="27848" title="Valley Parade" label="Valley Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q18519" start="27872" end="27884" title="Lincoln City FC" label="Lincoln City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065912" start="27939" end="27959" title="1966 FIFA World Cup Final" label="1966 World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="27983" end="27995" title="German national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="28117" end="28127" title="Non-League football" label="non-league"/>
<link wikidata="Q18316" start="28134" end="28148" title="Farsley Celtic AFC" label="Farsley Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="28263" end="28277" title="Football League Division Three" label="Division Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="28283" end="28298" title="Tranmere Rovers FC" label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570504" start="28396" end="28401" title="List of FA Vase winners" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q185580" start="28409" end="28416" title="FA Vase" label="FA Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140145" start="28423" end="28435" title="Yeading F.C." label="Yeading F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4966973" start="28452" end="28475" title="Bridlington Town A.F.C." label="Bridlington Town A.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="28484" end="28501" title="Manchester United FC" label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="28510" end="28523" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642507" start="28783" end="28801" title="Super League Grand Final" label="Championship Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202117" start="28810" end="28815" title="Leeds Rhinos" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059994" start="28889" end="28902" title="Challenge Cup" label="Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993069" start="29012" end="29025" title="RFL Yorkshire Cup" label="Yorkshire Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834748" start="29133" end="29153" title="BBC2 Floodlit Trophy" label="BBC2 Floodlit Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138696" start="29167" end="29175" title="Parkside, Hunslet" label="Parkside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143339" start="29201" end="29208" title="Hunslet R.L.F.C." label="Hunslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896243" start="29329" end="29358" title="Elland Road Greyhound Stadium" label="Elland Road Greyhound Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q168373" start="29537" end="29548" title="Rugby League Tri-Nations" label="Tri-Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310516" start="29558" end="29562" title="2004 Rugby League Tri-Nations" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="29590" end="29599" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538634" start="29639" end="29643" title="2005 Rugby League Tri-Nations" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535266" start="29721" end="29751" title="2009 Rugby League Four Nations" label="2009 Rugby League Four Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535269" start="29861" end="29891" title="2011 Rugby League Four Nations" label="2011 Rugby League Four Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202117" start="30000" end="30012" title="Leeds Rhinos" label="Leeds Rhinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187032" start="30180" end="30198" title="Headingley Stadium" label="Headingley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116260" start="30328" end="30348" title="World Club Challenge" label="World Club Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20876704" start="30501" end="30508" title="Hunslet F.C. (1883)" label="Hunslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589518" start="30625" end="30629" title="1994 Kangaroo tour" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519831" start="30630" end="30642" title="The Ashes (rugby league)" label="Ashes series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590161" start="30921" end="30927" title="France national rugby league team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154103" start="30946" end="30964" title="1978 Kangaroo tour" label="1978 Kangaroo tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q115908060" start="31019" end="31046" title="2021 Rugby League World Cup" label="2021 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997177" start="31274" end="31287" title="Magic Weekend" label="Magic Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059994" start="31322" end="31335" title="Challenge Cup" label="Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225736" start="31776" end="31795" title="South Leeds Stadium" label="South Leeds Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352689" start="31852" end="31866" title="Bradford Bulls" label="Bradford Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q109975831" start="31965" end="31983" title="2022 Challenge Cup" label="2022 Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202117" start="32118" end="32130" title="Leeds Rhinos" label="Leeds Rhinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116260" start="32131" end="32151" title="World Club Challenge" label="World Club Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811887" start="32262" end="32279" title="Melbourne Storm salary cap breach" label="salary cap breach"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="32387" end="32425" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32434" end="32467" title="North of England rugby union team" label="North of England rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q393491" start="32612" end="32638" title="2015 Rugby World Cup" label="2015 Rugby Union World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="32641" end="32658" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2953680" start="32727" end="32759" title="British American Football League" label="British American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251514" start="32794" end="32801" title="McLaren Field" label="Bramley"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="32949" end="32964" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430769" start="32979" end="32985" title="Dublin GAA" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778431" start="32990" end="32994" title="Mayo GAA" label="Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="33043" end="33070" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q868200" start="33108" end="33116" title="Twenty20" label="Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="33117" end="33124" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="33361" end="33366" title="Boxer (boxing)" label="Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16227455" start="33367" end="33382" title="Josh Warrington" label="Josh Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514983" start="33414" end="33423" title="Lee Selby" label="Lee Selby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="33749" end="33761" title="Leeds United" label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q349473" start="33769" end="33781" title="Lucas Radebe" label="Lucas Radebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192308" start="33829" end="33842" title="Kaiser Chiefs" label="Kaiser Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="33929" end="33938" title="greyhound" label="greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608430" start="34053" end="34081" title="Greyhound Racing Association" label="Greyhound Racing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q750080" start="34307" end="34315" title="Motorcycle speedway" label="speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508298" start="34331" end="34345" title="Fullerton Park" label="Fullerton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="34378" end="34387" title="world war" label="world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="34524" end="34534" title="Ice Hockey" label="Ice Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201111" start="34550" end="34560" title="Planet Ice" label="Planet Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153505" start="34764" end="34781" title="The Damned United" label="The Damned United"/>
<link wikidata="Q207658" start="34830" end="34842" title="Brian Clough" label="Brian Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q298276" start="34854" end="34867" title="Michael Sheen" label="Michael Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="35053" end="35072" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="old Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q160060" start="35107" end="35129" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Speech" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q162492" start="35206" end="35217" title="Colin Firth" label="Colin Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q166272" start="35219" end="35232" title="Geoffrey Rush" label="Geoffrey Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="35237" end="35257" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347124" start="35327" end="35335" title="Porridge (1974 TV series)" label="Porridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744438" start="35349" end="35362" title="Happy Release (Porridge)" label="Happy Release"/>
<link wikidata="Q31670" start="35702" end="35713" title="Loftus Road" label="Loftus Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="35778" end="35802" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q625994" start="35820" end="35830" title="Convention (meeting)" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515833" start="35958" end="35976" title="First Direct Arena" label="First Direct Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033284" start="36024" end="36034" title="Cottingley railway station" label="Cottingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466941" start="36094" end="36107" title="Leeds railway station" label="Leeds Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713897" start="36326" end="36341" title="M621 motorway" label="M621 junction 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961059" start="36637" end="36651" title="Wakefield Line" label="Wakefield Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267644" start="36971" end="36985" title="1905–06 in English football" label="1905–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q964650" start="37013" end="37027" title="1919–20 in English football" label="1919–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="37352" end="37367" title="The Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="37372" end="37386" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q27961547" start="37625" end="37639" title="1920–21 in English football" label="1920–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q106129375" start="37762" end="37776" title="2021–22 in English football" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q96416457" start="38142" end="38149" title="FIFA 21" label="FIFA 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565043" start="38219" end="38269" title="List of stadiums in the United Kingdom by capacity" label="List of stadiums in the United Kingdom by capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196333" start="38271" end="38288" title="Lists of stadiums" label="Lists of stadiums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706752" wikidata="Q57462" url="?curid=706752" title="Konrad Henlein">
<text>Konrad Ernst Eduard Henlein (6 May 1898 – 10 May 1945) was a Sudeten German politician in Czechoslovakia before World War II. After Germany invaded Czechoslovakia he became the and of Reichsgau Sudetenland under the occupation of Nazi Germany. 

Born in the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1898, Henlein served in the Austro-Hungarian Army in World War I. The Austrian Empire collapsed after that, and the Sudetenland, where Henlein lived, became part of newly created Czechoslovakia. 

He became active in the &quot;&quot; movement, a German nationalist and &quot;völkisch&quot; athletic organization. In 1933, he founded the Sudeten German Party of Czechoslovakia. It merged into the Nazi Party in 1939. 

Henlein actively lobbied for Germany to annex the Sudetenland and led the in the Sudeten German uprising in September 1938 that led to the Munich Agreement and the German occupation of the Sudetenland. After the occupation in October 1938, he formally joined the Nazi Party and the SS and was appointed of Reichsgau Sudetenland. He became of Reichsgau Sudetenland when it was formed on 1 May 1939, and was responsible for mass deportations to death camps. He died by suicide in 1945 in American custody after the war.

==Early life==
Konrad Henlein was born in Maffersdorf (now Vratislavice nad Nisou) near Reichenberg, Liberec, in what was then Bohemian crown land of Austria-Hungary. His father, Konrad Henlein Sr., worked as an accounts clerk. His mother, Hedvika Anna Augusta Dworatschek (Dvořáčková), came from a Czech family of German Bohemian origin.

Henlein attended business school in Gablonz (Jablonec nad Nisou) and in World War I entered the Austro-Hungarian Army as a military volunteer (), assigned to the k.u.k. Tiroler Kaiser-Jäger-Regiment # 3. In May 1916 he attended officer candidate school, then was assigned to k.u.k. Infanterie-Regiment Nr. 27, based in Graz. He saw Italian Front service in the Dolomites at Monte Forno, Mont Sief, and Monte Maletta between May 1916 and 17 November 1917.

He was severely wounded, then captured by the Italians, and spent the rest of the war as a POW on Asinara Island, where he studied the history of the German &quot;Turner&quot; (gymnastics) movement of Friedrich Ludwig Jahn. His experiences as a (front-line fighter), gassed on the Italian front played an important role in shaping his politics. His self-image as a fighter for the Sudeten community was crucial to his subsequent career.

==&quot;Völkisch&quot; gymnastics leader==
Henlein embraced the &quot;völkisch&quot; movement and joined the &quot;&quot; (gymnastics association). By 1923, he was promoting &quot;völkisch&quot; ideology in his local &quot;turner&quot; club. Henlein became an increasingly well known figure in the Sudetenland after club wins in a 1926 gymnastics competition in Prague. Henlein&#x27;s mentor Heinz Rutha, founder of the Turnerbund movement, proposed a youthful (male elite) of (leaders) commanding unconditional loyalty, a that which greatly influenced Henlein&#x27;s politics. 

Politics in the Sudetenland were divided between loyalists who wanted Sudeten Germans to take part in Czechoslovakian elections, and separatist &quot;negativists&quot; who did not, Heinlein among them. By 1928 the &quot;Turnerbund&quot; began to emerge as a proto-political party opposed to &quot;activist&quot; parties in the coalition governments in Prague. In an article published in the December 1930 in . Henlein called on Sudeten Germans to embrace ideology and condemned liberalism and democracy as &quot;un-German&quot;. In May 1931, Henlein was elected president of the supposedly apolitical , and it became more overtly and militaristic. The purpose of the became to
indoctrinate its members into the &quot;völkisch&quot; movement.

==Party leader==
Knowing that the Czechoslovak authorities were about to ban the two main parties in the Sudetenland for treason, on 1 October 1933, Henlein founded the &quot;Sudetendeutsche Heimatfront&quot; (&quot;Sudeten German Home Front&quot;, SHF). Although originally meant as a successor to the banned anti-Czech German National Socialist Workers&#x27; Party and German National Party, it soon became a big tent right-wing movement for autonomy for the German minority, rivalling the German Social Democratic Workers Party. Henlein&#x27;s association with the Catholic &quot;Kameradschaftsbund&quot;, which followed the teachings of Austrian philosopher Othmar Spann, allowed him to argue that his movement was not a continuation of the banned parties. American historian Gerhard Weinberg described Henlein as &quot;...a thirty-five year-old veteran of the war who had achieved prominence in a racist athletic organization in the Sudeten area. He now rallied around himself a motley assortment of elements that were long involved in internal feuds&quot;.

British historian Mark Cornwall wrote that he was &quot;attractive to the Sudeten population precisely because of his ordinariness... an Everyman who represented the average Sudeten German&#x27;s grievances&quot;. Ethnic Germans of the Sudetenland had been favored under the Austrian Empire and suddenly now were outsiders in the new Czechoslovak republic. Henlein saw himself as the founder of a (&quot;people&#x27;s community&quot;) for all Sudeten Germans. Henlein presented the Sudeten Germans as a special and unique German community. This Sudeten &quot;particularism&quot; later caused Henlein much trouble under the Third Reich when nationalists like Reinhard Heydrich took exception to these speeches. Cornwall wrote that &quot;...there slowly developed a chasm between Henlein&#x27;s self-perception as a Sudeten and the reality of a man who lacked both charisma and political acumen.&quot;

===Czech politics===
In the early 1930s, Henlein took a pro-Czechoslovak and overtly anti-Nazi stance in his speeches, but as early as 15 May 1934, Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Edvard Beneš told President Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk that Henlein&#x27;s received financial support from Berlin. Beneš was correct. From April 1934 onward, it was subsidized by not only the , but also the (&quot;Society for Germandom Abroad&quot;).

Henlein advocated Sudetenland autonomy, but was vague about what form this would take. To avoid having his party banned, Henlein presented the party&#x27;s ideas as pro-democracy rather than anti-Czech. He spoke of Sudeten Germans living in a Central European &quot;common space&quot; with an identity that transcended loyalty to Czechoslovakia, part of a wider Germanic &quot;common space&quot; that embraced all of Central Europe. He advocated &quot;reconciliation&quot; between Germans and Czechs, provided that the Czechs recognised that they and the Sudetenlanders belonged to the Central European &quot;common space&quot;. Despite his claims of loyalty to Czechoslovakia and its mosaic of peoples, Henlein portrayed life in Germany as far superior to Czechoslovakia, and encouraged his followers to boycott businesses owned by Czechs and Jews. He described the SdP as having a &quot;Christian worldview&quot;, a code-word for anti-Semitism.

On 19 April 1935 the SHF was renamed Sudeten German Party (, SdP) under pressure from the Czechoslovak government. In the parliamentary election of May 1935, the SdP, with massive support from the Nazi Party, received 15.2% of the votes cast and become the strongest Czechoslovak party with about 68% of the ethnic German vote. Henlein capitalized on resentment over the unemployment rate in the Sudetenland, twice that in Bohemia and Moravia. 

The SdP was being secretly subsidised by the and received 15,000 Reichsmark in 1935 alone from the German legation in Prague. In 1933 the subsidies greatly increased, and the SdP became the main recipient of German money in the spring of 1935. In part, the victory of the SdP in the 1935 elections was due to generous financial support from Germany; SdP ran a slick, polished campaign that overshadowed rival ethnic German parties.

Although the party was led &quot;collectively&quot;, Henlein regularly exercised sole authority. He made decisions without consulting the committee he was ostensibly responsible to, and lied and dissembled to even his closest followers. He also summoned all of the SdP deputies to Eger (modern Cheb, Czech Republic) to publicly swear oaths of personal loyalty to him.

Not all committee members knew of the secret German funding, but Henlein&#x27;s rival Karl Hermann Frank sometimes used the knowledge to blackmail him. Henlein claimed he had no contact with Germany, Weinberg wrote, but &quot;...in fact the internal affairs of the Sudeten German party were being supervised by Berlin with the German government picking the leaders, settling the policy lines, and giving or withholding financial support as the situation appeared to dictate&quot;.

Though the SdP won the majority of the seats in the Sudetenland, the numerical dominance of the Czech parties ensured that the SdP was always going to be an opposition party. The main right-wing Czech parties favored preserving Czechoslovakia as a single state, and Henlein&#x27;s talks with them quickly floundered over this issue. Czech public opinion was overwhelmingly hostile to calls to turn Czechoslovakia into a federation. The Czech government rejected Sudeten German autonomy, so Henlein courted foreign governments, especially Britain, in the hope that they would pressure the Czech government. Henlein&#x27;s voters expected him to achieve his platform of autonomy and his turn to &quot;foreign policy&quot; in 1935 reflected his fear of disappointing his supporters.

===Contact with Britain===
Henlein first met British spy and RAF Group-Captain Graham Christie, his main conduit to the British for the next three years, in July 1935. Henlein enjoyed being courted by foreign governments, as it strengthened his authority over his party, where his leadership was frequently questioned. 

In December 1935, Henlein gave a lecture at Chatham House in London on the Sudeten Germans. Historian Robert William Seton-Watson interviewed Henlein afterwards and in a summary wrote that Henlein accepted:

...the existing constitution, treaties and the Minority treaties as the basis of a settlement between Czechoslovakia and the Sudeten Germans. He ruled out not only all questions of German Bohemia (either as a whole or in part) uniting with Germany, but also admitted the impossibility of separating the German and Czech districts, and insisted on the essential unity of the Bohemian lands throughout history and no less today.

Henlein told Seton-Watson that he only criticized Czechoslovakia as a &quot;dishonest democracy&quot;. Henlein admitted his party was &quot;völkisch&quot;, but denied having any contacts with Germany, and said that claims his party was subsidized by the Germans were a &quot;lie&quot;. Seton-Watson asked if it was really possible for someone to believe in both &quot;völkisch&quot; ideology and German-Czech equality, but wrote that Henlein seemed very sincere.

Few in Britain had paid attention to Czechoslovakia before 1938, but the few who did tended to cite the &quot;injustices&quot; of the treaties of Versailles and St. Germain: that the Sudetenland was not allowed to join Germany or Austria as the majority of the Sudetenlanders had asked in 1918–19. Given these sympathies, Henlein was well received at the Chatham House.

In May 1936, Czechoslovak Prime Minister Milan Hodža declared in a speech: &quot;The government would take care that Henlein achieved no success, and it was confident that the SdP would then split up into various factions that could then be more easily handed&quot;. On 12 June 1936, Henlein complained in a speech in Eger that the law in Czechoslovakia protected only the rights of individuals, not &quot;racial groups&quot;. 

In July 1936, Henlein again went to London and expounded upon various grievances felt by the &quot;volksdeutsche&quot; of Czechoslovakia. &quot;It may well be that Germany has designs on Czechoslovakia in any event,&quot; wrote the Permanent Undersecretary of the Foreign Office, Sir Robert Vansittart after meeting him, &quot;but it is quite certain that at present the Czechoslovak government are providing them with ... a first-class pretext&quot;. London knew from 1936 onward that Henlein&#x27;s party was being secretly subsidised by Germany. One Foreign Office official wrote in April 1937 when a journalist from &quot;The News Chronicle&quot; presented evidence that Germany was financing the SdP that the documents &quot;do not really tell us anything new&quot;. In the fall of 1936, President Beneš, despite his distaste for Henlein, tried to talk with him, but Henlein, on orders from Berlin, ignored the feelers.

Starting in January 1937, the British government pushed Benes to negotiate with Henlein, but Beneš refused. The French minister in Prague, , supported Beneš, saying that any concession to Henlein would weaken Czechoslovakia, and thus the entire &quot;cordon sanitaire&quot; as the French alliance system in Eastern Europe was known. As France was Czechoslovakia&#x27;s most powerful ally, Beneš felt no need to give in to the British pressure in 1937 for talks with Henlein about devolving power from the Castle. Weinberg argued that this was a great missed opportunity for Beneš as &quot;...the way to show up Henlein as disloyal was for the Czechoslovak government to make him a real offer which he would either have to accept, thereby recognizing the willingness of the Prague government to make meaningful concessions, or reject and thereby show himself uninterested in agreement&quot;.

===Beneš reaction===
However, in February 1937, Beneš did promise &quot;ethnic proportionality&quot; in the Czechoslovak civil service, more funding for ethnic German cultural groups, a guarantee that government contracts for public works would go to businesses owned by ethnic Germans in areas where Germans where the majority, the distribution of government spending on a regional basis, and to allow greater use of German as one of the official languages of Czechoslovakia. On 27 April 1937, Henlein in a speech before the chamber of deputies demanded that all of the &quot;racial groups&quot; of Czechoslovakia be automatically enrolled in &quot;national organisations&quot; which would be separate legal entities and would direct all of the internal affairs of their own &quot;racial group&quot;. Once a citizen had chosen their &quot;national organisation&quot; at the age of 18, they would not be allowed to leave it. Henlein concluded that each of the &quot;racial groups&quot; needed their own &quot;national organisation&quot; to provide the necessary space to allow them to develop in peace. These demands were rejected by Beneš as an attempt to gut Czechoslovak unity by turning it into a series of corporate &quot;racial groups&quot; governing themselves. However, Henlein&#x27;s demands served to distract attention from the February reforms and allowed him to once again present the Sudeten Germans as being &quot;oppressed&quot; by Beneš, supposedly denying them the right to their own &quot;racial identity&quot;.

In the meantime, Henlein engaged in a &quot;soft power&quot; offensive, and was interviewed by the famous historian Arnold J. Toynbee for &quot;The Economist&quot; in July 1937. He insisted he was loyal to Czechoslovakia, but talked much about the Czech-dominated government discriminating against the Sudeten Germans. The speech by Hodža, where he pointed out the Czechoslovak state provided far more money in subsidies to German cultural groups than to cultural groups of the other minorities and that government spending in the Sudetenland was well above the 23% level required by &quot;the principle of proportionality&quot; which required that spending be matched to the size of the ethnic groups, attracted little attention in the British media, which largely repeated variations of Henlein&#x27;s line that the Sudeten Germans were the victims of &quot;oppression&quot; by the Czech-dominated Czechoslovak state.

Henlein did not become a declared follower of Adolf Hitler until 1937, after the pro-German camp within the SdP represented by Karl Hermann Frank emerged victorious. In October 1937 the Czechoslovak authorities were tipped off (possibly by the German secret service) about the homosexuality of his close ally Heinz Rutha, who was imprisoned on charges that he had had sexual relations with young men active in the SdP. Rutha hanged himself in a jail cell awaiting trial. Henlein swiftly aligned himself with the slogan &quot;Ein Volk, ein Reich, ein Führer!&quot; (&quot;One People, One Country, One Leader!&quot;), thus calling for the predominantly (typically more than 80%) German-speaking Sudetenland to be a part of Germany. Unknown to Henlein, on 5 November 1937 at the conference in Berlin recorded in the Hossbach Memorandum, Hitler declared that he was planning to attack Austria and Czechoslovakia in the very near future. British historian Richard Overy noted that in the Hossbach memorandum Hitler said nothing about Czechoslovakia&#x27;s treatment of the Sudeten Germans as a reason for war, instead saying that Germany was falling behind in the arms race with Britain and France, and so needed to conquer Czechoslovakia to exploit its resources, industries and people to take the lead in the arms race and to provide for economic autarky to make Germany immune to a British blockade.

On 19 November 1937, Henlein wrote to Hitler asking him to support him as the sole leader of the Sudeten German community, and declared his belief that ethnic Germans and Czechs simply could not coexist in the same country, and his willingness to support any German foreign move that would bring the Sudetenland &quot;home to the &quot;Reich&quot;&quot;. The Rutha scandal together with Henlein&#x27;s inability to achieve the autonomy he had promised his voters in 1935 left Henlein&#x27;s position as party leader weakened, so he decided to fully align himself with Berlin as the only way to save his career. On 3 November 1937, Henlein in a letter to Christie wrote: &quot;the policy which I have represented up to now is only sustainable if it results in concrete success&quot;.

==1938 crisis==
The dominance by Henlein&#x27;s political party of the Sudetenland in the 1930s set off the crisis that led to the Munich Agreement on 30 September 1938. On 12 March 1938, British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax told Jan Masaryk, the Czechoslovak minister in London, that his government should try to negotiate with Henlein, but Masaryk replied that Henlein was not to be trusted and it was a waste of time to talk to him. The Austrian &quot;Anschluss&quot; in March 1938 caused much excitement in the Sudetenland and the SdP held huge rallies with portraits of Hitler prominently displayed and crowds shouting &quot;Ein Volk, ein Reich, ein Führer!&quot; and &quot;Home to the &quot;Reich&quot;!&quot;. Henlein declared at these rallies that now more than ever his party was the &quot;only&quot; party that spoke for the Sudetenland. Two of the Sudeten &quot;activist&quot; parties, the Christian Social Party and the German Agrarian Party, both quit the government in Prague, declaring that they stood behind &quot;Führer&quot; Henlein.

===Enabling the invasion of Czechoslovakia ===

Henlein secretly visited Berlin to meet Hitler, and agreed to provide a pretext for a German invasion by demanding autonomy for the Sudetenland. Hitler believed that Italy could hold both Britain and France in check and that there was no danger that a German attack on Czechoslovakia would cause a wider war. Henlein&#x27;s role would be to make demands that the Castle could never accept. At a second meeting on 29 March 1938 also attended by Hitler, Henlein, Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop and State Secretary Baron Ernst von Weizsäcker to work out the tactics, Henlein was told to always come across as moderate, not to move too quickly, and above all never to negotiate in good faith.

Hitler made it clear that he did not want a general war in 1938 and that it was necessary to isolate Czechoslovakia internationally by making it appear that the Czechoslovak government was being intransigent, which was especially important given that France and Czechoslovakia had signed a defensive alliance in 1924. Hitler also authorized Henlein to contact other parties representing the Slovak, Polish, Ukrainian and Magyar minorities for a joint campaign to make Czechoslovakia into a federation, as this would make Czechoslovakia appear unstable and rickety, and hence presumably increase the unwillingness of France to go to war for a state that seemed unlikely to last. Finally, Henlein was told to ask only for autonomy, but to subtly promote the message that ethnic Germans and Czechs could not co-exist in the same country. On 5 April 1938, Henlein told a Hungarian diplomat that &quot;whatever the Czech government might offer, he would always raise still higher demands...he wanted to sabotage an understanding by all means&quot;.

On 24 April 1938, at a party congress in Karlsbad, Czechoslovakia (now Karlovy Vary, in the Czech Republic) Henlein announced the eight-point Karlsbad programme for Sudetenland autonomy, while insisting that he and his party were loyal to Czechoslovakia. The apparent moderation of the Karlsbad programme, demanding only autonomy, was intended to make Czechoslovakia appear intransigent, &quot;forcing&quot; Germany to invade. 

Hitler wanted the demand for German regiments to be the ninth point in the Karlsbad programme, but Henlein persuaded him that it was too inflammatory and too likely to alienate public opinion abroad. The Karlsbad programme set off the crisis that led to the Munich Agreement in September. Henlein&#x27;s speech in Karlsbad received extensive newspaper coverage all over the world, and raised acute tensions between Berlin and Prague when the German government declared its support for the Karlsbad programme. At the Karlsbad party congress, Henlein also added the &quot;Aryan paragraph&quot; to the StP, formally adopting &quot;völkisch&quot; racism. Despite this, Basil Newton, the British minister in Prague, described Henlein to London as a &quot;moderate&quot;, saying it was time for the Castle to make concessions before Henlein lost control of his party.

Czechoslovakia was allied to France. Britain would intervene in a Franco-German war rather than risk a French defeat that would make Germany the dominant power in Europe. The Soviet Union, also allied to Czechoslovakia, would be drawn in the war as well.

===Hitler ignoring his generals===
Much of the Wehrmacht leadership, led by Chief of the General Staff General Ludwig Beck, objected to Hitler&#x27;s plans as likely to cause a war with France, the Soviet Union and probably also Britain, at a time when they believed that German re-armament was not advanced enough for another world war. Until the spring of 1938, German military planning assumed that when the Reich went to war with France again, which the entire Wehrmacht leadership regarded as both inevitable and desirable, it would also go to war with France&#x27;s ally Czechoslovakia. In the spring of 1938, Hitler decided to attack Czechoslovakia, on the assumption that France would remain neutral, which Beck and Hermann Göring regarded as absurd. On 21 April 1938, Hitler told General Wilhelm Keitel of the OKW the &quot;political preconditions&quot; for a war against Czechoslovakia. The &quot;expendable&quot; Baron , the German minister in Prague, was to be assassinated, as justification for a German attack on Czechoslovakia. On 28 May 1938 Hitler issued orders for &quot;Fall Grün&quot;, the invasion of Czechoslovakia, scheduled for 1 October 1938.

German ambassador to Great Britain Herbert von Dirksen advised Berlin that the German position would seem stronger to the British if Henlein and his movement were not seen as working for Berlin, and that Henlein should visit London to promote this idea. Henlein first went to Berlin, where he was given a memo written by Weizsäcker telling him what to say in London: &quot;Henlein will deny in London that he is acting on instructions from Berlin...Finally, Henlein will speak of the progressive disintegration of the Czech political structure, in order to discourage those circles which consider that their intervention on behalf of this structure may still be of use&quot;. Starting on 12 May 1938, Henlein visited London and impressed almost everyone he met as an apparently reasonable, mild-mannered man full of genial charm, who just wanted autonomy for his people. Henlein told British politicians that he was not working for Hitler, that the Czechs were &quot;oppressing&quot; the Sudetenland by forcing the children in some districts to attend classes taught in Czech, and insisted he only wanted autonomy for the Sudetenland. Henlein promoted the idea that he only wanted a &quot;fair deal&quot; for the Sudeten and claimed that he opposed the Sudetenland joining Germany, noting that after the &quot;Anschluss&quot; Austrian Nazis were pushed aside by the Germans. He said he did not want the same thing to happen to him, but did admit that if Prague refused to give in to all
eight demands of the Karlsbad programme, Germany would definitely invade. No British cabinet ministers met Henlein, as it was felt to be inappropriate for ministers of the Crown to meet an opposition politician from another country, but he did meet with many backbenchers and journalists, who came away sympathetic to Henlein&#x27;s movement. Henlein was however unable to explain just precisely how a one-party state could co-exist inside a democracy. On 15 May 1938, Henlein left London for Berlin, where he called his visit a great success.

In the May 1938 local elections in the Sudetenland, the SdP candidates for town and village councils won 87%–90% of the votes cast, indicating that a majority of the Sudeten Germans were behind Henlein. Frustrated with the unwillingness of Henlein and Hodža to talk, in the summer of 1938 the British government, believing that both parties wanted an agreement, sent an intermediary to Czechoslovakia they thought might be able to break the deadlock. In his August 1938 visit, British Liberal politician Lord Runciman fell under Henlein&#x27;s influence. He was said to have told Henlein to stop inciting violence, but the report he wrote largely reflected Henlein&#x27;s ideas, for example, that ethnic Germans and Czechs simply could not live together and should be separated.

In August 1938, Group-Captain Graham Christie met Henlein in a beer-hall in Karlsbad, and reported that unlike his usual mild-mannered self, Henlein under the influence of alcohol was abusive and arrogant, saying he hated the Czechs and did not want to live with them in the same state anymore. On 17 August 1938, General Louis-Eugène Faucher, the French military attache in Prague, reported to Paris that Czechoslovak military intelligence had presented him with conclusive evidence that Henlein was planning, together with the &quot;Abwehr&quot; (German military intelligence), a September uprising in the Sudetenland. The initial plan for the &quot;Anschluss&quot; had called for Austrian Nazis to assassinate as a pretext Franz von Papen, the German ambassador to Vienna. The same plan was adopted for Czechoslovakia; Henlein ordered some of his followers to put on police uniforms and assassinate Baron Ernst von Eisenlohr to provide a pretext for war when the time was right, as well as to have attack the police, to create further incidents. 

In early September 1938, President Beneš announced the &quot;Fourth Plan&quot; for constitutional change to make Czechoslovakia into a federation, which did not meet all of the demands of the Karlsbad programme, but did grant autonomy to the Sudetenland. In response, Henlein announced on 7 September 1938 that the &quot;Fourth Plan&quot; was unacceptable. On 9 September 1938, Benito Mussolini formally endorsed all eight points of the Karlsbad programme and denounced Czechoslovakia as &quot;tainted&quot; by its alliances with France and the Soviet Union. From 12 September 1938 forward, Henlein helped organise hundreds of terrorist attacks and two coup attempts by the &quot;Sudetendeutsches Freikorps&quot; a paramilitary organisation affiliated with the &quot;SS-Totenkopfverbände&quot;, immediately after Hitler&#x27;s threatening speech in Nuremberg at the Nazi Party&#x27;s annual rally on 12 September 1938. Hitler dropped Sudetenland autonomy and formally demanded that it join Germany. The attempted uprising was quickly suppressed by Czechoslovak forces. Henlein fled to Germany, only to start numerous intrusions into Czechoslovak territory around Aš as a commander of Sudeten guerilla bands. Henlein&#x27;s flight was widely seen as cowardice, and he remained always very sensitive about criticism of his actions in September 1938.

Hitler&#x27;s plans for &quot;Fall Grun&quot; (Case Green), scheduled for 1 October 1938, were foiled by Britain, who took at face value Hitler&#x27;s claim that all he wanted was the Sudetenland, and did not realize that the issue was a pretext. Greek historian Aristotle Kallis wrote: &quot;The problem [for Hitler] was that the British government took the irredentist alibi of Nazi expansionism quite seriously, eager to make concessions on these lines, without realising that no territorial offer on &quot;ethnic&quot; grounds would never satisfy the &quot;geographical&quot; prerequisites of the fascist &#x27;new order&#x27;&quot;. Kallis noted that Hitler&#x27;s plans had always called for the conquest of all of Czechoslovakia, not just the Sudetenland. The fact that Britain kept pressuring Czechoslovakia in September 1938 to make concessions sabotaged Hitler&#x27;s plan for war based on the assumption that the Castle would not make concessions on the Sudetenland issue. Kallis wrote that Hitler&#x27;s claim that he was only concerned about the treatment of ethnic Germans in the Sudetenland can be seen as dishonest, since until 1939 he completely ignored the South Tyrol region of Italy, whose ethnic German population was treated far worse.

When Hitler finally did turn to South Tyrol in 1939, he signed the South Tyrol Option Agreement with Mussolini calling for the German-speakers of South Tyrol to either move to Germany or be Italianized. For Hitler, an alliance with Fascist Italy outweighed any concern for the persecuted German community of South Tyrol. As the countdown for a war scheduled to begin on 1 October continued, it dawned on Henlein that the Sudetenland was going to become a war zone, which caused him to sink into depression. But on 27 September 1938 when Hitler decided not to go to war after all, citing the unenthusiastic response of the people of Berlin to a huge military parade he had ordered. He could not go to war with the German people not behind him, he said. On 28 September 1938, Hitler told French ambassador André François-Poncet that he was willing to attend a conference in Munich to discuss a peaceful solution to the crisis, with Mussolini as a mediator. The 
Munich Agreement of 30 September 1938 ended the crisis and stated the Sudetenland was to &quot;go home to the Reich&quot; peacefully over a ten-day period in October 1938. Hitler saw the Munich Agreement as a diplomatic defeat as it &quot;cheated&quot; him out of the war he had planned to start the next day, but Henlein was greatly relieved.

==German occupation==

Upon the Wehrmacht&#x27;s entry into the Sudetenland, on 1 October 1938 Henlein was appointed &quot;Reichskommissar&quot; and &quot;Gauleiter&quot; for Reichsgau Sudetenland and became a SS-&quot;Gruppenführer&quot; (later an SS-&quot;Obergruppenführer&quot;). 

Henlein organized the &quot;Kristallnacht&quot; pogrom in the Sudetenland on 9 November 1938, which smashed Jewish homes and businesses. and was deeply involved in a campaign for the &quot;de-Jewification&quot; of the Sudeten economy, confiscating businesses and properties owned by Jews. He himself confiscated a villa in Reichenberg (modern Liberec, Czech Republic) from a Jewish businessman. It remained his home until 1945. Henlein was elected to the &quot;Reichstag&quot; in December 1938 and formally joined the Nazi Party on 26 January 1939.

===Nazi politics===
When Germans took over what remained of Czechoslovakia in March 1939, Henlein served one month as head of the civil administration of the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, nominally making him the number-two man in the Protectorate behind Konstantin von Neurath. Henlein welcomed the creation of the Protectorate of Bohemia-Moravia as restoring &quot;natural Czech subservience&quot; to the Germans, saying that Bohemia and Moravia were &quot;German lands&quot; that had unfortunately ended up &quot;occupied&quot; by the Czechs, who now would serve as a &quot;demographic and economic resources&quot; to be exploited by Germany. However, most of the power ended up in the hands of his long-time rival Karl Hermann Frank. On 1 May 1939, Henlein was named (Reich Governor) of Reichsgau Sudetenland, thereby holding both the highest party and governmental offices in his jurisdiction. On 16 November 1942, he was named Reich Defense Commissioner for the Reichsgau. He continued to hold these positions until the end of the war.

Henlein attempted to place his long-term followers in key positions in his Reichsgau and, starting in the spring of 1939, became locked into a battle over patronage with Reinhard Heydrich. Cornwall described them as &quot;ideologically close&quot;, with the principal differences between Henlein&#x27;s emphasis on Sudeten &quot;particularism&quot; as opposed to Heydrich&#x27;s &quot;Großdeutschland&quot; nationalism. Heydrich felt that Henlein should present the SdP as an unambiguously &quot;völkisch&quot; party. In late 1939, Heydrich struck at Henlein by arresting over 50 leading Sudeten Nazis — all of them closely associated with Henlein&#x27;s mentor Heinz Rutha -- on charges of being part of a homosexual group who used their positions in the SdP in the 1930s to recruit young men for sex. Heydrich let the accused go on trial in early 1940 rather than taking them into &quot;protective custody&quot; when the courts heard lurid stories of how in the 1930s the SdP leaders had engaged in homosexual orgies.

Faced with that threat, Henlein went to Berlin to meet Heydrich and agreed to fire deputy Gauleiter Fritz Köllner and replace him with Heydrich&#x27;s nominee, Richard Donnevert. Hitler tended to side with his Gauleiters, and made clear that he was behind Henlein, so removing him was not practical for Heydrich, who therefore tried to neutralize him by removing his followers from the local NSDAP. In March 1940, at a party rally in Hohenelbe (modern Vrchlabí, Czech Republic), Henlein formally denouncing Rutha—the best man at his wedding in 1926—as a homosexual &quot;pervert&quot;, and embraced Heydrich&#x27;s &quot;Großdeutschland&quot; nationalism, asserting that Sudeten Germans were no different from the &quot;Reichdeutsch&quot;.

Henlein&#x27;s pursued a &quot;merciless&quot; vendetta against the Czechs in the Sudetenland, who numbered about 300,000 (~10% of the population). an &quot;apartheid&quot; regime designed to ensure the total physical separation of the German and Czech communities, with the Czechs forced to accept considerably inferior facilities. Henlein said that Czechs were to serve as to the Germans, and banned Czech children from going beyond primary school, believing that education would encourage them to demand equality. In 1942–43, he confiscated much land owned by ethnic Czech farmers unable to pay their taxes, and gave it to 3,000 settlers from Germany. Henlein&#x27;s policy was the complete Germanization of the Sudetenland, and only the unwillingness of the authorities in Bohemia-Moravia to accept the ethnic Czechs of the Sudetenland prevented Henlein from expelling them all. However, the need of the German state for Czechs to work in war industries, especially when so many Sumen had been called up for service with the , meant that the Sudetenland had more Czechs living in it in 1945 than in 1938. Henlein protested against bringing Czechs from Bohemia-Moravia to work in the Sudetenland&#x27;s factories and farms, which counteracted his policy of reducing the Czech population, but Berlin said that the needs of war industry and agriculture were far more important than his anti-Czech obsessions.

When Henlein heard of Heydrich&#x27;s assassination, he celebrated by visiting the local beer-hall. 

In late 1942, Henlein deported the last Jews to Theresienstadt. For the next two years, Henlein reigned supreme in his &quot;Gau&quot; and rehired many of the men he had been forced to fire in 1940. Henlein&#x27;s willingness to assert himself won him the respect of Martin Bormann who called him in July 1944 a &quot;historic personality&quot; and &quot;an especially reliable party comrade&quot;. 

In the last days of World War II, in what Cornwall called a &quot;mad scheme&quot;, Heinlen tried to persuade Hitler to abandon Berlin for the Sudetenland, to continue the war and launch a new invasion of the Soviet Union from its mountains.

==Arrest and suicide==
On 10 May 1945, while in American captivity in the barracks of Pilsen, he committed suicide by cutting his veins with his broken glasses. He was buried anonymously in the Plzeň Central Cemetery. 

The annexation of Sudetenland to Germany was reversed after the war and the entire ethnic German population of the Sudetenland was expelled to eastern Germany in 1945–46 under the Beneš decrees. In Czech, &quot;Henleinovci&quot; (&#x27;Henleinists&#x27;) is a term of abuse, meaning a traitor or fifth-columnist.

==In fiction==
Harry Turtledove&#x27;s &quot;The War That Came Early&quot; alternate history novel series begins with Henlein being assassinated on 28 September 1938, causing a version of WWII to begin in 1938.

&quot;Henleinists&quot; are a looming presence throughout Martha Gellhorn&#x27;s novel &quot;A Stricken Field&quot; (1940). Republished 2011, .

Henlein is the subject of a murder investigation by detective Bernie Gunther in Philip Kerr&#x27;s novel &quot;Prague Fatale&quot;. Published 2011.

He was also portrayed in the Czechoslovak film &quot;Jára Cimrman ležíci spíci&quot;, where he is a child living in the fictional village of Liptákov,

==See also==
*Germans in Czechoslovakia (1918–1938)
*List SS-Obergruppenführer

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*


==Further reading==
*Adam, Alfons (2013). &quot;Die Arbeiterfrage soll mit Hilfe von KZ-Häftlingen gelöst werden&quot;: Zwangsarbeit in KZ-Außenlagern auf dem Gebiet der heutigen Tschechischen Republik [&quot;The labor question should be solved with the help of concentration camp prisoners&quot;: Forced labor in the subcamps on the territory of what is now the Czech Republic] (in German). Metropol-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-86331-083-7.
*Lowy, Paul (2013). &quot;La destruction des communautés juives des Sudètes. L&#x27;exemple de Teplitz-Schönau&quot;. Revue d&#x27;Histoire de la Shoah (in French). Cairn. 199 (2): 411. doi:10.3917/rhsho.199.0411. ISSN 2111-885X.
*Osterloh, Jörg (2006). Nationalsozialistische Judenverfolgung im Reichsgau Sudetenland 1938–1945 [The Nazi Persecution of Jews in Reichsgau Sudetenland, 1938–1945] (in German). Munich: Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag. ISBN 978-3-486-57980-2.
*Osterloh, Jörg (2010). Nacionálněsocialistické pronásledování Židů v říšské župě Sudety v letech 1938-1945 [The Nazi Persecution of Jews in the Sudetenland, 1938–1945] (in Czech). Argo. ISBN 978-80-257-0213-0.
*Zimmermann, Volker (1999). Die Sudetendeutschen im NS-Staat: Politik und Stimmung der Bevölkerung im Reichsgau Sudetenland (1938-1945) [The Sudeten Germans in the Nazi State: Politics and Mood of the Population of Reichsgau Sudetenland (1938–1945)] (in German). Essen: Klartext. ISBN 978-3-88474-770-4.

==External links==

* Konrad Henlein in Britannica
* Konrad Henlein (in German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57462" start="0" end="27" title="Konrad Henlein" label="Konrad Ernst Eduard Henlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q663389" start="61" end="75" title="Sudeten Germans" label="Sudeten German"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="90" end="104" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="112" end="124" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q315432" start="184" end="205" title="Reichsgau Sudetenland" label="Reichsgau Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="230" end="242" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="258" end="281" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="313" end="334" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="338" end="349" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="401" end="412" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="464" end="478" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="531" end="549" title="German nationalist" label="German nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="554" end="574" title="Völkisch movement" label="&amp;quot;völkisch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q678584" start="622" end="642" title="Sudeten German Party" label="Sudeten German Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="681" end="691" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="753" end="764" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726836" start="784" end="807" title="Sudeten German uprising" label="Sudeten German uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="842" end="858" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="915" end="925" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="966" end="976" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="985" end="987" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q315432" start="1009" end="1030" title="Reichsgau Sudetenland" label="Reichsgau Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q315432" start="1045" end="1066" title="Reichsgau Sudetenland" label="Reichsgau Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q705952" start="1264" end="1275" title="Vratislavice nad Nisou" label="Maffersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q146351" start="1310" end="1321" title="Liberec" label="Reichenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="1349" end="1357" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1372" end="1387" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="1521" end="1526" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q663389" start="1537" end="1552" title="German Bohemian" label="German Bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q147607" start="1598" end="1605" title="Jablonec nad Nisou" label="Gablonz"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1634" end="1645" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="1658" end="1679" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454940" start="1685" end="1703" title="military volunteer" label="military volunteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q265411" start="1724" end="1730" title="Imperial and Royal" label="k.u.k."/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="1881" end="1885" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q659745" start="1894" end="1907" title="Italian Front (World War I)" label="Italian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283" start="1923" end="1932" title="Dolomites" label="Dolomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="2064" end="2071" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="2109" end="2112" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q730500" start="2116" end="2123" title="Asinara" label="Asinara"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="2195" end="2205" title="gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q77098" start="2219" end="2240" title="Friedrich Ludwig Jahn" label="Friedrich Ludwig Jahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="2520" end="2549" title="Völkisch movement" label="&amp;quot;völkisch&amp;quot; movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600855" start="2848" end="2859" title="Heinz Rutha" label="Heinz Rutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="3514" end="3524" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="3529" end="3538" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="3747" end="3776" title="völkisch movement" label="&amp;quot;völkisch&amp;quot; movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q678584" start="3954" end="3981" title="Sudeten German Party" label="Sudetendeutsche Heimatfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q567306" start="4100" end="4145" title="German National Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Czechoslovakia)" label="German National Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203613" start="4150" end="4171" title="German National Party" label="German National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030814" start="4190" end="4198" title="big tent" label="big tent"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="4223" end="4231" title="Autonomous area" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q456307" start="4271" end="4309" title="German Social Democratic Workers Party in the Czechoslovak Republic" label="German Social Democratic Workers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356981" start="4362" end="4380" title="Kameradschaftsbund (Czechoslovakia)" label="Kameradschaftsbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q79151" start="4441" end="4453" title="Othmar Spann" label="Othmar Spann"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="4559" end="4575" title="Gerhard Weinberg" label="Gerhard Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="5501" end="5518" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="5922" end="5934" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Edvard Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q78492" start="5950" end="5972" title="Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk" label="Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q678584" start="7155" end="7175" title="Sudeten German Party" label="Sudeten German Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201881" start="7240" end="7274" title="1935 Czechoslovak parliamentary election" label="parliamentary election of May 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q193719" start="8291" end="8295" title="Cheb" label="Cheb"/>
<link wikidata="Q57328" start="8452" end="8470" title="Karl Hermann Frank" label="Karl Hermann Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588397" start="9708" end="9723" title="Graham Christie" label="Graham Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q263016" start="9994" end="10007" title="Chatham House" label="Chatham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q647596" start="10052" end="10079" title="Robert William Seton-Watson" label="Robert William Seton-Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q349893" start="11462" end="11473" title="Milan Hodža" label="Milan Hodža"/>
<link wikidata="Q336379" start="12134" end="12151" title="Robert Gilbert Vansittart" label="Robert Vansittart"/>
<link wikidata="Q185381" start="15316" end="15333" title="Arnold J. Toynbee" label="Arnold J. Toynbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="15344" end="15357" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="16167" end="16179" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q57328" start="16248" end="16266" title="Karl Hermann Frank" label="Karl Hermann Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600855" start="16430" end="16441" title="Heinz Rutha" label="Heinz Rutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q125982" start="16934" end="16953" title="Hossbach Memorandum" label="Hossbach Memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376016" start="17072" end="17085" title="Richard Overy" label="Richard Overy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="17465" end="17472" title="autarky" label="autarky"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="18435" end="18451" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="18518" end="18530" title="Lord Halifax" label="Lord Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q315531" start="18536" end="18547" title="Jan Masaryk" label="Jan Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="19885" end="19907" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q60650" start="19934" end="19954" title="Ernst von Weizsäcker" label="Ernst von Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q384544" start="21222" end="21234" title="Karlovy Vary" label="Karlovy Vary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="21838" end="21854" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q314732" start="22150" end="22165" title="Aryan paragraph" label="Aryan paragraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q810015" start="22245" end="22257" title="Basil Newton" label="Basil Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="22746" end="22755" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q57170" start="22810" end="22821" title="Ludwig Beck" label="Ludwig Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="23423" end="23437" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="23496" end="23510" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="23518" end="23521" title="OKW" label="OKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="23654" end="23660" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268359" start="23788" end="23797" title="Fall Grün (Czechoslovakia)" label="Fall Grün"/>
<link wikidata="Q213954" start="23903" end="23922" title="Herbert von Dirksen" label="Herbert von Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713954" start="26267" end="26282" title="Runciman Mission" label="an intermediary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333376" start="26404" end="26417" title="Walter Runciman, 1st Viscount Runciman of Doxford" label="Lord Runciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588397" start="26710" end="26725" title="Graham Christie" label="Graham Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260465" start="27002" end="27022" title="Louis-Eugène Faucher" label="Louis-Eugène Faucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q152993" start="27215" end="27221" title="Abwehr" label="Abwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q150552" start="27406" end="27421" title="Franz von Papen" label="Franz von Papen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="28109" end="28125" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="28384" end="28388" title="coup d&amp;#x27;etat" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q329530" start="28411" end="28437" title="Sudetendeutsches Freikorps" label="Sudetendeutsches Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q312204" start="28498" end="28518" title="SS-Totenkopfverbände" label="SS-Totenkopfverbände"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="28580" end="28589" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q583910" start="28894" end="28896" title="Aš" label="Aš"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="30255" end="30266" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q249068" start="30406" end="30434" title="South Tyrol Option Agreement" label="South Tyrol Option Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q518576" start="31143" end="31164" title="André François-Poncet" label="André François-Poncet"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="31299" end="31315" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="31676" end="31685" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q695843" start="31767" end="31782" title="Reichskommissar" label="Reichskommissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451250" start="31799" end="31808" title="Gauleiter" label="Gauleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q315432" start="31819" end="31840" title="Reichsgau Sudetenland" label="Reichsgau Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19007787" start="31863" end="31876" title="Gruppenführer" label="Gruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154633" start="31902" end="31919" title="Obergruppenführer" label="Obergruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="31958" end="31971" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q146351" start="32273" end="32280" title="Liberec" label="Liberec"/>
<link wikidata="Q878525" start="32391" end="32400" title="Reichstag (Nazi Germany)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="32638" end="32673" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153421" start="32742" end="32764" title="Konstantin von Neurath" label="Konstantin von Neurath"/>
<link wikidata="Q57328" start="33205" end="33223" title="Karl Hermann Frank" label="Karl Hermann Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q315432" start="33278" end="33299" title="Reichsgau Sudetenland" label="Reichsgau Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139827" start="33420" end="33446" title="Reich Defense Commissioner" label="Reich Defense Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="33700" end="33717" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600855" start="34192" end="34203" title="Heinz Rutha" label="Heinz Rutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694" start="34711" end="34728" title="Richard Donnevert" label="Richard Donnevert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008595" start="35003" end="35011" title="Vrchlabí" label="Vrchlabí"/>
<link wikidata="Q15111616" start="36853" end="36867" title="Theresienstadt concentration camp" label="Theresienstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="37072" end="37086" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="37535" end="37541" title="Plzeň" label="Pilsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="37556" end="37563" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q165559" start="37849" end="37862" title="Beneš decrees" label="Beneš decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="37998" end="38014" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773487" start="38028" end="38051" title="The War That Came Early" label="The War That Came Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="38058" end="38075" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q120085" start="38253" end="38268" title="Martha Gellhorn" label="Martha Gellhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566576" start="38542" end="38567" title="Jára Cimrman Lying, Sleeping" label="Jára Cimrman ležíci spíci"/>
<link wikidata="Q17122804" start="38655" end="38692" title="Germans in Czechoslovakia (1918–1938)" label="Germans in Czechoslovakia (1918–1938)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38694" end="38719" title="Register of SS-Leaders in general&amp;#x27;s rank#List SS-Obergruppenführer" label="List SS-Obergruppenführer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706766" wikidata="Q5437269" url="?curid=706766" title="Fatal">
<text>Fatal is to cause death. It may also refer to:

==Music==
* &quot;Fatal&quot; (album), by Hussein Fatal, 2002
* &quot;Fatal&quot; (song), a song by Gemn (Kento Nakajima and Tatsuya Kitani), 2024
* &quot;Fatal&quot;, a song by Motionless in White from &quot;Infamous&quot;, 2012
* &quot;Fatal&quot;, a song by Pearl Jam from &quot;Lost Dogs&quot;, 2003
* Fatal Recordings, a record label founded by Hanin Elias

==People==
* Hussein Fatal (1973–2015), American rapper
* Fatal, a rapper who collaborated with the band Therapy? on the song &quot;Come and Die&quot; from the &quot;Judgment Night&quot; film soundtrack

==Other uses==
* &quot;F.A.T.A.L.&quot;, a tabletop role-playing game released in 2003
* &quot;Fatal&quot;, a 2010 French film starring Michaël Youn and Stéphane Rousseau

==See also==
* Fatale (disambiguation)
* Fatalis (disambiguation)
* Fatalism, a philosophical doctrine
* Fate (disambiguation)
* Fattal, a surname
* Lethal (disambiguation)
* Death, the foreboding of</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5437269" start="0" end="5" title="Fatal" label="Fatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="18" end="23" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019476" start="60" end="85" title="Fatal (album)" label="&amp;quot;Fatal&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127162572" start="112" end="136" title="Fatal (song)" label="&amp;quot;Fatal&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028782" start="257" end="265" title="Infamous (Motionless in White album)" label="Infamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q534037" start="330" end="339" title="Lost Dogs (album)" label="Lost Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q443276" start="398" end="409" title="Hanin Elias" label="Hanin Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384898" start="424" end="437" title="Hussein Fatal" label="Hussein Fatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009451" start="571" end="613" title="Judgment Night (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Judgment Night&amp;quot; film soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854054" start="638" end="648" title="F.A.T.A.L." label="F.A.T.A.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q737676" start="751" end="763" title="Michaël Youn" label="Michaël Youn"/>
<link wikidata="Q360899" start="768" end="785" title="Stéphane Rousseau" label="Stéphane Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437317" start="802" end="825" title="Fatale (disambiguation)" label="Fatale (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437320" start="828" end="852" title="Fatalis (disambiguation)" label="Fatalis (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29253" start="855" end="863" title="Fatalism" label="Fatalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q395297" start="892" end="913" title="Fate (disambiguation)" label="Fate (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21452191" start="916" end="922" title="Fattal" label="Fattal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038551" start="936" end="959" title="Lethal (disambiguation)" label="Lethal (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="962" end="967" title="Death" label="Death"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706770" wikidata="Q5058450" url="?curid=706770" title="Celso Ad. Castillo">
<text>Celso Adolfo Castillo (September 12, 1943 November 26, 2012) was a Filipino film director and screenwriter. He was known as the &quot;Messiah of Philippine Cinema&quot; for directing films that broke new ground in Philippine cinema, including &quot;Asedillo&quot;, &quot;Patayin Mo sa Sindak si Barbara&quot;, and &quot;Burlesk Queen&quot;, among others. Castillo was a prolific director who made 64 films throughout his life, casting actors like Fernando Poe Jr., Vilma Santos, and Maria Isabel Lopez.

==Early life and education==

Castillo was born in Siniloan, Laguna on September 12, 1943. He became a movie director, scriptwriter and actor. He was the son of lawyer-writer Dominador Ad Castillo, and Marta Adolfo.

Celso Castillo studied at Manuel L. Quezon University and obtained his Bachelor of Arts degree in English literature in 1964.

==Career==

Castillo started as a writer for a comic magazine. With the help of his father, he published his own magazine where he wrote all the stories from cover to cover, using different names as authors. A movie producer commissioned him to write a script on the character of &quot;James Bandong&quot;, named after Britain&#x27;s superspy. The film made money and it was followed by a sequel, &quot;Dr. Yes&quot;, 1965, a spoof on the British film, &quot;Dr. No&quot;. He wrote and directed his first movie, &quot;Misyong Mapanganib&quot; (Dangerous Mission), in 1966.

The most memorable of his earlier films is &quot;Asedillo&quot;, 1971, based on Teodoro Asedillo, a Filipino rebel of the 1930s who was hunted down as a bandit by the American colonial government. With this film, Fernando Poe, Jr. acquired the image that was to set him off as a legendary gunslinger, a defender of the poor and oppressed. Castillo also made &quot;Ang Alamat&quot; (The Legend), 1972, with Poe as a reluctant hero who battle a whole private army all by himself to defend his townfolk.

Succeeding Castillo films aspired towards thematic originality: small-town perversion in &quot;Ang Madugong Daigdig ni Salvacion&quot; (The Bloody World of Salvacion), 1975; incest in &quot;Tag-ulan sa Tag-araw&quot; (Rainy Days in Summer), 1975; political and period gangsterism in &quot;Daluyong at Habagat&quot; (Tall Waves, Wild Wind), 1976. Even his sex films had a to message to tell. One finds spiritual undertones in the story of an oversexed girl in &quot;Nympha&quot;(Nymph), 1971; a struggle of conscience in a stripteaser who laughed on the outside but cried on the inside in &quot;Burlesk Queen&quot; (Burlesque Queen), 1977; tribal conflict in &quot;Aliw-iw&quot;, 1979; a conflict of family values in &quot;Snake Sisters&quot;, 1983; and the politics of domination in &quot;Isla&quot; (Island), 1983.

Other notable Castillo films are &quot;Ang Mahiwagang Daigdig ni Pedro Penduko&quot; (The Wonderful World of Pedro Penduko), 1973; &quot;Ang Pinakamagandang Hayop sa Balat ng Lupa&quot; (The Most Beautiful Animal on the Face of the Earth), 1975; &quot;Ang Alamat ni Julian Makabayan&quot; (The Legend of Julian Makabayan), 1979; &quot;Totoy Boogie&quot;, 1980; &quot;Uhaw na Dagat&quot; (Thirsty Sea), 1981; &quot;Pedro Tunasan&quot;, 1983; &quot;Virgin People&quot;, 1983; and &quot;Payaso&quot; (Clown), 1986. It was Castillo who started a trend in Philippine movies known as the wet look which later helped establish bomba film as a definite genre.

Castillo also became the &quot;Master Of Horror And Suspense&quot; when actress Susan Roces shifts to the Classic Pinoy Gothic genre her first horror film was &quot;Patayin Mo Sa Sindak Si Barbara&quot; (Kill Barabara In Terror) about the malevolent spirit of a suicidal sister comes to torment against her very own sister out of jealousy and resentment and even possessing her own daughter for her own sinister plans, 1974; &quot;Maligno&quot; (Satan&#x27;s Seed) about a family targeted by a Satanic Cult and their accomplices of witches and warlocks attempting to steal a beautiful woman&#x27;s innocence and finds herself impregnated by an evil spirit fearing that the child she would conceive became the child of the devil also encountering bizarre events and hallucinogenic incidents, 1977. Shifting to the 1990s and 2000s &quot;Lihim ni Madonna&quot; (Madonna&#x27;s Secret) about a brainwashing ghost from the past drives a young woman to the brink of derangement and insanity, 1997; &quot;Sanib&quot; (Possessed) talks about a young bride finds herself being possessed by the specter of her long dead stepsister, 2003.

Castillo won the Filipino Academy of Movie Arts and Sciences (FAMAS) awards for Best Director and Best Story, and the Urian awards for Best Director and Best Screenplay for &quot;Pagputi ng Uwak, Pag-itim ng Tagak&quot; (When the Crow Turns White, When the Heron Turns Black) in 1978. He shared the story credits with Ruben Nicdao, and the screenplay credits with Lando jacob, Ishko Lopez and Ruben Nicdao. He won the FAMAS best director trophy again in 1985 for Paradise Inn, a Lolita Rodriguez-Vivian Velez starrer. He also has a FAMAS best supporting actor award, for &quot;Sampung Ahas ni Eba&quot; (Ten Snakes of Eve), in 1984.

Castillo&#x27;s last directing role was &quot;Medical Center&quot; in 2011, while his last acting career on TV was &quot;Reputasyon&quot; in 2011.

==Personal life==
===Family===
Castillo was married 3 times and his last wife was Ofelia Lopez-Castillo. He had ten children: Christopher (Jan. 19, 1964-Aug. 12, 2018), Catherine, John, Amerjapil, Crystal, Amir, Kid, Patrick, Monique and Roxanne Ad Castillo.

===Death===
Celso Ad Castillo, died early morning of November 26, 2012, due to a heart attack, according to the director’s brother John. Castillo, who was working on his autobiography &quot;Celso Ad. Castillo: An Autobiography and His Craft&quot;, died at 1:45 a.m. at his home in Siniloan, Laguna. He was brought to Pakil General Hospital at around 3:00 AM where he was declared dead on arrival.
He was buried beside his son Christoper at Siniloan Public Cemetery in Siniloan, Laguna

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===

===Acting roles===
==Awards==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5058450" start="0" end="21" title="Celso Ad. Castillo" label="Celso Adolfo Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="67" end="75" title="Filipinos" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551011" start="214" end="231" title="Cinema in the Philippines" label="Philippine cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q77895556" start="249" end="257" title="Asedillo" label="Asedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144306" start="271" end="302" title="Patayin Mo sa Sindak si Barbara" label="Patayin Mo sa Sindak si Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373770" start="447" end="463" title="Fernando Poe Jr." label="Fernando Poe Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2197580" start="465" end="477" title="Vilma Santos" label="Vilma Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761273" start="483" end="501" title="Maria Isabel Lopez" label="Maria Isabel Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q75948" start="555" end="571" title="Siniloan, Laguna" label="Siniloan, Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547506" start="747" end="774" title="Manuel L. Quezon University" label="Manuel L. Quezon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="1167" end="1190" title="James Bond" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s superspy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102754" start="1307" end="1313" title="Dr. No (film)" label="Dr. No"/>
<link wikidata="Q77895556" start="1471" end="1479" title="Asedillo" label="Asedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128188778" start="1502" end="1518" title="Teodoro Asedillo" label="Teodoro Asedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373770" start="1635" end="1652" title="Fernando Poe, Jr." label="Fernando Poe, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1870001" start="3474" end="3485" title="Susan Roces" label="Susan Roces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144306" start="3559" end="3590" title="Patayin Mo Sa Sindak Si Barbara" label="Patayin Mo Sa Sindak Si Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="4103" end="4121" title="Antichrist" label="child of the devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000849" start="4540" end="4583" title="Filipino Academy of Movie Arts and Sciences" label="Filipino Academy of Movie Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q75948" start="5846" end="5862" title="Siniloan, Laguna" label="Siniloan, Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q75948" start="6033" end="6041" title="Siniloan" label="Siniloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="6043" end="6049" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706773" wikidata="Q1723186" url="?curid=706773" title="Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill">
<text>Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill is a volcanic peak and Tūpuna Maunga (ancestral mountain) in Auckland, New Zealand. It is an important place culturally and archeologically for both Māori and Pākehā. The suburb around the base of the hill is also called One Tree Hill. It is surrounded by the suburbs of Royal Oak to the west, and clockwise, Epsom, Greenlane, Oranga, and Onehunga. The summit provides views across the Auckland area, and allows visitors to see both of Auckland&#x27;s harbours.

The scoria cones of the hill were erupted from three craters – one is intact and two have been breached by lava flows that rafted away part of the side of the scoria cone. Lava flows went in all directions, many towards Onehunga, covering an area of , making it the second largest (in area covered) of the Auckland volcanic field, behind Rangitoto Island. The volcano erupted approximately 67,000 years ago.

==History==
===Tāmaki Māori history===

In pre-European times, Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill was the largest pā in the Tāmaki Makaurau region. The Māori name &quot;Maungakiekie&quot; means &quot;mountain of the kiekie vine&quot;. The terraces of the pā were constructed by Ngāti Awa chief Tītahi in the 17th century, and were traditionally known as Ngā Whakairo a Tītahi (the carvings of Tītahi).

The &quot;tihi&quot; (summit) of the maunga was where the umbilical cord of Ngāti Awa rangatira Korokino was buried and a tōtara tree sprig was planted on top, giving rise to the name Te Tōtara-i-āhua (&quot;The Tōtara That Stands Alone&quot;), another common name for the mountain used by Tāmaki Māori.

Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill is associated with the Waiohua confederation of tribes, who were active in the 17th and 18th centuries. The time of the third paramount chief of Waiohua, Kiwi Tāmaki, is associated with the time of the greatest unity and strength of the Waiohua confederation, when the Tāmaki Makaurau region was one of the most populated areas of Aotearoa. The cone and its surroundings are estimated to have been home to a population of up to 5,000. Kiwi Tāmaki, the third paramount chief of Waiohua, moved the seat of power of the confederation from Maungawhau / Mount Eden to Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill. Near the summit of Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill was a gigantic pahū pounamu (greenstone gong) known as Whakarewa-tāhuna (&quot;Lifted from the Banks of the Sea&quot;), which Kiwi Tāmaki used to call for the warriors of the Tāmaki isthmus to assemble. During the later Waiohua period, the southern slopes of Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill south to Onehunga were known as Nga Māra a Tahuri (&quot;The Plantations of Tahuri&quot;), which were extensive kūmara (sweet potato) plantations managed by Tahuri, an agriculturalist and wife of Waiohua chief Te Ika-maupoho. Kiwi Tāmaki and most of the people of Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill did not live permanently at the mountain, instead migrating across circuits of the Auckland region collecting resources.

Kiwi Tāmaki&#x27;s rule and the Waiohua hegemony over the Tāmaki isthmus came to an end in the 1740s, after war with the Te Taoū hapū of Ngāti Whātua from South Kaipara. After the war, Te Taoū settled on the isthmus, and chief Tuperiri constructed a pā below the summit of Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill, known as Hikurangi. Hikurangi was abandoned around 1795 AD, with the death of Tuperiri, and Ngāti Whātua re-centred their activities around the Onehunga-Māngere area. While Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill was no longer central to Ngāti Whātua life, it remained a central part of the iwi&#x27;s rohe.

===European history===
In 1844, Ngāti Whātua chiefs sold a block of land which included Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill to a merchant, Thomas Henry. Most of this property was removed from Henry&#x27;s ownership in 1847, with the 115 acres of the hill and surrounding land becoming a Crown reserve, now known as the One Tree Hill Domain. In 1853, Auckland businessmen John Logan Campbell and William Brown purchased the Henry&#x27;s remaining land. Henry had referred to his property as Mt Prospect, however after the purchase Campbell renamed the farm the One Tree Hill Estate. Over the next 20 years, the farm was developed for cattle and sheep farming, and included potato cultivations. During this period, Campbell and Brown spent most of their time in Europe.

In 1874, Campbell returned to Auckland and took sole ownership of the property, planning to build an Italian-style mansion adjacent to the mountain. Campbell&#x27;s wife Emma did not approve of the designs or location, so by 1876 abandoned plans for the villa. In 1878, he planted an olive grove at Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill, the only commercial olive grove in New Zealand until the 1980s.

In 1880, after the death of his daughter Ida, Campbell decided to gift the One Tree Hill Estate to the public, leasing the land to Chinese market gardener Fong Ming Quong in the mean-time. In 1901, Campbell formally handed over the land to the public during the visit of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall in 1901 (who later became King George V and Queen Mary of Teck).

===One Tree Hill Domain===

One Tree Hill Domain, a park, is owned by the Ngā Mana Whenua o Tāmaki Makaurau Collective (also known as the Tāmaki Collective) and administered by the Tūpuna Maunga o Tāmaki Makaurau Authority (Tūpuna Maunga Authority). One Tree Hill Domain adjoins Cornwall Park&#x27;s , creating a total of of public green space.

The hilltop is always accessible by foot, but because of anti-social behaviour, including drinking, vandalism and crime, after-dark road access to the summit was closed in 2008.

Due to the spiritual and cultural significance of Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill to Māori, and for pedestrian safety, the summit road was permanently closed to most vehicles in March 2019.

The area contains two parks, One Tree Hill Domain and Cornwall Park, which are next to each other and thus often perceived as one. One Tree Hill Domain is open to the public and was formerly administered by Auckland City Council but since 2012 has been owned and administered by the Tūpuna Maunga Authority. All decisions are made by the owners, who have delegated minor day-to-day operations to Cornwall Park Trust. Cornwall Park is a private park, also open to the public, administered by the Cornwall Park Trust Board. The Trust&#x27;s endowment includes income from leasehold properties adjoining the park&#x27;s borders.

Because One Tree Hill Domain is high and relatively central, the city has long used it for its potable water reservoirs. The first of these was constructed in 1900 atop the western peak; though it is no longer in service, the small structure remains in place. Five further reservoirs were subsequently built underground, with the latest completed in 1977. These were built at such a height to enable them to be easily connected with similar reservoirs at Maungawhau / Mount Eden.

=== Cornwall Park ===
Cornwall Park, which adjoins the One Tree Hill Domain, was given by Sir John Logan Campbell to a private trust he had established to hold the land for the use of the public.

===Treaty settlement===
In the 2014 Treaty of Waitangi settlement between the Crown and the &quot;Ngā Mana Whenua o Tāmaki Makaurau&quot; collective of 13 Auckland iwi and hapū (also known as the Tāmaki Collective), ownership of the 14 Tūpuna Maunga of &quot;Tāmaki Makaurau&quot; / Auckland, was vested to the collective, including the volcano officially named Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill. The legislation specified that the land be held in trust &quot;for the common benefit of Ngā Mana Whenua o Tāmaki Makaurau and the other people of Auckland&quot;. The &quot;Tūpuna Maunga o Tāmaki Makaurau Authority&quot; or Tūpuna Maunga Authority (TMA) is the co-governance organisation established to administer the 14 &quot;Tūpuna Maunga&quot;. Auckland Council manages the &quot;Tūpuna Maunga&quot; under the direction of the TMA.

==Features==

===Obelisk===

On the summit of the hill is an obelisk, a memorial to Māori. Before the obelisk stands a bronze statue of a Māori warrior. The stone obelisk was designed by Richard Atkinson Abbot and completed in 1940, but the unveiling of the obelisk was delayed until after World War II on 24 April 1948. This was in keeping with Māori custom of not holding such ceremonies during a time of bloodshed.

Beneath it is the grave of Sir John Logan Campbell who bequeathed £5,000 for the obelisk. His grave is a plain granite slab, ornamented only by a bronze wreath. It lies in the middle of the viewing platform, on axis with the main memorial plaques on the Obelisk base and the bronze Warrior Statue.

Campbell, like many European New Zealanders of his generation, had expected that Māori would gradually die out and that an impressive memorial would be a most fitting symbol to perpetuate their memory. By the 1930s this had obviously not happened, and some considered the term &quot;memorial&quot; was inappropriate with many Māori objecting to its use. During construction of the obelisk, a suggestion was made that it should be described as a centennial tower to mark the centennial year of the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi and not a memorial.

===Stardome Observatory===
The Stardome Observatory (previously known as &quot;Auckland Observatory&quot;), is located within One Tree Hill Domain, and contains two telescopes and a planetarium. The observatory has, amongst other research, discovered and named the asteroid 19620 Auckland. Its current functions combine entertainment and education (via the planetarium and via public access to the older telescope) as well as ongoing research with both telescopes. It is operated by a charitable trust.

==Summit trees==

During the Waiohua confederation of the 17th and 18th century, the summit of the maunga was known for its single tōtara tree.

When Auckland was founded as a colonial town a tree stood near the tihi which gave the maunga its English name. Two accounts identify it as a pōhutukawa (&quot;Metrosideros excelsa&quot;). This tree was cut down by a Pākehā settler in 1852, in an act of vandalism in one account, or for firewood in another. An exotic Monterey pine was planted in 1875 by John Logan Campbell to replace the tōtara or pōhutukawa. Campbell repeatedly tried to grow native trees on the tihi, but the trees failed to survive – with only two pines, originally part of a shelter belt for the native trees, surviving for long. However, in 1960, one of the two was felled in another attack.

The remaining tree was later attacked twice with chainsaws by Māori activists to draw attention to injustices they claimed the New Zealand government had inflicted upon Māori. The first attack happened on 28 October 1994, the anniversary of the 1835 Declaration of Independence. A second attack in October 2000 left the tree unable to recover, and it was removed the following year by Auckland Council due to the risk of it falling. In 2007, the chainsaw used by activist Mike Smith in the first attack was placed on sale on auction site TradeMe, but withdrawn by the website after complaints and a poll of users. It was later listed on eBay. The chainsaw is now in the collection of Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa.

A dawn ceremony conducted by the Tūpuna Maunga Authority took place upon Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill on 11 June 2016 planting nine young tōtara and pōhutukawa grown from parent trees on the maunga. The strongest single tree will eventually remain and kiekie will be added.

In 2021, The Spinoff produced a short documentary centred around the chainsaw called &quot;The chainsaw used on One Tree Hill and heard across Aotearoa&quot;.

==In popular culture==
* Irish rock band U2 wrote a song about the hill, &quot;One Tree Hill&quot;, which appeared on their album &quot;The Joshua Tree&quot;. It was written to honour New Zealander Greg Carroll, an employee of the band who died in a motorcycle accident in Dublin on 3 July 1986.
** The naming of the teen television drama, &quot;One Tree Hill&quot; and the show&#x27;s final episode, was inspired in turn by the U2 song. In the series Andy Hargrove hails from New Zealand. His mother moved the family to Tree Hill, North Carolina because of the common name.
* Asteroid &quot;23988 Maungakiekie&quot; was named after the hill by Ian P. Griffin, a British astronomer. The asteroid was discovered at the Auckland Observatory which is located in the One Tree Hill Domain, a kilometre southwest of the peak.
* Mozilla Firefox 0.9 was named One Tree Hill by Auckland resident and (at that time) Firefox lead engineer Ben Goodger.
*The American television series &quot;One Tree Hill&quot; makes reference to One Tree Hill in Auckland when character Karen Roe dates character Andy Hargrove (played by New Zealand actor Kieren Hutchison) and he talks about his home country of New Zealand.
* One Tree Hill has appeared on two seasons of &quot;The Amazing Race&quot;: &quot;The Amazing Race 2&quot; and &quot;HaMerotz LaMillion 1&quot;.

==References==
===Print references===
*

==Further reading==
*&quot;Volcanoes of Auckland: A Field Guide&quot;. Hayward, B.W.; Auckland University Press, 2019, 335 pp. .

==External links==

* One Tree Hill (official Auckland Council mention)
* Cornwall Park (official website of the park surrounding One Tree Hill)
* Photographs of Maungakiekie held in Auckland Libraries&#x27; heritage collections.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1723186" start="0" end="28" title="Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill" label="Maungakiekie / One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="34" end="47" title="volcano" label="volcanic peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q113372345" start="52" end="65" title="Tūpuna Maunga o Tāmaki Makaurau" label="Tūpuna Maunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="90" end="98" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="178" end="183" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="188" end="194" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393909" start="250" end="263" title="One Tree Hill, New Zealand" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374617" start="300" end="309" title="Royal Oak, New Zealand" label="Royal Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055861" start="338" end="343" title="Epsom, New Zealand" label="Epsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604250" start="345" end="354" title="Greenlane" label="Greenlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099466" start="356" end="362" title="Oranga" label="Oranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352699" start="368" end="376" title="Onehunga" label="Onehunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642389" start="496" end="502" title="scoria" label="scoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368970" start="503" end="507" title="volcanic cone" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="599" end="603" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q758661" start="798" end="821" title="Auckland volcanic field" label="Auckland volcanic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422715" start="830" end="846" title="Rangitoto Island" label="Rangitoto Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234236" start="1009" end="1011" title="pā" label="pā"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="1047" end="1052" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q311751" start="1111" end="1117" title="kiekie (plant)" label="kiekie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023219" start="1173" end="1182" title="Ngāti Awa" label="Ngāti Awa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172563" start="1356" end="1370" title="umbilical cord" label="umbilical cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q164276" start="1420" end="1431" title="Podocarpus totara" label="tōtara tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180858" start="1588" end="1600" title="Tāmaki Māori" label="Tāmaki Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q106040773" start="1655" end="1662" title="Waiohua" label="Waiohua"/>
<link wikidata="Q111080329" start="1786" end="1797" title="Kiwi Tāmaki" label="Kiwi Tāmaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q111080329" start="2067" end="2078" title="Kiwi Tāmaki" label="Kiwi Tāmaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875408" start="2168" end="2191" title="Maungawhau / Mount Eden" label="Maungawhau / Mount Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155737" start="2448" end="2462" title="Tāmaki isthmus" label="Tāmaki isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352699" start="2570" end="2578" title="Onehunga" label="Onehunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q107313797" start="2673" end="2694" title="Sweet potato cultivation in Polynesia" label="kūmara (sweet potato)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24998508" start="3097" end="3104" title="Te Taoū" label="Te Taoū"/>
<link wikidata="Q675182" start="3105" end="3109" title="hapū" label="hapū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112181" start="3113" end="3125" title="Ngāti Whātua" label="Ngāti Whātua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721483" start="3137" end="3144" title="Kaipara Harbour" label="Kaipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352699" start="3423" end="3431" title="Onehunga" label="Onehunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748975" start="3432" end="3439" title="Māngere Bridge (suburb)" label="Māngere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359728" start="3570" end="3574" title="rohe" label="rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700877" start="3941" end="3960" title="John Logan Campbell" label="John Logan Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006008" start="3965" end="3978" title="William Brown (New Zealand politician)" label="William Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494846" start="5008" end="5012" title="Duke of Cornwall" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351906" start="5017" end="5036" title="Duchess of Cornwall" label="Duchess of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="5068" end="5076" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="5087" end="5099" title="Mary of Teck" label="Mary of Teck"/>
<link wikidata="Q23039223" start="5382" end="5395" title="Cornwall Park, Auckland" label="Cornwall Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875408" start="6898" end="6921" title="Maungawhau" label="Maungawhau / Mount Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700877" start="7018" end="7037" title="John Logan Campbell" label="John Logan Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="7157" end="7175" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296" start="7199" end="7204" title="Monarchy of New Zealand" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="7285" end="7288" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q675182" start="7293" end="7297" title="hapū" label="hapū"/>
<link wikidata="Q113372345" start="7357" end="7370" title="Tūpuna Maunga" label="Tūpuna Maunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="8010" end="8017" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323821" start="8136" end="8158" title="Richard Atkinson Abbot" label="Richard Atkinson Abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8239" end="8251" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="9179" end="9197" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="9384" end="9393" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="9401" end="9412" title="planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="9484" end="9492" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q742751" start="9493" end="9507" title="19620 Auckland" label="19620 Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164276" start="9854" end="9860" title="Podocarpus totara" label="tōtara"/>
<link wikidata="Q311747" start="10010" end="10020" title="Metrosideros excelsa" label="pōhutukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="10085" end="10091" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q748888" start="10186" end="10199" title="Monterey pine" label="Monterey pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429291" start="10314" end="10326" title="Flora of New Zealand" label="native trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959425" start="10597" end="10612" title="Māori protest movement" label="Māori activists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11007" end="11017" title="Mike Smith (activist)" label="Mike Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831908" start="11073" end="11080" title="TradeMe" label="TradeMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="11172" end="11176" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q915603" start="11219" end="11258" title="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa" label="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q311751" start="11513" end="11519" title="kiekie (plant)" label="kiekie"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046821" start="11545" end="11556" title="The Spinoff" label="The Spinoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="11737" end="11739" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328141" start="11775" end="11788" title="One Tree Hill (song)" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q152873" start="11832" end="11847" title="The Joshua Tree" label="The Joshua Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="11969" end="11975" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203385" start="12042" end="12055" title="One Tree Hill (TV series)" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750149" start="12148" end="12161" title="Andy Hargrove" label="Andy Hargrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q203385" start="12217" end="12242" title="Tree Hill, North Carolina" label="Tree Hill, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="12273" end="12281" title="Asteroid" label="Asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209819" start="12288" end="12306" title="List of asteroids (23001-24000)" label="23988 Maungakiekie"/>
<link wikidata="Q507395" start="12341" end="12355" title="Ian P. Griffin" label="Ian P. Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886747" start="12414" end="12434" title="Auckland Observatory" label="Auckland Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="12518" end="12533" title="Mozilla Firefox" label="Mozilla Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118" start="12624" end="12635" title="Ben Goodger" label="Ben Goodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q203385" start="12675" end="12688" title="One Tree Hill (TV series)" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q553323" start="12824" end="12840" title="Kieren Hutchison" label="Kieren Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q641613" start="12947" end="12963" title="The Amazing Race" label="The Amazing Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552457" start="12977" end="12995" title="The Amazing Race 2" label="The Amazing Race 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841609" start="13012" end="13032" title="HaMerotz LaMillion 1" label="HaMerotz LaMillion 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819503" start="13395" end="13419" title="Auckland Libraries" label="Auckland Libraries&amp;#x27;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706778" wikidata="Q1507065" url="?curid=706778" title="George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum">
<text>The George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum is the presidential library and burial site of George H. W. Bush, the 41st president of the United States (1989–1993), and his wife Barbara Bush. Located on a site on the west campus of Texas A&amp;M University at 1000 George Bush Drive West in College Station, Texas, the library is one of 15 administered by the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).

==Description==
The George H.W. Bush Presidential Library was dedicated on November 6, 1997, as the George Bush Presidential Library and Museum, opening to the public shortly thereafter, and designed by the architectural firm of Hellmuth, Obata + Kassabaum.

Situated on a plaza adjoining the Annenberg Presidential Conference Center and the George Bush School of Government and Public Service, the library is administered by NARA under the provisions of the Presidential Libraries Act of 1955.

The mission of the George H.W. Bush Presidential Library is to preserve and make available for research the official records, personal papers, and artifacts of President George H.W. Bush, to support democracy, promote civic education, and increase historical understanding of U.S. national experience through the life and times of George H.W. Bush.

The textual archives contain more than 44 million pages of personal papers and official documents subject to the Presidential Records Act, as well as personal records from associates connected with President Bush&#x27;s public career as Congressman, Ambassador to the United Nations, Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office in China, Chairman of the Republican National Committee, and Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. As in all NARA presidential libraries, records are housed in acid-free storage (Hollinger) boxes in a balanced humidity and temperature atmosphere. The archival storage area houses of records, and the library has a National Security vault holding of Presidential Records. In addition to memoranda, speeches, and reports found in the textual collection, there is an extensive audio-visual and photographic archive.

The museum has just under of permanent exhibit space and of temporary exhibit space. Permanent exhibits draw on the best of the museum collection to visually convey the essence of George Bush&#x27;s life and public service career and to illustrate historical events of this period in American history. Changing exhibits explore topics on the Bush Administration, American history, American presidents, and other related topics.

In 2011, the George Bush Presidential Library Foundation was given an overall score of 2 out of 4 by Charity Navigator. The CEO was listed on that site&#x27;s &quot;10 Highly Paid CEOs at Low-Rated Charities&quot;.

==Renovations and expansion==
On April 23, 2007, the permanent exhibit closed for complete renovation (though the temporary exhibit gallery remained open, hosting the popular &quot;Traveling White House in Miniature&quot; exhibit). The museum reopened November 10, 2007, with a ceremony during which the former president arrived via parachute jump. The permanent exhibit now features (like many other presidential libraries), a replica of the Oval Office; unlike those other presidential libraries, visitors are able to fully enter the replica, sit behind the president&#x27;s desk, and have a souvenir photo taken.

On November 8, 2019, the Union Pacific Railroad donated its EMD SD70ACe locomotive #4141 to the library, where it will be on permanent display in the pavilion. The exhibit was expected to open in 2020 but is now expected to open in 2024. It will be placed between the library and the Annenberg Presidential Conference Center. Unveiled on October 18, 2005 in honor of Bush, it remained in active service until 2009, and later was brought back to participate in Bush&#x27;s funeral train on December 6, 2018. It subsequently remained in active service following the funeral until its last run between November 8 and November 9, as part of the Union Pacific 4014 Southwest Tour, in which the plans for the display were unveiled. 4141 returned to the presidential library on March 12, 2021.

In addition to UP 4141, the Bush Foundation is also seeking to have a retired Boeing VC-25A and a Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk displayed on the library grounds, of which the UH-60 Black Hawk has been confirmed for permanent display.

On December 2, 2019, a life-size bronze statue of Sully, the President&#x27;s service dog during his final six months, was unveiled at the site.

==George Bush Award==
The Presidential Library Foundation also awards the &quot;George Bush Award for Excellence in Public Service&quot;, which &quot;recognizes an individual&#x27;s or group&#x27;s dedication to public service at the local, state, national or international levels&quot;. The recipients are given a crystal sculpture designed by Eric Hilton, comprising a &quot;three panel prismatic column of crystal. In the center of the column is a shallow lens engraving of the world.&quot; The winners are:

* 2019 John Major
*2018 Brian Mulroney
* 2016 Bob Dole
* 2013 Sheikha Moza bint Nasser
* 2011 Ronald Reagan
* 2007 Robert M. Gates
* 2006 William &quot;Billy&quot; F. Graham
* 2004 Arnold Schwarzenegger
* 2003 Edward M. Kennedy
* 2001 Mikhail Gorbachev
* 2000 Helmut Kohl

==Burials==

Bush&#x27;s daughter Pauline Robinson Bush (1949–1953) was originally buried at Putnam Cemetery in Greenwich, Connecticut, but was re-buried at the library in 2000.

Barbara Bush was buried on April 21, 2018, following her death on April 17.

George H. W. Bush was buried on December 6, 2018, following his death on November 30.
==See also==
* Presidential Records Act
* MSC Student Conference on National Affairs
* George W. Bush Presidential Center
* Presidential memorials in the United States
* List of burial places of presidents and vice presidents of the United States

==References==
==External links==

* George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum
* George H.W. Bush Presidential Library Foundation
*&quot;Life Portrait of George H. W. Bush&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, broadcast from the George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum, December 13, 1999</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1507065" start="4" end="52" title="George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum" label="George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546583" start="60" end="80" title="Presidential library system" label="presidential library"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="100" end="117" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="128" end="158" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="185" end="197" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="239" end="263" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q695511" start="298" end="320" title="College Station, Texas" label="College Station, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="367" end="411" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives and Records Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602991" start="650" end="677" title="Hellmuth, Obata + Kassabaum" label="Hellmuth, Obata + Kassabaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720722" start="763" end="814" title="George Bush School of Government and Public Service" label="George Bush School of Government and Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108857" start="1380" end="1404" title="Presidential Records Act" label="Presidential Records Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="3392" end="3414" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267769" start="3427" end="3438" title="EMD SD70 series" label="EMD SD70ACe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885902" start="3450" end="3455" title="Union Pacific 4141" label="#4141"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820456" start="3839" end="3852" title="funeral train" label="funeral train"/>
<link wikidata="Q14512137" start="4008" end="4026" title="Union Pacific 4014" label="Union Pacific 4014"/>
<link wikidata="Q645289" start="4233" end="4246" title="Boeing VC-25A" label="Boeing VC-25A"/>
<link wikidata="Q189491" start="4253" end="4278" title="Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk" label="Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q59995838" start="4436" end="4441" title="Sully (dog)" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q38629" start="4464" end="4475" title="service dog" label="service dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="5051" end="5061" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="5068" end="5082" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="5090" end="5098" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q238774" start="5106" end="5130" title="Moza bint Nasser" label="Sheikha Moza bint Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="5138" end="5151" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="5159" end="5174" title="Robert M. Gates" label="Robert M. Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="5182" end="5217" title="Billy Graham" label="William &amp;quot;Billy&amp;quot; F. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="5225" end="5246" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="5254" end="5271" title="Edward M. Kennedy" label="Edward M. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="5279" end="5296" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="5304" end="5315" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q52159104" start="5351" end="5372" title="Pauline Robinson Bush" label="Pauline Robinson Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262319" start="5410" end="5425" title="Putnam Cemetery" label="Putnam Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="5429" end="5451" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q59344430" start="5637" end="5642" title="Death and state funeral of George H. W. Bush" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108857" start="5674" end="5698" title="Presidential Records Act" label="Presidential Records Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642023" start="5701" end="5743" title="MSC Student Conference on National Affairs" label="MSC Student Conference on National Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508430" start="5746" end="5780" title="George W. Bush Presidential Center" label="George W. Bush Presidential Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108855" start="5783" end="5826" title="Presidential memorials in the United States" label="Presidential memorials in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769850" start="5829" end="5905" title="List of burial places of presidents and vice presidents of the United States" label="List of burial places of presidents and vice presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="6098" end="6104" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6118" end="6153" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706780" wikidata="Q14950275" url="?curid=706780" title="Maurice Clarett">
<text>Maurice Edward Clarett (born October 29, 1983) is an American former professional football player who was a running back for the Omaha Nighthawks of the United Football League (UFL). He played college football for the Ohio State Buckeyes. During his freshman year he helped lead the Buckeyes to a national championship. In a widely unexpected move Clarett was selected on the first day of the 2005 NFL draft with the final pick of the third round (#101 overall) by the Denver Broncos. Clarett unsuccessfully challenged the NFL&#x27;s draft eligibility rules that required a player to be three years removed from high school.

His tumultuous life outside football included his dismissal from Ohio State, several arrests, and imprisonment. In the years after his release from prison, Clarett became a public speaker, talking candidly about his previous struggles and recovery. Later, Clarett founded a behavioral health agency in Youngstown, Ohio. In recent years, Clarett was appointed to the Youngstown/Warren Regional Chamber of Commerce Board in February 2022.

==Football career==

===High school===
After displaying his abilities as a freshman tailback on the Austintown-Fitch High School varsity team, Clarett transferred to Warren G. Harding High School and garnered national attention. When he graduated from Harding, national publications ranked him among the top 100 players nationally. Clarett was a 2002 U.S. Army All-American. Clarett received an offer from Ohio State University and verbally committed to Ohio State over offers from Notre Dame, Fresno State, and the University of Miami. He formally committed to the Buckeyes in February 2002. Ohio State&#x27;s coach, Jim Tressel, had previously been coach of Clarett&#x27;s hometown Youngstown State Penguins. Later, Clarett received the &quot;USA Today&quot; Offensive High School Player of the Year and &quot;Parade&quot; All-American distinctions.

===College===
Clarett started at Ohio State for the 2002-2003 season, rushing for 1,237 yards (then a school record for a freshman) and scoring 18 touchdowns, which helped the Buckeyes to a 14–0 record and the 2002 BCS National Championship. He scored the winning touchdown against Miami with a five-yard run in the second overtime in the 2003 Fiesta Bowl. Clarett also made a key defensive play in that game, stealing the ball on the Miami 28 from Hurricanes&#x27; safety Sean Taylor, who was returning an interception from the end zone of a pass thrown by Craig Krenzel. After that play, Ohio State kicked a field goal, giving them a 10-point lead at the time. Clarett was the first freshman to be the leading rusher on a national championship team since Ahman Green of the University of Nebraska–Lincoln in 1995.

====Dismissal from Ohio State====

Clarett&#x27;s time at Ohio State University was marked by several troubling incidents. He was seen yelling at his position coach during the Northwestern–Ohio State game in the 2002 season. In December 2002, he publicly maligned OSU officials for not paying for him to fly home for the funeral of a friend and accused administrators of lying when they said he had not filed the necessary paperwork. In July 2003, Clarett became the center of an academic scandal when a teaching assistant told the &quot;New York Times&quot; that Clarett had received preferential treatment from professors, claiming he had not attended any classes during his only year at Ohio State. However, the investigation did not find sufficient evidence of academic misconduct. He was suspended for the 2003 season on September 10, 2003.

Clarett moved to Los Angeles after his dismissal from Ohio State, and, while living there, sued to be included in the 2004 NFL Draft. He won his case at trial. However, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the decision. Subsequently, Clarett worked with trainers in preparation for the 2005 NFL Combine, hoping to impress for the upcoming draft. It was also in Los Angeles that Clarett&#x27;s problems with drugs began. Clarett has battled depression and alcoholism since as early as 2002.

===National Football League===
In his attempt to enter the 2004 NFL draft, Clarett challenged the NFL&#x27;s rule that a player must wait three years after graduating from high school to declare for the draft. Federal Judge Shira Scheindlin initially ruled based on anti-trust grounds that the NFL could not bar Clarett from participating in the 2004 draft. This decision was later overturned by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in an opinion by Judge Sonia Sotomayor, and Clarett&#x27;s petition for certiorari was refused by the Supreme Court. Clarett and USC wide receiver Mike Williams, who were both hoping to enter the draft early, were then barred from the draft by the NFL. Later, because they both signed agents before being denied the opportunity to join the NFL Draft, the NCAA refused to reinstate the college eligibility of Clarett or Williams. Notably, while the NFL was successful in blocking Clarett and Williams from entering the draft before 2005, they did allow Pitt wideout Larry Fitzgerald to enter the 2004 draft despite only playing at Pitt for two years without redshirting due to him spending a year at Valley Forge Military Academy and College after high school for academic reasons and the NFL considering that to satisfy the three-year rule; the league considered Clarett and Fitzgerald&#x27;s cases to be separate.

In February 2005, he participated in the NFL Combine in Indianapolis. During a press conference, he uttered the phrase: &quot;It&#x27;s a humbling thing being humble.&quot; After running a disappointing 4.72 and 4.82 seconds in the 40-yard dash, he refused to participate further, and was referred to as &quot;Slow-Mo&quot; by the sports media, who were largely critical of his combine performance.

Ohio State declined to allow him to take part in a private workout for pro scouts in Columbus because it wanted to avoid a &quot;circus&quot; situation.

====2005 NFL draft====
In an unexpected move, Clarett was drafted in the 2005 NFL draft with the final pick of the third round (#101 overall) by the Denver Broncos. Many experts felt that he would fall to the sixth or seventh round, if he was drafted at all; the Pittsburgh Steelers, a team that was in possible need of a running back due to the uncertain future of Jerome Bettis, publicly said that they would not draft Clarett. (Bettis ended up returning for what would be his final NFL season.) However, Clarett turned out to be unimpressive in the Denver Broncos&#x27; preseason training camp. As Clarett had not played a game in two years or practiced in over a year, he entered training camp weighing 248 pounds, more than 20 pounds overweight. He was also slow to recover from an injury.

Despite his unimpressive training camp, Clarett signed a four-year contract on July 28, 2005, with the Broncos in which he gave up $413,000 of guaranteed money in order to secure an incentive-laden deal. Clarett signed this deal against the advice of his former agents, Steve Feldman and Josh Luchs. Clarett&#x27;s motivation was to replace the proposed deal with a package that would pay him first-round money if he rushed for 1,000 yards in multiple seasons.

However, after further disappointments and incidents with his coaches and never playing a preseason game, Clarett was released on waivers on August 28, 2005, only a month after signing a contract and before playing a down in the NFL. As is standard procedure in the NFL, for a 24-hour period after his release, other teams could have claimed him and taken on his contract. After that 24-hour period, Clarett was freed from his contract and able to negotiate with any team, but no team expressed interest.

====Post-NFL troubles====
As his college and NFL careers tanked, &quot;The Miami Herald&quot; reported in September that Clarett was already $1 million in debt from legal fees for his fight with the NFL and other costs. They also reported that Clarett turned down the traditional signing bonus in the originally proposed contract from Denver because his attorney, David Kenner, wanted incentives that would pay Clarett if he became a star.

===Exploring alternatives to the NFL===
In December 2005, Clarett was in talks to play for the Steubenville Stampede, a squad in the North Division of the American Indoor Football League. According to Jim Terry, Manager of the Stampede, &quot;I have been in contact with [Clarett&#x27;s] agent and he&#x27;s expressed interest with us. ... Clarett is hungry and has something to prove. He has a chip on his shoulder and wants to show he can still play.&quot; However, Clarett never signed with the Stampede. In an interview with the &quot;Columbus Dispatch&quot; published on August 10, 2006, Terry claimed that Clarett attempted to call him just minutes before the events on the morning of August 9 that led to Clarett&#x27;s arrest.

Clarett also expressed interest in playing for NFL Europe. Josh Luchs, Clarett&#x27;s agent, reported that Clarett was going to sign with the NFL on January 2, 2006, and was expected to be allocated to NFL Europe. There were also discussions about Clarett playing for the semi-pro Eastern Indoor Football League team Mahoning Valley Hitmen coached by Terry.

On August 23, 2010, Clarett was released from a halfway house and requested permission from Franklin County Common Pleas Court Judge David Fais to attend a tryout for the Omaha Nighthawks of the United Football League. The motion was approved on August 25. As part of his sentence, Clarett requires court permission in order to leave the state of Ohio.

===Omaha Nighthawks===
On August 30, 2010, the Omaha Nighthawks of the United Football League signed Clarett. On October 1, 2010, he played his first meaningful game of any sort in eight years, rushing for 12 yards on 5 attempts against the Sacramento Mountain Lions. As the Nighthawks&#x27; #2 running back, Clarett finished the season with 154 yards on the ground on 37 attempts and a touchdown. He also caught 12 passes for 98 yards, and returned one kickoff for 13 yards. The UFL suspended operations in 2012.

==Rugby career==

===Tiger Rugby===
On May 17, 2013, it was announced that Clarett would make his rugby debut for the Columbus affiliate of Tiger Rugby at The Ohio Rugby Sevens Invitational on May 25, 2013, in Mechanicsburg, Ohio. It was subsequently reported that Clarett would not play with the team as their practices did not fit with his schedule.

==Arrests and convictions==

===Robbery conviction===
On January 1, 2006, police announced that they were searching for Clarett in relation to two incidents of armed robbery that took place outside the Opium Lounge dance club in Columbus. Allegedly armed with a .45 caliber handgun, Clarett robbed two people and then escaped in a white SUV with two unidentified persons. Clarett reportedly made off with only a cell phone valued at $150 belonging to one of the victims.

Clarett turned himself in to police shortly after 9 p.m., EST, on January 2, just as the Buckeyes were defeating Notre Dame in the Fiesta Bowl in Tempe, Arizona, the very bowl game in which Clarett last played college football. He faced two counts of aggravated robbery. He was later released on $50,000 bond.

On February 10, 2006, Clarett was indicted by a Franklin County grand jury on two counts of aggravated robbery with gun specifications and five other counts. If convicted, he would be sentenced to up to 25 years in prison. His attorneys said that he denied every allegation, saying Clarett &quot;intends to fight this indictment with the same vigor and resolve he displayed in taking OSU to a national championship.&quot;

On February 22, 2006, Clarett pleaded not guilty to aggravated-robbery charges. He was released on $20,000 bail until his trial began.

On July 26, 2006, Clarett fired his lawyers, William Settina and Robert Krapenc, two weeks before his trial date. The privately retained attorneys had filed a motion two days earlier saying they wanted to withdraw their counsel, claiming that Clarett was not paying their fees or cooperating in his defense.

At a status hearing held on August 9, 2006, pertaining to the January charges, Franklin County Common Pleas Judge David Fais increased Clarett&#x27;s bond to $1.1 million. This was due to Clarett&#x27;s arrest earlier that morning (see below). On August 10, 2006, Fais ordered an additional status hearing which was held on August 11, 2006. This hearing had not been requested by either the prosecution or Clarett&#x27;s defense team but was requested by Fais himself. At the hearing, Fais delayed the trial until September 18, 2006, revoked the $1.1 million bond in the case and ordered Clarett to undergo a mental health evaluation.

===August 2006 arrest===
In the early morning hours of August 9, 2006, Clarett was arrested in Columbus after he made an illegal U-turn and led the police on a chase in a sports utility vehicle reportedly belonging to his uncle. After Clarett drove over a police spike strip, the chase ended in a nearby restaurant parking lot.

Police said they were forced to secure a cloth around Clarett&#x27;s mouth after he allegedly spat at the officers. According to Columbus Police Sgt. Mike Woods, the officers discovered a katana, a zanbatō, a loaded AK-47 variant and two loaded handguns in his vehicle along with an open bottle of Grey Goose vodka. The police requested that the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives perform a trace on the firearms to determine if Clarett violated federal gun laws.

The officers used mace to subdue Clarett after attempts to subdue him with a Taser proved ineffective because he was wearing Kevlar body armor.

Clarett was arraigned on the latest charges on August 10, 2006, in Franklin County Municipal Court in Columbus. During the arraignment, Judge Andrea C. Peeples set his bond, on the charges of carrying a concealed weapon without a permit and failure to maintain current lane, at $5 million. In setting the bond, Peeples agreed with prosecutors that Clarett was now a flight risk or could attempt to intimidate witnesses in his upcoming robbery trial. Clarett remained lodged in the Franklin County Corrections Center, however, as the $1.1 million bond for the robbery charge was revoked by trial judge David Fais. According to a &quot;Columbus Dispatch&quot; report, Clarett, who was due to be tried for his January arrest, was in the neighborhood of one of the principal witnesses against him at the time the events of August 9 occurred.

On September 18, Clarett filed a guilty plea to the charges in a plea bargain that involved these events as well as the earlier robbery charges. He was sentenced by Judge David Fais to seven and a half years in prison, with the possibility of applying for early release after three and a half years. As part of the plea agreement, the prosecution agreed not to object to early release if and when Clarett applied for it.

On December 14, it was announced that Clarett would be changing prisons to a close-security prison in a single-person cell at Toledo Correctional Institution, where he was able to eat with and exercise with other inmates.

Clarett enrolled in a distance-learning program at Ohio University while serving his sentence at the Toledo Correctional Institution, working towards earning a bachelor&#x27;s degree in Geriatrics and Gerontology.

On April 7, 2010, Judge Fais granted early release to Clarett. Clarett was ordered to enter Maryhaven, a halfway house in Columbus, for up to six months.

====Post-football life====
While in prison, Clarett blogged about his life there on &quot;The Mind of Maurice Clarett&quot;. Because he did not have Internet access in the prison, he sent his entries to his girlfriend, who posted them for him.

In one post, Clarett summed up his attitude towards prison by saying &quot;Understand my struggle so you can respect my hustle. I am never coming back here, believe that. Never, I am cool on this. It is first-class living from the day I get out. I WILL NEVER SETTLE FOR LESS, EVER AGAIN. That goes for communication, personal relationships, housing, education, friendships, and travel arrangements. Everything. I have the fire in my eyes&quot;

During his three and a half years in prison, Clarett shifted his attention to develop his mind by reading psychology books and as much business-related literature as he could, and managed to turn his life around. By sharing his life story, he has become a much sought-after motivational speaker.

In November 2012, Clarett was invited back to Ohio State to celebrate the 10-year anniversary of the undefeated championship season of 2002.

Having suffered from depression, Clarett joined other mental health advocates in August 2013 in promoting expansion of Medicaid in Ohio. He has spoken at prisons, juvenile detention facilities and worked with youth football camps to share his story so others do not repeat it. Clarett has also reconnected with Ohio State by taking courses and working out with current football players.

In December 2013, he was featured in &quot;Youngstown Boys&quot;, an ESPN &quot;30 for 30&quot; documentary which included extensive interviews with family, friends and associates.

In February 2014, he was invited back to Ohio State University as part of a ceremony recognizing the National Championship team he played on. While there, he also spoke to an audience of about 500 at the Archie Griffin Grand Ballroom in the Ohio Union, discussing past troubles and his ongoing rehabilitation and the restoration of his reputation.

== Business career ==
In 2016, Clarett founded The Red Zone, a behavioral health agency in Youngstown, Ohio. The agency provides mental health services, addiction and recovery services, school-based social work, and many other services. In 2018, Youngstown City Schools released a report showing that 283 students who received services from The Red Zone saw their GPA increase by an average of 16.5%.

In 2021, Clarett worked as a consultant to collegiate athletic departments like the University of Connecticut helping mentor players and encourage them to focus on their mental wellbeing.

In 2022, Clarett was appointed as a member of the Youngstown/Warren Regional Chamber of Commerce.

== Political involvement and advocacy ==
In recent years, Clarett has spoken in public forums several times about his experiences in the criminal justice system and the need for criminal justice reform. He also wrote an op-ed in &quot;The Columbus Dispatch&quot; on the same topic.

During the 2018 Ohio Gubernatorial election, Clarett headlined a political fundraiser for Democratic candidate and fellow Youngstown native Joe Schiavoni during Schiavoni&#x27;s failed bid for the Democratic nomination.

Also during the 2018 Ohio gubernatorial election, Clarett participated in a campaign event and panel discussion with eventual winner and 70th Governor of Ohio Mike DeWine about ways to improve education, workforce training, and recovery from addiction.

On February 9, 2022, Clarett was appointed to the board of directors of the Youngstown/Warren Regional Chamber of Commerce.

==References==
;General
* 2003 National Championship DVD. Produced by ABC.
;Specific
==External links==
* Maurice Clarett Website
* Just Sports Stats</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14950275" start="0" end="22" title="Maurice Clarett" label="Maurice Edward Clarett"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="82" end="90" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="108" end="120" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081806" start="129" end="145" title="Omaha Nighthawks" label="Omaha Nighthawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q778946" start="153" end="175" title="United Football League (2009–2012)" label="United Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="193" end="209" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080909" start="218" end="237" title="Ohio State Buckeyes football" label="Ohio State Buckeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714948" start="393" end="407" title="2005 NFL draft" label="2005 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="469" end="483" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="523" end="526" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750919" start="540" end="557" title="NFL draft eligibility" label="eligibility rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080909" start="691" end="701" title="Ohio State Buckeyes football" label="Ohio State"/>
<link wikidata="Q589410" start="1148" end="1156" title="Halfback (American football)" label="tailback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823358" start="1164" end="1192" title="Austintown-Fitch High School (Youngstown, Ohio)" label="Austintown-Fitch High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970213" start="1230" end="1259" title="Warren G. Harding High School" label="Warren G. Harding High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978638" start="1415" end="1437" title="U.S. Army All-American Bowl" label="U.S. Army All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080909" start="1470" end="1480" title="Ohio State Buckeyes football" label="Ohio State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147495" start="1546" end="1556" title="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503200" start="1558" end="1570" title="Fresno State Bulldogs football" label="Fresno State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827329" start="1580" end="1599" title="Miami Hurricanes football" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198584" start="1682" end="1693" title="Jim Tressel" label="Jim Tressel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058668" start="1748" end="1773" title="Youngstown State Penguins football" label="Youngstown State Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080909" start="1950" end="1960" title="Ohio State Buckeyes football" label="Ohio State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948736" start="2132" end="2157" title="NCAA Division I-A national football champions" label="BCS National Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827329" start="2199" end="2204" title="Miami Hurricanes football" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601372" start="2256" end="2272" title="2003 Fiesta Bowl" label="2003 Fiesta Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q720488" start="2390" end="2401" title="Sean Taylor" label="Sean Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4240230" start="2475" end="2488" title="Craig Krenzel" label="Craig Krenzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q744865" start="2629" end="2635" title="Rush (American football)" label="rusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q327124" start="2674" end="2685" title="Ahman Green" label="Ahman Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984693" start="2693" end="2723" title="Nebraska Cornhuskers football" label="University of Nebraska–Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="3272" end="3286" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348417" start="3499" end="3518" title="academic misconduct" label="academic misconduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246876" start="4139" end="4153" title="2004 NFL draft" label="2004 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="4290" end="4303" title="Federal Judge" label="Federal Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560987" start="4304" end="4320" title="Shira Scheindlin" label="Shira Scheindlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="4480" end="4533" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11107" start="4557" end="4572" title="Sonia Sotomayor" label="Sonia Sotomayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4636" end="4649" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857469" start="4681" end="4694" title="Mike Williams (wide receiver, born 1984)" label="Mike Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="4889" end="4893" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199341" start="5086" end="5090" title="Pittsburgh Panthers football" label="Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q944199" start="5099" end="5115" title="Larry Fitzgerald" label="Larry Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497674" start="5191" end="5202" title="Redshirt (college sports)" label="redshirting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008225" start="5233" end="5274" title="Valley Forge Military Academy and College" label="Valley Forge Military Academy and College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960124" start="5491" end="5502" title="NFL Combine" label="NFL Combine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="5506" end="5518" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q231314" start="5682" end="5694" title="40-yard dash" label="40-yard dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339677" start="5921" end="5931" title="Scout (sport)" label="pro scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714948" start="6077" end="6091" title="2005 NFL draft" label="2005 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="6153" end="6167" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="6267" end="6286" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q548453" start="6370" end="6383" title="Jerome Bettis" label="Jerome Bettis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7088" end="7098" title="Josh Luchs" label="Josh Luchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706651" start="7839" end="7855" title="Miami Herald" label="The Miami Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q613117" start="7933" end="7943" title="Attorney&amp;#x27;s fee" label="legal fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611700" start="8304" end="8325" title="Steubenville Stampede" label="Steubenville Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842955" start="8364" end="8395" title="American Indoor Football League" label="American Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8410" end="8419" title="Jim Terry" label="Jim Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="8992" end="9002" title="NFL Europe" label="NFL Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9226" end="9256" title="Eastern Indoor Football League" label="Eastern Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9262" end="9284" title="Mahoning Valley Hitmen" label="Mahoning Valley Hitmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081806" start="9475" end="9491" title="Omaha Nighthawks" label="Omaha Nighthawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q778946" start="9499" end="9521" title="United Football League (2009)" label="United Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081806" start="9705" end="9721" title="Omaha Nighthawks" label="Omaha Nighthawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q778946" start="9729" end="9751" title="United Football League (2009–2012)" label="United Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q588481" start="9899" end="9924" title="Sacramento Mountain Lions" label="Sacramento Mountain Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="10291" end="10299" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986032" start="10383" end="10402" title="Mechanicsburg, Ohio" label="Mechanicsburg, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="10686" end="10699" title="armed robbery" label="armed robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="10741" end="10751" title="nightclub" label="dance club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="10755" end="10763" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q158801" start="10788" end="10799" title=".45 GAP" label=".45 caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="10863" end="10866" title="Sport utility vehicle" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="11111" end="11121" title="University of Notre Dame" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411753" start="11129" end="11140" title="Fiesta Bowl" label="Fiesta Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="11144" end="11158" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q113237" start="11357" end="11372" title="Franklin County, Ohio" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q113237" start="12256" end="12271" title="Franklin County, Ohio" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="12908" end="12916" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343116" start="12942" end="12948" title="U-turn" label="U-turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="12984" end="13006" title="sports utility vehicle" label="sports utility vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698460" start="13076" end="13087" title="spike strip" label="spike strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150040" start="13271" end="13286" title="Columbus Division of Police" label="Columbus Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="13330" end="13336" title="katana" label="katana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465921" start="13340" end="13347" title="zanbatō" label="zanbatō"/>
<link wikidata="Q37116" start="13358" end="13371" title="Civilian &amp;quot;cousins&amp;quot; of the AK-47" label="AK-47 variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753595" start="13440" end="13456" title="Grey Goose vodka" label="Grey Goose vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q434371" start="13488" end="13539" title="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives" label="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618296" start="13605" end="13621" title="Gun Control Act" label="federal gun laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723023" start="13642" end="13646" title="Mace (spray)" label="mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q870114" start="13701" end="13706" title="electroshock gun" label="Taser"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="13749" end="13755" title="Kevlar" label="Kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="14673" end="14685" title="plea bargain" label="plea bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446550" start="15156" end="15187" title="Toledo Correctional Institution" label="Toledo Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075339" start="15304" end="15319" title="Ohio University" label="Ohio University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384" start="15439" end="15449" title="Geriatrics" label="Geriatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10387" start="15454" end="15465" title="Gerontology" label="Gerontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565622" start="15573" end="15586" title="halfway house" label="halfway house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030809" start="17220" end="17229" title="30 for 30" label="30 for 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="17363" end="17384" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q216820" start="17762" end="17778" title="Youngstown, Ohio" label="Youngstown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004569" start="18539" end="18562" title="Criminal justice reform in the United States" label="criminal justice reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520347" start="18596" end="18617" title="The Columbus Dispatch" label="The Columbus Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25025313" start="18655" end="18687" title="2018 Ohio gubernatorial election" label="2018 Ohio Gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212227" start="18784" end="18797" title="Joe Schiavoni" label="Joe Schiavoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q878581" start="19007" end="19023" title="Governor of Ohio" label="Governor of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363468" start="19024" end="19035" title="Mike DeWine" label="Mike DeWine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="19169" end="19187" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="19222" end="19241" title="Chamber of Commerce" label="Chamber of Commerce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706792" wikidata="Q5163681" url="?curid=706792" title="Constantia Jones">
<text>Constantia Jones (1708 – 22 December 1738) was a prostitute in London, which was then part of the Kingdom of Great Britain, during the term of Prime Minister Robert Walpole. She was sentenced to hang for stealing 36 shillings and a half-guinea from one of her clients.

== Conviction ==
Jones&#x27;s accuser, describing her as &quot;a three-penny upright,&quot; testified as follows: &quot;As I stood against the Wall, [she] came behind me, and with one hand she took hold of . . . --and the other she thrust into my Breeches Pocket and took my Money.&quot; Based on this testimony, Jones was sentenced to hang at Tyburn.

Jones, who had been sent to the notorious prison at Newgate some twenty times before, was 30 years old upon her execution. Historian Peter Linebaugh asserts that regardless of her guilt or innocence, her conviction on such flimsy evidence indicates the bias of 18th-century English courts against the trade of prostitution and those who worked in the industry. Although officially London courts took all persons as equally worthy, class distinctions were still operative, and therefore testimony from a &quot;gentleman,&quot; in particular, would weigh heavily against that of a prostitute. Jones would have been a weak defendant, as she had been in Newgate on multiple occasions.

==References==
==Sources==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5163681" start="0" end="16" title="Constantia Jones" label="Constantia Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="49" end="59" title="prostitute" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="63" end="69" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="98" end="122" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="143" end="157" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="158" end="172" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="195" end="199" title="hanging" label="hang"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="216" end="224" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="237" end="243" title="guinea (coin)" label="guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196258" start="572" end="581" title="testimony" label="testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362341" start="614" end="620" title="Tyburn" label="Tyburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822183" start="675" end="682" title="Newgate Prison" label="Newgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="746" end="755" title="Historian" label="Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175473" start="756" end="771" title="Peter Linebaugh" label="Peter Linebaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q742736" start="876" end="880" title="bias" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="905" end="910" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="1054" end="1059" title="social class" label="class"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706795" wikidata="Q937791" url="?curid=706795" title="Francis Preston Blair">
<text>Francis Preston Blair Sr. (April 12, 1791 – October 18, 1876) was an American journalist, newspaper editor, and influential figure in national politics advising several U.S. presidents across party lines.

Blair was an early member of the Democratic Party, and a strong supporter of President Andrew Jackson, having helped him win Kentucky in the 1828 presidential election. From 1831 to 1845, Blair worked as Editor-in-Chief of the Washington Globe, which served as the primary propaganda instrument for the Democratic Party, and was largely successful. Blair was an influential advisor to President Jackson, and served prominently in a group of unofficial advisors and assistants known as the &quot;Kitchen Cabinet&quot;.

Blair, despite being a slaveholder from Kentucky, eventually came to oppose the expansion of slavery into western territories. He supported the Free Soil Party ticket of Martin Van Buren and Charles Francis Adams Sr. in the 1848 presidential election. In 1854, in opposition to the Kansas–Nebraska Act, he left the Democratic Party and helped establish the Republican Party. Blair served as an advisor to President Abraham Lincoln during the American Civil War. In 1861, he was sent by Lincoln to offer command of a large Union army to Colonel Robert E. Lee, who declined, and instead joined the Confederacy. Blair also helped organize the Hampton Roads Conference of 1865, a failed attempt to end the war.

After the Union victory, Blair became disillusioned with Radical Reconstruction, a policy promoted by many members of the Republican Party. He eventually left the party and rejoined the Democrats. His son, Francis Preston Blair Jr., was the party&#x27;s nominee for vice president on a losing ticket in the 1868 election. Blair died in 1876 at age 85. 

His home, Blair House on Lafayette Square, Washington, D.C. across from the White House, is now used to host visiting heads of state and other guests of the president. It has been called &quot;the world&#x27;s most exclusive hotel.&quot; 

==Early life and career==
Blair was born at Abingdon, Virginia to a Scottish-American named James Blair, a lawyer who became an Attorney General of Kentucky, and Elizabeth Smith. Raised in Frankfort, Kentucky and referred to as &quot;Preston&quot; by the family members, he graduated from Transylvania University with honors in 1811. He studied law, was admitted to the bar in 1817 but did not practice due to a vocal defect. He took to journalism, and became a contributor to Amos Kendall&#x27;s paper, the Frankfort &quot;Argus&quot;.

During the social and financial turmoil caused by the Panic of 1819, Blair joined the so-called Relief Party of Kentucky. He participated in the Old Court – New Court controversy in Kentucky. He was president of the public Bank of the Commonwealth, which opened in May 1821 to provide relief for debtors. The Bank&#x27;s charter was denied by the Kentucky Court of Appeals (KCoA), which was backed by the United States 7th Circuit Court of Appeals. The KCoA ruled that the relief measures already started were unconstitutional. The state legislature abolished the KCoA, and created a new Court of Appeals, but the Justices of the old KCoA refused to accept this act or turn over the Court&#x27;s records. In 1824, Blair was appointed Clerk of the &quot;New Court&quot;, and led a party which broke into the clerk&#x27;s office and seized the records. A few years later, the New Court was abolished and Blair returned.

As an ardent follower of Andrew Jackson, he helped him to carry Kentucky in the 1828 presidential election. In 1830, he was made editor of &quot;The Washington Globe&quot;, the newspaper that was the recognized organ of the Jacksonian democracy. In this capacity, and as a member of Jackson&#x27;s unofficial advisory council, the so-called &quot;Kitchen Cabinet&quot;, he exerted a powerful influence on national politics. &quot;The Washington Globe&quot; was the administration&#x27;s voice until 1841, and the chief Democratic organ until 1845, when Blair ceased to be its editor. He partnered with John C. Rives, and started a printing house, receiving profitable orders from Congress, including publishing the proceedings of Congress in &quot;The Congressional Globe&quot;, the precursor of the Congressional Record. During his time in Washington serving Jackson, Blair acquired in 1836 what later became known as the Blair House at Washington, D.C.

==Politician==

Blair backed James K. Polk during the 1844 presidential election; however, he did not establish a good rapport with Polk and was forced to sell his interest in &quot;The Washington Globe&quot;. In 1848, he actively supported Martin Van Buren, the Free Soil candidate, for the presidency. Next, in 1852, Blair supported Franklin Pierce, but became disillusioned in his administration after Pierce backed the Kansas–Nebraska Act. With other anti-slavery, free-soil Democrats, Blair helped to organize the new Republican Party, and presided at its 1856 preliminary convention at Pittsburgh on February 22, 1856, forging a party block out of discordant elements of Whigs, abolitionists, free-soilers and nativists. He used his political experience, influence and persuasion to create a momentum for a new party.

At the 1856 Republican National Convention, he was influential in securing the nomination of John C. Frémont, who was married to Jessie Benton Frémont, a daughter of his old friend, Thomas Hart Benton, for the presidency. At the 1860 Republican convention, he, as delegate at large from Maryland, initially supported Edward Bates for the 1860 presidential nomination. When it became clear that Bates would not succeed, Blair supported the nomination of Abraham Lincoln.

The elder Blair took it upon himself to advise Lincoln, and both of his sons, Francis Jr., who became a Union general, and Montgomery Blair, who joined Lincoln&#x27;s cabinet, were the president&#x27;s trusted associates. On April 17, 1861, just three days after the surrender of Fort Sumter, Lincoln asked Francis Blair to convey his offer to Colonel Robert E. Lee to command the Union Army. The next day, Lee visited Blair across Lafayette Square from the White House. Lee blunted Blair&#x27;s offer of the Union command by saying: &quot;Mr. Blair, I look upon secession as anarchy. If I owned the four millions of slaves at the South, I would sacrifice them all to the Union; but how can I draw my sword upon Virginia, my native State?&quot;

After Lincoln&#x27;s re-election in 1864, Blair thought that his former close personal relations with the Confederate leaders, including President Jefferson Davis, might aid in bringing about a cessation of hostilities, and with Lincoln&#x27;s consent went unofficially two times to Richmond and induced President Davis to appoint commissioners including Confederate Vice President Alexander H. Stephens to confer with representatives of the United States. This political maneuvering resulted in the futile Hampton Roads Conference of February 3, 1865.

During the Reconstruction Era, Blair advocated a speedy reunification without placing much burden on the Southern states and spoke against the Radical Republicans&#x27; Reconstruction policies in the South. He became a political ally of President Andrew Johnson, and eventually rejoined the Democratic Party.

==Later years==

Preston Blair permanently established his residence in Washington, D.C. in 1836 after acquiring a home on 1651 Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest. The brick dwelling first became known as &quot;Blair&#x27;s House&quot; and then simply &quot;Blair House&quot;. In 1840, Blair, and perhaps his daughter Elizabeth, encountered a &quot;mica-flecked&quot; spring in the vicinity of Seventh Street Pike, now Acorn Park on Blair Mill Rd. off the renamed Georgia Avenue in Montgomery County, Maryland. He liked the location at present day East West Highway and Newell Street, Silver Spring, Maryland, so much that he bought the surrounding land and built a spacious summer home in 1849 which he called &quot;The Silver Spring&quot;. His son James, a naval officer, and his wife Mary lived in a two-story cottage on the estate, eventually naming it &quot;The Moorings.&quot; Blair&#x27;s other son, Montgomery, built a summer house for his family nearby, calling it &quot;Falkland&quot;; it was burned down in 1864 during a Confederate raid by General Jubal Early. Gen. Early denied any personal involvement with the destruction of &quot;Falkland&quot; and took credit for saving &quot;The Crystal Spring&quot; from plunder.

In 1854, Blair gave his Washington, D.C. house to his son Montgomery and permanently settled at &quot;The Silver Spring&quot;. After his death, his daughter Elisabeth inherited the house for her lifetime.

Even though he held slaves as servants in his household, Blair became convinced after the Mexican–American War that slavery should not be extended beyond where it was currently allowed. By 1862, Blair had told his slaves that they could &quot;go when they wished&quot;; he later said that &quot;all but one declined the privilege,&quot; choosing to stay on as servants.

After the Civil War, Blair placed all his political hopes and aspirations with his son, Francis &quot;Frank&quot; Blair, who was the 1868 Democratic vice-presidential candidate and became a U.S. Senator in 1871 before dying in 1875. Blair died the following year at his estate at Silver Spring, Maryland, at the age of 85.

==Family==

Francis married Eliza Violet Gist on July 21, 1812. He had three sons, Montgomery Blair (1813–1883), James L. Blair (1819–1852) and Francis &quot;Frank&quot; Preston Blair Jr. (1821–1875), and two daughters, Juliet Blair (1816–1819) and Elizabeth Blair (1818–1906). Montgomery and Francis became prominent in American politics. Among many contributions, Montgomery Blair represented Dred Scott before the United States Supreme Court in the seminal 1857 case regarding slavery. Francis became a prominent Senator and ran as the Democratic Party&#x27;s nominee for the Vice Presidency in 1868. James, who participated as a midshipman in Antarctica&#x27;s exploration and was later commissioned as a lieutenant in the U.S. Navy, made his fortune during the California Gold Rush, but died at an early age. Blair&#x27;s daughter, Elizabeth married Rear Admiral Samuel Phillips Lee and was a close friend of Mary Todd Lincoln. His nephew, Benjamin Gratz Brown (1826–1885) was also politically inclined, becoming a U.S. Senator and Missouri Governor. His grandson, Blair Lee I (1857–1944) became a U.S. Senator from Maryland.

==Legacy==
As editor of &quot;The Washington Globe&quot; newspaper for fifteen years and publisher of &quot;The Congressional Globe&quot;, Preston Blair became an influential political figure of the Jacksonian Era, and served as an unofficial adviser to presidents Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren. By idealizing republicanism and democracy as national ideals in his writing, he contributed to the growing popular spirit of &quot;Americanism&quot;. Blair held onto his political capital during Van Buren&#x27;s presidency, but began losing his political influence as the pro-slavery wing of the Democratic Party gained more power.

In response, after briefly supporting the Free Soil Party, he helped to launch the new Republican party in 1854. At the outbreak of the Civil War, he personally conveyed Lincoln&#x27;s offer to Robert E. Lee to command all the Union armies, which Lee rejected. During the war, Blair served as unofficial political adviser to Lincoln. After Lincoln&#x27;s re-election, Blair organized the abortive Hampton Roads Conference, where peace terms were discussed with the Confederates, but no substantial issues resolved. He opposed the radical congressional Reconstruction of the South after the Civil War.

William Ernest Smith, Professor of American History from Miami University, wrote in 1933 that Francis Preston Blair and his two sons, Francis and Montgomery, &quot;are representatives of a longer period of influence in American politics than any other family except the Adams family.&quot; Two of Blair&#x27;s three sons, Montgomery Blair and Francis Preston Blair Jr. were prominent in American politics; his daughter, Elizabeth Blair Lee, was Mary Todd Lincoln&#x27;s confidante. Blair&#x27;s Washington, D.C., residence with its rich history withstood the test of time and currently Blair House is the common name of the President&#x27;s Guest House complex.

The city of Silver Spring, Maryland took its name from Blair&#x27;s estate. Out of three houses connected to the Blairs at Silver Spring, only the house of James Blair survived. In her will, Violet Blair Janin, a daughter of James and Mary Blair, designated the house for public use and renamed it from &quot;The Moorings&quot; to &quot;Jesup Blair House&quot; in honor of her brother. It is currently located in the center of 14.5-acre Blair Park at Silver Spring and is administered by the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission.

In 1885, a new school at 635 I Street, NE in Washington D.C. was renamed the &quot;Blair School&quot; in honor of Francis P. Blair Sr. The school was closed prior to 1978 when the building became the home of Blair House, a large Transitional Rehabilitation housing facility.

==Media portrayal==
* In Steven Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;Lincoln&quot; (2012), Preston Blair is played by Hal Holbrook.
* In Ronald Maxwell&#x27;s &quot;Gods and Generals&quot; (2003), Preston Blair is played by Malachy McCourt.

Neither Spielberg&#x27;s nor Maxwell&#x27;s production teams elected to actually portray Francis Preston Blair particularly faithfully. Whereas in real life, he was of a spindly frame, bald, and clean-shaven, both films portray him as overweight, and while &quot;Lincoln&quot; portray him as having a great mop of hair by the standards of the time, &quot;Gods and Generals&quot; portray him as having a handlebar moustache. This is highly curious, seeing both movies otherwise went out of their ways to secure as aesthetically a realistic depiction of the era and the people therein as possible.

==See also==
*Old Court – New Court controversy

==References==

Attribution:

==Further reading==
* Blair, Francis P. &quot;A Voice from the Grave of Jackson: Letter from Francis P. Blair to a Public Meeting in New York, Held April 29, 1856.&quot; Washington: Buell &amp; Blanchard, printers, 1856.
* &quot;The Papers of the Blair Family.&quot; Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1988. 
* Laas, Virginia J. &quot;Wartime Washington: The Civil War Letters of Elizabeth Blair Lee.&quot; Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991. 
* Smith, Elbert B. &quot;Francis Preston Blair.&quot; New York: Free Press, 1980.
* Smith, William E. Francis P. &quot;Blair: Pen-executive of Andrew Jackson.&quot; Cedar Rapids: The Torch Press, 1931.
* Smith, William E. &quot;The Francis Preston Blair Family in Politics, 2 vols.&quot; New York: The Macmillan Company, 1933.
==External links==
* Blair House 
* Blair family papers from Princeton University Library. Special Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q937791" start="0" end="25" title="Francis Preston Blair" label="Francis Preston Blair Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="239" end="255" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="293" end="307" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q698489" start="347" end="373" title="1828 United States presidential election" label="1828 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581374" start="701" end="716" title="Kitchen Cabinet" label="Kitchen Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346993" start="869" end="884" title="Free Soil Party" label="Free Soil Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="895" end="911" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q75174" start="916" end="941" title="Charles Francis Adams Sr." label="Charles Francis Adams Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q698769" start="949" end="975" title="1848 United States presidential election" label="1848 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="1007" end="1026" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1082" end="1098" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="1140" end="1155" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1167" end="1185" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="1269" end="1282" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1321" end="1332" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646292" start="1365" end="1389" title="Hampton Roads Conference" label="Hampton Roads Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="1490" end="1512" title="Radical Reconstruction" label="Radical Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="1540" end="1547" title="Radical Republicans" label="members"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350196" start="1639" end="1664" title="Francis Preston Blair Jr." label="Francis Preston Blair Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q698955" start="1740" end="1753" title="1868 United States presidential election" label="1868 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q881182" start="1797" end="1808" title="Blair House" label="Blair House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471523" start="1812" end="1846" title="Lafayette Square, Washington, D.C." label="Lafayette Square, Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="1863" end="1874" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q137919" start="2071" end="2089" title="Abingdon, Virginia" label="Abingdon, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="2095" end="2112" title="Scottish-American" label="Scottish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818639" start="2155" end="2183" title="Attorney General of Kentucky" label="Attorney General of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q28603" start="2216" end="2235" title="Frankfort, Kentucky" label="Frankfort, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q956056" start="2316" end="2339" title="Transylvania University" label="Transylvania University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="2464" end="2474" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q474264" start="2504" end="2516" title="Amos Kendall" label="Amos Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131100" start="2619" end="2632" title="Panic of 1819" label="Panic of 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083783" start="2710" end="2743" title="Old Court – New Court controversy" label="Old Court – New Court controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392210" start="2912" end="2937" title="Kentucky Court of Appeals" label="Kentucky Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="3509" end="3523" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q698489" start="3564" end="3590" title="1828 United States presidential election" label="1828 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="3708" end="3728" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581374" start="3831" end="3846" title="Kitchen Cabinet" label="Kitchen Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4003" end="4013" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500733" start="4115" end="4129" title="Printer (publishing)" label="printing house"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4164" end="4172" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160952" start="4284" end="4304" title="Congressional Record" label="Congressional Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q881182" start="4407" end="4418" title="President&amp;#x27;s Guest House" label="Blair House"/>
<link wikidata="Q11891" start="4469" end="4482" title="James K. Polk" label="James K. Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q698731" start="4494" end="4520" title="1844 United States presidential election" label="1844 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q698769" start="4653" end="4657" title="1848 United States presidential election" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="4681" end="4697" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346993" start="4703" end="4712" title="Free Soil Party" label="Free Soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q698802" start="4753" end="4757" title="1852 United States presidential election" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="4775" end="4790" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="4863" end="4882" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4963" end="4979" title="History of the United States Republican Party#Establishing a national party, and opposition" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5001" end="5028" title="1856 Republican National Convention#History" label="1856 preliminary convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="5032" end="5042" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="5117" end="5122" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="5124" end="5136" title="abolitionist" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346993" start="5139" end="5151" title="Free Soil Party" label="free-soilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969722" start="5156" end="5165" title="Nativism (politics)" label="nativists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554943" start="5272" end="5307" title="1856 Republican National Convention" label="1856 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="5358" end="5373" title="John C. Frémont" label="John C. Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187624" start="5394" end="5415" title="Jessie Benton Frémont" label="Jessie Benton Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317969" start="5447" end="5465" title="Thomas Hart Benton (politician)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555041" start="5494" end="5520" title="1860 Republican National Convention" label="1860 Republican convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291670" start="5582" end="5594" title="Edward Bates" label="Edward Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="5603" end="5607" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="5718" end="5733" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350196" start="5814" end="5825" title="Francis Preston Blair Jr." label="Francis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1665428" start="5859" end="5875" title="Montgomery Blair" label="Montgomery Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q737517" start="6016" end="6027" title="Fort Sumter" label="Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="6088" end="6101" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="6117" end="6127" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471523" start="6168" end="6184" title="Lafayette Square, Washington, D.C." label="Lafayette Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="6194" end="6205" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="6448" end="6456" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q698908" start="6488" end="6522" title="1864 United States presidential election" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s re-election in 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="6588" end="6599" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="6629" end="6644" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="6765" end="6773" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q549495" start="6864" end="6885" title="Alexander H. Stephens" label="Alexander H. Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646292" start="6989" end="7013" title="Hampton Roads Conference" label="Hampton Roads Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="7047" end="7065" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="7179" end="7198" title="Radical Republicans" label="Radical Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="7283" end="7297" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="7418" end="7434" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q881182" start="7599" end="7610" title="Blair House" label="Blair House"/>
<link wikidata="Q546746" start="7659" end="7668" title="Elizabeth Blair Lee" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="7690" end="7694" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674560" start="7760" end="7770" title="Acorn Park" label="Acorn Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547350" start="7805" end="7819" title="Georgia Avenue" label="Georgia Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="7823" end="7850" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="7926" end="7949" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q257497" start="8393" end="8412" title="Jubal Early" label="General Jubal Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="8871" end="8891" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q698955" start="9285" end="9289" title="1868 United States presidential election" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="9432" end="9455" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56011063" start="9504" end="9521" title="Eliza Violet Gist Blair" label="Eliza Violet Gist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665428" start="9559" end="9575" title="Montgomery Blair" label="Montgomery Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350196" start="9620" end="9663" title="Francis Preston Blair Jr." label="Francis &amp;quot;Frank&amp;quot; Preston Blair Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q546746" start="9725" end="9740" title="Elizabeth Blair Lee" label="Elizabeth Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="9928" end="9963" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="seminal 1857 case regarding slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="10242" end="10262" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q546746" start="10313" end="10322" title="Elizabeth Blair Lee" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218751" start="10344" end="10363" title="Samuel Phillips Lee" label="Samuel Phillips Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q215062" start="10390" end="10407" title="Mary Todd Lincoln" label="Mary Todd Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q376825" start="10421" end="10441" title="B. Gratz Brown" label="Benjamin Gratz Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q433668" start="10546" end="10557" title="Blair Lee I" label="Blair Lee I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="10807" end="10821" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="10873" end="10887" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="10892" end="10908" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="11041" end="11052" title="American exceptionalism" label="Americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346993" start="11285" end="11300" title="Free Soil Party" label="Free Soil Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11330" end="11346" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="11379" end="11388" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="11413" end="11420" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="11437" end="11450" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646292" start="11640" end="11664" title="Hampton Roads Conference" label="Hampton Roads Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665428" start="12167" end="12183" title="Montgomery Blair" label="Montgomery Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350196" start="12188" end="12213" title="Francis Preston Blair Jr." label="Francis Preston Blair Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q546746" start="12265" end="12284" title="Elizabeth Blair Lee" label="Elizabeth Blair Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q215062" start="12290" end="12307" title="Mary Todd Lincoln" label="Mary Todd Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q881182" start="12431" end="12442" title="Blair House" label="Blair House"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="12520" end="12543" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781255" start="13000" end="13054" title="Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission" label="Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="13358" end="13374" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32433" start="13388" end="13395" title="Lincoln (2012 film)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q314801" start="13437" end="13449" title="Hal Holbrook" label="Hal Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q759186" start="13456" end="13470" title="Ronald F. Maxwell" label="Ronald Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533901" start="13484" end="13501" title="Gods and Generals (film)" label="Gods and Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276083" start="13543" end="13558" title="Malachy McCourt" label="Malachy McCourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083783" start="14172" end="14205" title="Old Court – New Court controversy" label="Old Court – New Court controversy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706797" wikidata="Q7687708" url="?curid=706797" title="Taste of the Danforth">
<text>Taste of the Danforth is a yearly festival held in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, in the Greektown area along Danforth Avenue for a period of three days in August, spawned from the Taste of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois, United States. It is currently Canada&#x27;s largest street festival. It started in 1993, and in 2013, it completed its 20th year of this event which celebrates Greek food and culture. The owner of Papas Grill – a Greek cuisine on the Danforth stated that the Taste of the Danforth has &quot;grown exponentially and we are still experiencing growth 20 years to the day&quot;

This event generally occurs the second weekend of August. Past attendance numbers have been reported as high as 1.6 million people over the three-day event. Approximately 1.6 kilometres of Danforth Avenue is closed from Broadview Avenue to past Jones Avenue for the festival.

It was announced on May 15, 2020, that the 2020 festival scheduled for August 7–9, 2020 was cancelled due to gathering restrictions of 25,000 people or more as mandated by the City of Toronto amid the global COVID-19 pandemic. It was also cancelled in 2021 and later in 2022. It was also cancelled in 2024, as it was deemed too costly to operate.

==Food and attractions==
Greek food includes pork, chicken, and beef souvlaki, spanakopita, loukoumades, gyros, and roast quail. Attendees can also enjoy seated dining within the many restaurants throughout Danforth Avenue and enjoy such Greek favourites as saganaki (the &quot;flaming&quot; cheese), and delicious fresh Greek salads. Thousands have been coming here in recent years and they are planning to continue to go strong. Existing stores and restaurants are also open during the festival, usually opening up their stores to the streets for customers

Interactive activities are available at The Taste, including face-painting and video games.

==External links==
* Official website

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7687708" start="0" end="21" title="Taste of the Danforth" label="Taste of the Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="51" end="67" title="Toronto" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q9357917" start="84" end="93" title="Greektown, Toronto" label="Greektown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013471" start="105" end="120" title="Danforth Avenue" label="Danforth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687696" start="176" end="192" title="Taste of Chicago" label="Taste of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="196" end="213" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="215" end="228" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="376" end="381" title="Ethnic Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="1076" end="1093" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072584" start="1338" end="1343" title="quail" label="quail"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="706798" wikidata="Q452307" url="?curid=706798" title="Romeo Miller">
<text>Percy Romeo Miller Jr. (born August 19, 1989), also known by his stage name Romeo (formerly Lil&#x27; Romeo), is an American rapper, singer, actor and television personality. He gained fame as a rapper in the early 2000s after signing with his father, Master P&#x27;s record label No Limit Records. His 2001 debut single, &quot;My Baby&quot; peaked at number three on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and preceded his debut studio album &quot;Lil&#x27; Romeo&quot;, which peaked at number six on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200.

In 2002, Miller released his second album &quot;Game Time&quot;, which charted at number 33 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. In 2004, Miller released his third album &quot;Romeoland&quot;, which charted at number 70, and in 2006, he released the digital album &quot;Lottery&quot; under the name Romeo. That same year, Miller released an accompanying soundtrack to his film &quot;God&#x27;s Gift&quot;; his first explicit album. To date, it has sold over 300,000 units.

In 2007, Miller was offered and accepted a scholarship to play basketball for the USC Trojans, at the University of Southern California. He played basketball for the Trojans under his birth name, and played for the team until 2010. Aside from music, Miller has also worked as an actor and was given his own television series on Nickelodeon titled &quot;Romeo!&quot; in 2002, which ran for three seasons. Miller starred in the feature films &quot;Jumping the Broom&quot; (2011) and Tyler Perry&#x27;s &quot;Madea&#x27;s Witness Protection&quot; (2012). Miller founded the record labels Guttar Music, Take a Stand, The Next Generation and No Limit Forever Records in 2010.

==Early life==
Miller was born in New Orleans, Louisiana. He is a son of rapper and entrepreneur Master P and former rapper Sonya C. He is a nephew of rappers C-Murder and Silkk the Shocker, cousin of producer, singer, and rapper Mo B. Dick, and a brother of singer and actress Cymphonique Miller. Romeo was signed to No Limit&#x27;s subsidiary label Soulja Music Entertainment at the age of five, after he wrote a rap to his father.

==Music career==
===2001: &quot;Lil&#x27; Romeo&quot;===
As Lil&#x27; Romeo, his debut album was the self-titled &quot;Lil&#x27; Romeo&quot;. It contains the hit single &quot;My Baby&quot; that charted No. 1 for R&amp;B/Hip-hop Singles. The album peaked at No. 6 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and No. 5 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums. On July 28, 2001, it was certified Gold by the RIAA for selling 500,000 copies in the United States. Also in 2001, he was featured on his uncle Silkk the Shocker&#x27;s remix single of &quot;That&#x27;s Kool&quot;, which was also featured on his own album.

===2002–2003: &quot;Game Time&quot;===
In 2002, a year later after his debut album, Miller put out his second studio album, &quot;Game Time&quot;. It peaked at No. 33 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and No. 10 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums. It spawned the Billboard-charting single &quot;2-Way&quot; that charted to No. 66 Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs. It also spawned a second single &quot;True Love&quot; which charted at No. 16 under the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs.

===2004: &quot;Romeoland&quot;===
In 2004, Miller released his third studio album &quot;Romeoland&quot; via The New No Limit and Koch, it would be Miller&#x27;s last studio album to feature himself billed as Lil&#x27; Romeo; it was not as successful in sales. &quot;Romeoland&quot; charted at No. 70 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and at No. 29 on the Top Rap Albums chart.

===2005–2007: Collaborations, name change, &quot;Lottery&quot; and &quot;God&#x27;s Gift&quot; soundtrack===
In 2005, Miller, along with his father Master P, founded a new record label titled Guttar Music Entertainment. Also in 2005, Miller, along with his brother Valentino Miller and their three cousins C-Los, Lil&#x27; D and Willie J, formed the rap group Rich Boyz. They released their debut album titled &quot;Young Ballers: The Hood Been Good to Us&quot; via Guttar Music on November 22, 2005. The group later disbanded.

On April 4, 2006, Miller released his debut digital album &quot;Lottery&quot; via Guttar Music Entertainment, UrbanDigital and GoDigital Music Group, it was Miller&#x27;s first album released with his official name changed to Romeo. On December 12, 2006, Miller released an album titled &quot;God&#x27;s Gift&quot; via Guttar Music, UrbanDigital and GoDigital Music Group, it served as the soundtrack to the same name independent film Miller&#x27;s father Master P had directed and produced, it was also Miller&#x27;s first album to be classified as explicit. Both albums contained the song &quot;U Can&#x27;t Shine Like Me&quot;, which was a direct response to fellow rapper/actor Bow Wow, who fans believed dissed Miller and his father Master P in his song &quot;Fresh Azimiz&quot;.

In 2007, Miller and his father Master P started a non-explicit record label titled Take A Stand Records. They also formed a new group called Miller Boyz. On September 4, 2007, they would release their debut album titled &quot;Hip Hop History&quot; via Take A Stand Records, UrbanDigital and GoDigital Music Group.

===Since 2008: Mixtapes, EPs and collaborations===
In 2008, Miller stated he was working on his fourth studio album titled &quot;Gumbo Station&quot;. On June 17, Miller released the first single from the album &quot;Get Low Wit It&quot;, which featured Akon and his brother Valentino Miller, it failed to gain success on the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts.

On March 3, 2009, Miller released a compilation album titled &quot;Get Low&quot; that contained singles that were originally supposed to have been on &quot;Gumbo Station&quot; and also contained original songs from his previous albums. In late 2009, Miller formed a new record label titled The Next Generation Entertainment, the label at the time featured his group the College Boyys.

During this time, Romeo also confirmed that he was still working on his fourth studio album, but had changed the name of the album to &quot;The College Boy&quot;. Later, Romeo announced that the title of the album would be &quot;I Am No Limit&quot;. On January 19, 2010, Miller released a promotional single for the album titled &quot;Tell Me a Million Times&quot; featuring Tempo. On January 26, Miller released a second promotional single for the album titled &quot;Ice Cream Man Jr.&quot; which was a tribute to his father. On February 16, Miller released his debut mixtape &quot;Patience Is A Virtue&quot; to promote the album. On March 2, Miller released two EPs to promote the album which were the &quot;Famous Girl&quot; and &quot;Monster/Practice&quot; via his label The Next Generation Entertainment and LPD Music. Also in 2010, Miller would introduce his new group the College Boyys; on May 25, 2010, they released their debut album titled &quot;Spring Break&quot; via his label The Next Generation Entertainment and Hollywood Dream Music, but the group would later disband due to unknown reasons. Miller also on this day released three promotional singles which were &quot;You&quot; that featured his artist at the time D&#x27;Anna and Lil Twist, &quot;She Bad&quot; that featured his cousins/artists Lil&#x27; D and Black Don and &quot;They Dont Know&quot;. Miller also performed at the 2010 Hip Hop Honors along with his brother Valentino Miller, his cousins Lil&#x27; D and Black Don, and his uncle Silkk The Shocker, along with Trina, Gucci Mane and Mystikal to honor Master P and No Limit Records. In late 2010, Miller relaunched No Limit Records as No Limit Forever. Romeo also confirmed that he had changed the name of his album from &quot;I Am No Limit&quot; to &quot;Intelligent Hoodlum&quot;.

In 2011, Miller toured with his father and Silkk the Shocker. The tour was titled &quot;No Limit Forever International&quot;. On January 11, Miller released his EP &quot;Dont Push Me&quot; via his label The Next Generation Entertainment. On May 3, 2011, Miller released the first official single from &quot;Intelligent Hoodlum&quot; called &quot;Famous Girl (Remix)&quot; which was the mastered version of the original, it still featured the original appearances from Sean Kingston and Miller&#x27;s cousin Black Don, but it would be later dubbed as a promotional single. On August 19, 2011, Miller released his &quot;I Am No Limit&quot; mixtape, which was originally supposed to be his fourth studio album, but Miller decided it would be best to just release it as a mixtape for his fans.

In 2012, Miller formed a new group called Resq3 which consisted of himself, drummer Christian Brock and guitarist/vocalist Myles Eberhardt. They released their first single &quot;The Only One&quot; and were scheduled to be releasing their debut album, touring and filming TV show later that year, but the group would disband due to unknown reasons. The group&#x27;s other releases consisted of songs such as &quot;Right Along&quot; and &quot;No One Else Like You&quot;. On April 12, 2012, Miller released his first single from his upcoming fourth album titled &quot;Hug Me Forever&quot;, which featured his brother Valentino. On May 19, 2012, Miller released the music video for &quot;Hug Me Forever&quot;. On August 15, 2012, Miller announced that he had been working on a new mixtape titled &quot;Inception&quot;, it was released on August 19, 2012, under his new stage name Maserati Rome.

In 2013, Miller announced that he was working on a mixtape, &quot;When in Rome&quot;, slated for release in 2014.
On January 5, 2015, Miller released his first collaboration mixtape titled &quot;We All We Got&quot; with his group Money Mafia that includes himself, his father, Ace B, Young Junne, Eastwood, Gangsta, Play Beezy, Calliope Popeye, Flight Boy and No Limit Forever in-house producer Blaq N Mild. The mixtape would also include a surprise feature from Lil Wayne on the track &quot;Power&quot;. On April 20, Miller released his second collaboration mixtape titled &quot;Hustlin&quot; with his group Money Mafia. On July 29, 2015, Miller would release two new singles from his upcoming fourth studio album titled &quot;Till the Club Close&quot; featuring fellow No Limit Forever artist Ace B and &quot;Bent&quot; featuring fellow No Limit Forever artists Ace B and Silkk the Shocker. On December 17, Miller revealed the title, cover art and also announced the release date of his planned fourth studio album titled &quot;Fighting Monsters&quot;, which was set for release in January.

On January 7, 2016, Miller would release &quot;Fighting Monsters&quot; as a mixtape; it would feature guest appearances from Ace B, BlaqNmilD, DeCarlo, Eastwood, €$¢Ø, JSlugg500, his father Master P, Silkk the Shocker, and Travis Kr8ts. &quot;Fighting Monsters&quot; was originally supposed to be his fourth studio album, but Miller decided again it would be best to just release it as a mixtape for his fans. On January 13, Miller would release the mixtape for retail on iTunes for charity. On November 1, 2016, Miller released two singles from his planned fourth studio album titled &quot;B, All, In&quot; featuring fellow No Limit Forever artist Young Vee, and &quot;Shoulder&quot; featuring DeCarlo and fellow No Limit Forever artist Ace B. In December 2019, Miller released the album &quot;Hidden Treasure&quot;, featuring a collaboration with his father, Master P.

==Other ventures==
===Acting career===
In 2001, Miller began his acting career with a cameo appearance in the Walt Disney Pictures&#x27; film &quot;Max Keeble&#x27;s Big Move.&quot; In 2003, he co-starred with Jessica Alba, Mekhi Phifer, and Zachary Isaiah Williams in the dance film &quot;Honey&quot;. In this film, his supporting character was Benny, a young boy looking for a break. In 2003, he voiced himself in &quot;Romeo in the Mix&quot;, an episode of the animated series &quot;Static Shock&quot;, and additionally performed the series&#x27; third theme song. He starred in another film with Zachary Isaiah Williams, &quot;God&#x27;s Gift&quot;, which was released in 2006. He went on to co-star with his father in a film called &quot;Uncle P&quot; in 2007. His next project in 2007, was a film called &quot;ASL&quot; in which he starred as himself, alongside Forrest Lipton and Zachary Isaiah Williams who played the young Romeo; Williams had previously co-starred with Romeo in two films and Nickelodeon&#x27;s &quot;Romeo!&quot;. Miller also made a cameo appearance in &quot;Ned&#x27;s Declassified School Survival Guide&quot; as a rapping coach. He guest-starred as a rapper accused of murder in the 2010 CBS series &quot;The Defenders&quot; and acted in &quot;Jumping the Broom&quot;, released in May 2011. In 2011, he also starred in TV commercials for McDonald&#x27;s and ICDC College. In 2012, Miller starred in Tyler Perry&#x27;s film &quot;Madea&#x27;s Witness Protection&quot;. He played as Jake, a young man who is trying to get his money back from a ponzi scheme for his father&#x27;s church and his retirement. In 2012, he participated in Fox&#x27;s dating game show &quot;The Choice&quot;. He was a special guest star on the Nick News with Linda Ellerbee episode &quot;If Only I Were An Only Child: The Top 10 Annoying Things My Siblings Do&quot; which aired on Nickelodeon on May 13, 2013, on which Romeo (among others) talked about annoying things his siblings did, one of which was his brother taking shoes that Romeo was planning to wear, so he could show them to a girl he liked.

From 2013 to 2014, Miller appeared in additional advertisements for ICDC College. He was cast in the 2017 feature film &quot;Never Heard&quot;, also starring his father, Master P. In February 2022, it was announced Miller had landed a role in the Lifetime film &quot;Wrath: A Seven Deadly Sins Story&quot;, which aired on April 16. In December 2022, he starred in the holiday themed BET+ film, &quot;A Miracle Before Christmas&quot;.

===Fashion designer===
On July 24, 2010, Romeo launched his own clothing line titled &quot;College Boyys&quot;. The brand has been promoted by Miller, his group the College Boyys, and also artists such as Justin Bieber, Big Time Rush, and Jaden Smith. Romeo stated:

On November 13, 2013, Miller revealed that he was working on a brand new clothing line titled ROME Everything.

===Basketball career===
Miller played basketball as a point guard for one year at Windward High School before he transferred and became a three-year starter at Beverly Hills High School. As a junior, during the 2005–06 high school season, he averaged 13.9 points and 5.6 assists per game. As a senior, during the 2006–07 high school season, he averaged 8.6 points and 9.0 assists per game.

In the summer of 2006, Miller was invited to the Reebok-sponsored ABCD Camp, a basketball camp in the US. The Teaneck, New Jersey–based camp, an invitation-only basketball showcase, was previously attended by high-profile National Basketball Association (NBA) players including Kobe Bryant, Stephon Marbury, Tracy McGrady, LeBron James, and Carmelo Anthony. Surrounded by future NBA players such as O. J. Mayo, Derrick Rose, and Kevin Love, Miller averaged less than 2 points a game and struggled throughout the camp. Sonny Vaccaro, the longtime director of the ABCD Camp, explained that he invited Miller to the 2006 camp, &quot;primarily as a favor to Percy Miller (Romeo&#x27;s father Master P), whom he knew from the club basketball circuit.&quot; Vaccaro also said, &quot;If you&#x27;re looking for the profile of an athlete who plays basketball at USC, he&#x27;s not it.&quot;

Despite this, on April 13, 2007, Miller verbally committed to the University of Southern California (USC) and signed a letter of intent on November 19. According to &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, the decision to grant Miller a full scholarship at USC was largely driven by his relationship with friend and teammate DeMar DeRozan, an All-American forward who was rated as the number five prospect in the country on Scout.com, and his father&#x27;s influence. &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported Coach Tim Floyd as saying, &quot;Last April ... Percy Miller called while driving both players from a tournament in Fayetteville, Ark ... Percy Miller said &#x27;Demar and Romeo are ready to make their decision, and would you like to have them both on scholarship?&#x27; ... &#x27;I said absolutely.&#x27;&quot;

Miller and DeRozan began playing for USC in the 2008–09 season. Miller used his given first name, Percy, when playing for the Trojans. He only played for the Trojans for two seasons, and was released after the 2009–10 season. He played a total of 19 minutes in nine games, scoring five points and recording three rebounds and one assist.

===Modeling career===
On December 27, 2010, Romeo modeled for a new 2011 calendar. On April 10, 2011, Miller modeled for the April issue of &quot;TROIX&quot; magazine. On April 12, Miller modeled in a new photoshoot.

===&quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;===
After originally withdrawing from season two of &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot; due to an injury, Romeo competed in season twelve. He was partnered with professional dancer, Chelsie Hightower. They were eliminated from the show on May 10, 2011, and finished in the Top 5, one week before the semi-final.
*In week 7, Donnie Burns was the guest judge and scored the dances.

===Other media===
On November 21, 2017, Miller competed on the &quot;Champs vs. Stars&quot; special of the MTV reality series &quot;The Challenge&quot;. He also hosted MTV&#x27;s &quot;Ex on the Beach&quot; for four seasons.

== Personal life ==
On February 14, 2022, Miller took to Instagram to announce the birth of his first child, a daughter, with girlfriend, Drew Sangster. On March 15, 2023, Miller announced on Instagram that he had welcomed another daughter, his second child with Sangster. Miller is Catholic.

==Discography==

*&quot;Lil&#x27; Romeo&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Game Time&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Romeoland&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Lottery&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Hidden Treasure&quot; (2019)

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===
==Awards and nominations==
*Billboard Music Awards
**2001, Rap Artist of the Year (Winner)
**2001, Music Videos: &quot;My Baby&quot; (Winner)
**2002, R&amp;B/Hip-Hop: &quot;My Baby&quot; (Winner)
*Kids Choice Awards
**2002, Favorite Male Singer – (Nominated)
**2003, Favorite Male Singer – (Nominated)
**2004, Favorite Television Actor – Male for: &quot;Romeo!&quot; (Nominated)
**2005, Favorite Television Actor – Male for: &quot;Romeo!&quot; (Winner)
**2006, Favorite Television Actor – Male for: &quot;Romeo!&quot; (Nominated)
*Radio Disney Music Awards
**2003, Favorite Male Singer – (Nominated)
*Teen Choice Awards
**2004, Choice Breakout Movie Star – Male for: &quot;Honey&quot; (Nominated)
*Black Reel Awards
**2004, Choice Breakout Movie Star – Male for: &quot;Honey&quot; (Nominated)
*Young Artist Awards
**2005, Best Performance in a TV Series (Comedy or Drama) – Leading Young Actor: &quot;Romeo!&quot; (Nominated)
*NAMIC Vision Awards
**2005, Best Comedic Performance: &quot;Romeo!&quot; (Nominated)
*Image Awards
**2005, Outstanding Performance in a Youth/Children&#x27;s Program – Series or Special: &quot;Romeo!&quot; (Nominated)
*Golden Raspberry Awards
**2013, Worst Screen Ensemble: &quot;Madea&#x27;s Witness Protection&quot; (nominated)
*Urban Film Festival
**2019, Jury Award: &quot;I Got the Hook Up 2&quot; (Winner)

==References==
==External links==

* USC Athletics Player Biography: No. 15 Percy Miller 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q452307" start="0" end="22" title="Romeo Miller" label="Percy Romeo Miller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q452307" start="76" end="81" title="Romeo Miller" label="Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q452307" start="92" end="107" title="Romeo Miller" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q722042" start="252" end="260" title="Master P" label="Master P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="281" end="297" title="No Limit Records" label="No Limit Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944960" start="328" end="335" title="My Baby (Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo song)" label="My Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547384" start="444" end="459" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo (album)" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="504" end="529" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519911" start="580" end="589" title="Game Time" label="Game Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363147" start="708" end="717" title="Romeoland" label="Romeoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q452307" start="831" end="836" title="Romeo Miller" label="Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840365" start="886" end="896" title="God&amp;#x27;s Gift (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575697" start="915" end="930" title="God&amp;#x27;s Gift (film)" label="God&amp;#x27;s Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="1049" end="1060" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="1069" end="1079" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866372" start="1088" end="1099" title="USC Trojans men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="USC Trojans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="1108" end="1141" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="1334" end="1345" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580573" start="1359" end="1365" title="Romeo!" label="Romeo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333710" start="1452" end="1469" title="Jumping the Broom (film)" label="Jumping the Broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q686301" start="1487" end="1498" title="Tyler Perry" label="Tyler Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235276" start="1512" end="1543" title="Madea&amp;#x27;s Witness Protection" label="Madea&amp;#x27;s Witness Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="1577" end="1589" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="1643" end="1667" title="No Limit Forever Records" label="No Limit Forever Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="1712" end="1723" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q722042" start="1775" end="1783" title="Master P" label="Master P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317079" start="1802" end="1809" title="Sonya C" label="Sonya C"/>
<link wikidata="Q913123" start="1837" end="1845" title="C-Murder" label="C-Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304365" start="1850" end="1867" title="Silkk the Shocker" label="Silkk the Shocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886165" start="1908" end="1918" title="Mo B. Dick" label="Mo B. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q515562" start="1956" end="1974" title="Cymphonique Miller" label="Cymphonique Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="1996" end="2004" title="No Limit Records" label="No Limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547384" start="2232" end="2247" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo (album)" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944960" start="2288" end="2295" title="My Baby (Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo song)" label="My Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2383" end="2408" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="2426" end="2452" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547384" start="2645" end="2661" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo (album)" label="That&amp;#x27;s Kool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519911" start="2842" end="2851" title="Game Time" label="Game Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2886" end="2911" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="2930" end="2956" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596921" start="3005" end="3010" title="2-Way" label="2-Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="3040" end="3065" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="3155" end="3180" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363147" start="3271" end="3280" title="Romeoland" label="Romeoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="3291" end="3307" title="No Limit Records" label="The New No Limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273666" start="3312" end="3316" title="Koch Records" label="Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="3490" end="3515" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="3537" end="3551" title="Top Rap Albums" label="Top Rap Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="3752" end="3778" title="Guttar Music Entertainment" label="Guttar Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q107337859" start="3873" end="3884" title="D The Business" label="Lil&amp;#x27; D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363140" start="4153" end="4160" title="Lottery (album)" label="Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17460632" start="4216" end="4237" title="GoDigital Media Group" label="GoDigital Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840365" start="4382" end="4397" title="God&amp;#x27;s Gift (soundtrack)" label="God&amp;#x27;s Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="4479" end="4489" title="soundtrack" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575697" start="4519" end="4523" title="God&amp;#x27;s Gift (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4639" end="4647" title=":wikt:explicit" label="explicit"/>
<link wikidata="Q312173" start="4771" end="4778" title="Bow Wow (rapper)" label="Bow Wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502946" start="4854" end="4866" title="Fresh Azimiz" label="Fresh Azimiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843804" start="5101" end="5116" title="Hip Hop History" label="Hip Hop History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363140" start="5319" end="5332" title="Get Low LP" label="Gumbo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q32849" start="5443" end="5447" title="Akon" label="Akon"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="5582" end="5599" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363140" start="5613" end="5620" title="Get Low (album)" label="Get Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="5816" end="5828" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="6596" end="6598" title="extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240753" start="7179" end="7188" title="Lil Twist" label="Lil Twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q107337859" start="7244" end="7255" title="D The Business" label="Lil&amp;#x27; D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="7260" end="7269" title="Black Don" label="Black Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q928250" start="7336" end="7350" title="Hip Hop Honors" label="Hip Hop Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q107337859" start="7404" end="7415" title="D The Business" label="Lil&amp;#x27; D"/>
<link wikidata="Q257150" start="7475" end="7480" title="Trina" label="Trina"/>
<link wikidata="Q206032" start="7482" end="7492" title="Gucci Mane" label="Gucci Mane"/>
<link wikidata="Q962811" start="7497" end="7505" title="Mystikal" label="Mystikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="7528" end="7544" title="No Limit Records" label="No Limit Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="7598" end="7614" title="No Limit Forever" label="No Limit Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q216934" start="8215" end="8228" title="Sean Kingston" label="Sean Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615" start="9894" end="9903" title="Lil Wayne" label="Lil Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="10997" end="11003" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="11507" end="11527" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Walt Disney Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779547" start="11545" end="11571" title="Max Keeble&amp;#x27;s Big Move" label="Max Keeble&amp;#x27;s Big Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q44077" start="11607" end="11619" title="Jessica Alba" label="Jessica Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q119676" start="11621" end="11633" title="Mekhi Phifer" label="Mekhi Phifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q597846" start="11687" end="11692" title="Honey (2003 film)" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470464" start="11883" end="11895" title="Static Shock" label="Static Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575697" start="12028" end="12043" title="God&amp;#x27;s Gift" label="God&amp;#x27;s Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="12213" end="12216" title="ASL" label="ASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580573" start="12424" end="12430" title="Romeo!" label="Romeo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535338" start="12483" end="12528" title="Ned&amp;#x27;s Declassified School Survival Guide" label="Ned&amp;#x27;s Declassified School Survival Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="12614" end="12617" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q699383" start="12631" end="12644" title="The Defenders (2010 TV series)" label="The Defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333710" start="12670" end="12687" title="Jumping the Broom (film)" label="Jumping the Broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="12764" end="12779" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985483" start="12784" end="12796" title="ICDC College" label="ICDC College"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="13058" end="13061" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954077" start="13092" end="13102" title="The Choice (American TV series)" label="The Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027604" start="13145" end="13174" title="Nick News with Linda Ellerbee" label="Nick News with Linda Ellerbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="13282" end="13293" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="13753" end="13761" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q124735218" start="13773" end="13805" title="Seven Deadly Sins (film series)" label="Wrath: A Seven Deadly Sins Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q71614494" start="13889" end="13893" title="BET+" label="BET+"/>
<link wikidata="Q34086" start="14146" end="14159" title="Justin Bieber" label="Justin Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q752419" start="14161" end="14174" title="Big Time Rush (band)" label="Big Time Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q221364" start="14180" end="14191" title="Jaden Smith" label="Jaden Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q212413" start="14374" end="14385" title="point guard" label="point guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185037" start="14480" end="14505" title="Beverly Hills High School" label="Beverly Hills High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040711" start="14777" end="14786" title="ABCD Camp" label="ABCD Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q991387" start="14821" end="14840" title="Teaneck, New Jersey" label="Teaneck, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="14933" end="14964" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q25369" start="14989" end="15000" title="Kobe Bryant" label="Kobe Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q319336" start="15002" end="15017" title="Stephon Marbury" label="Stephon Marbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q202295" start="15019" end="15032" title="Tracy McGrady" label="Tracy McGrady"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="15034" end="15046" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q129041" start="15052" end="15067" title="Carmelo Anthony" label="Carmelo Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q464358" start="15110" end="15120" title="O. J. Mayo" label="O. J. Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205326" start="15122" end="15134" title="Derrick Rose" label="Derrick Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q297221" start="15140" end="15150" title="Kevin Love" label="Kevin Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q722042" start="15399" end="15407" title="Master P" label="Master P"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="15661" end="15694" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q456374" start="15916" end="15929" title="DeMar DeRozan" label="DeMar DeRozan"/>
<link wikidata="Q971589" start="16110" end="16119" title="Tim Floyd" label="Tim Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612983" start="16465" end="16479" title="2008–09 USC Trojans men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616266" start="16627" end="16641" title="2009–10 USC Trojans men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468454" start="17049" end="17059" title="Dancing with the Stars (U.S. season 2)" label="season two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674710" start="17069" end="17091" title="Dancing with the Stars (US TV series)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215616" start="17134" end="17147" title="Dancing with the Stars (U.S. season 12)" label="season twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090167" start="17192" end="17209" title="Chelsie Hightower" label="Chelsie Hightower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241973" start="17334" end="17346" title="Donnie Burns" label="Donnie Burns"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17460" end="17476" title="The Challenge: Champs vs. Stars" label="Champs vs. Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="17498" end="17501" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q902421" start="17523" end="17536" title="The Challenge (TV series)" label="The Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754564" start="17570" end="17597" title="Ex on the Beach (American season 2)" label="&amp;quot;Ex on the Beach&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17900" end="17908" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547384" start="17935" end="17950" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo (album)" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519911" start="17971" end="17980" title="Game Time" label="Game Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363147" start="18001" end="18010" title="Romeoland" label="Romeoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580573" start="18506" end="18512" title="Romeo!" label="Romeo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q597846" start="18825" end="18830" title="Honey (2003 film)" label="Honey"/>
</links>
</doc>
