<doc id="223215" wikidata="Q213861" url="?curid=223215" title="Jim Jones">
<text>James Warren Jones (May 13, 1931 – November 18, 1978) was an American cult leader and mass murderer who founded and led the Peoples Temple between 1955 and 1978. In what Jones termed &quot;revolutionary suicide&quot;, Jones and the members of his inner circle planned and orchestrated a mass murder-suicide in his remote jungle commune at Jonestown, Guyana, on November 18, 1978. Jones and the events that occurred at Jonestown have had a defining influence on society&#x27;s perception of cults.

As a child, Jones developed an affinity for Pentecostalism and a desire to preach. He was ordained as a Christian minister in the Independent Assemblies of God, attracting his first group of followers while participating in the Pentecostal Latter Rain movement and the Healing Revival during the 1950s. Jones&#x27;s initial popularity arose from his joint campaign appearances with the movement&#x27;s prominent leaders, William Branham and Joseph Mattsson-Boze, and their endorsement of his ministry. Jones founded the organization that would become the Peoples Temple in Indianapolis in 1955. In 1956, Jones began to be influenced by Father Divine and the Peace Mission movement. Jones distinguished himself through civil rights activism, founding the Temple as a fully integrated congregation. In 1964, Jones joined and was ordained a minister by the Disciples of Christ; his attraction to the Disciples was largely due to the autonomy and tolerance they granted to differing views within their denomination.

In 1965, Jones moved the Temple to California. The group established its headquarters in San Francisco, where he became heavily involved in political and charitable activity throughout the 1970s. Jones developed connections with prominent California politicians and was appointed as chairman of the San Francisco Housing Authority Commission in 1975. Beginning in the late 1960s, reports of abuse began to surface as Jones became increasingly vocal in his rejection of traditional Christianity and began promoting a form of anti-capitalism he called &quot;Apostolic Socialism&quot; and making claims of his own divinity. Jones became progressively more controlling of his followers in Peoples Temple, which had over 3,000 members at its peak. Jones&#x27;s followers engaged in a communal lifestyle in which many turned over all their income and property to Jones and Peoples Temple who directed all aspects of community life.

Following a period of negative publicity and reports of abuse at Peoples Temple, Jones ordered the construction of the Jonestown commune in Guyana in 1974 and convinced or compelled many of his followers to live there with him. Jones claimed that he was constructing a socialist paradise free from the oppression of the United States government. By 1978, reports surfaced of human rights abuses and accusations that people were being held in Jonestown against their will. U.S. Representative Leo Ryan led a delegation to the commune in November of that year to investigate these reports. While boarding a return flight with some former Temple members who wished to leave, Ryan and four others were murdered by gunmen from Jonestown. Jones then ordered a mass murder-suicide that claimed the lives of 909 commune members; almost all of the members died by drinking Flavor Aid laced with cyanide.

== Early life ==
Jim Jones was born on May 13, 1931, in the rural community of Crete, Indiana, to James Thurman Jones (October 21, 1887 – May 29, 1951) and Lynetta Putnam (April 16, 1902 – December 10, 1977). Jones was of Irish and Welsh descent; he and his mother both claimed to also have some Cherokee ancestry, but there is no evidence of this. Jones&#x27;s father was a disabled World WarI veteran who suffered from severe breathing difficulties due to injuries which he sustained in a chemical weapons attack. He tried to augment his income by occasionally working on neighborhood road repair projects because the military pension he earned due to his wounds was insufficient to support his family.

His father&#x27;s illness led to financial difficulties, which in turn resulted in intense marital problems between Jones&#x27;s parents. In 1934, during the Great Depression, the Jones family was evicted from their home for failure to make mortgage payments. Their relatives purchased a shack for them to live in at the nearby town of Lynn. The new home, where Jones grew up, lacked plumbing and electricity. In Lynn, the family attempted to earn an income through farming, but again met with failure when Jones&#x27;s father&#x27;s health further deteriorated. The family often lacked adequate food and relied on financial support from their extended family. They sometimes resorted to foraging in the nearby forest and fields to supplement their diet.

According to multiple Jones biographers, his mother had &quot;no natural maternal instincts&quot; and she frequently neglected her son. When Jones started to attend school, his extended family threatened to cut off their financial assistance unless his mother got a job, forcing her to work outside her home. Meanwhile, Jones&#x27;s father was hospitalized multiple times due to his illness. As a result, Jones&#x27;s parents were frequently absent during his childhood. Although his aunts and uncles lived close by and gave him some supervision, Jones often wandered the streets of the town, sometimes naked. Jones was cared for by the female residents of Lynn, and they frequently gave him food, clothing, and gifts.

===Early religious and political influences===
Myrtle Kennedy, the wife of the Nazarene Church&#x27;s pastor, developed a special attachment to Jones. She gave Jones a Bible and encouraged him to study it, teaching him to follow the holiness code of the Nazarene Church. As Jones grew older, he attended services at most of the churches in Lynn, often going to multiple churches each week, and he was baptized in several of them. Jones developed a desire to become a preacher as a child and he began to practice preaching in private. His mother claimed that she was disturbed when she caught him imitating the pastor of the local Apostolic Pentecostal Church and she unsuccessfully attempted to prevent him from attending the church&#x27;s services.

Although they had sympathy for Jones because of his poor circumstances, his neighbors reported that he was an unusual child who was obsessed with religion and death. Jones regularly visited a casket manufacturer in Lynn and held mock funerals for roadkill that he collected. One neighbor of the Jones family even stated that Jones killed a cat with a knife for one of these funerals. When he could not get any children to attend his funerals, he would perform the services alone. Jones claimed to have unique abilities, such as the capacity to fly. He once leaped off a building&#x27;s roof to demonstrate his abilities to others, but he fell and broke his arm. He nonetheless persisted in saying he had exceptional abilities despite the fall. At times, he would put other children into life-threatening situations and tell them he was guided by the Angel of Death. Jones allegedly committed countless sacrilegious pranks in the churches he attended as a boy, according to claims he made in adult life. He claimed that he had stolen the Pentecostal minister&#x27;s Bible and had covered Acts 2:38 with cow manure. He also asserted that he substituted a cup of his urine for the holy water once at a Catholic church.

One Jones biographer suggested that he developed his unusual interests because he found it difficult to make friends. Although his strange religious practices stood out the most to his neighbors, they reported that he misbehaved more seriously. He frequently stole candy from merchants in the town; his mother was required to pay for his thefts. Jones regularly used offensive profanity, commonly greeting his friends and neighbors by saying, &quot;Good morning, you son of a bitch&quot; or &quot;Hello, you dirty bastard&quot;, similar to his mother Lynetta, who frequently swore in public and found amusement in people being offended at a woman cursing. Jones&#x27;s mother usually beat him with a leather belt to punish his misbehavior.

Jones also developed an intense interest in social doctrines. He became a voracious reader who studied Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Karl Marx and Mahatma Gandhi. Jones would tell his wife that Mao Zedong was his hero. He spent hours in the community library, and he brought books home so he could read them in the evenings. Although he studied different political systems, Jones did not espouse any radical political views in his youth, but as World War II started, Jones developed an intense interest in the Nazi Party. He was fascinated by their pomp, their cohesion, and Hitler&#x27;s total power. The members of his neighbourhood found it disconcerting that he extolled Nazi Germany. Jones acted as a dictator over the other kids, ordering them to goosestep together and beating those who disobeyed. One childhood friend recalled Jones shouting &quot;Heil Hitler!&quot; and giving the Nazi salute to German prisoners of war who were traveling to a detention facility. Commenting on his childhood, Jones stated: Tim Reiterman, a journalist and biographer of Jones, wrote that Jones&#x27;s attraction to religion was strongly influenced by his desire for a family. Jones went to see the Kennedy family in 1942 when they spent the summer in Richmond, Indiana. They took part in services four times a week while attending a summer religious convention at a nearby Pentecostal church. When Jones returned to Lynn in the fall, he upset his neighborhood by explaining sexual reproduction in detail to young children. Jones&#x27;s mother was urged to control his behavior by many individuals in Lynn, but she refused. Many parents decided to keep their kids away from Jones as a result of the issue. He had established himself as an outcast among his friends by the time he started high school and was progressively despised by the locals.

===Education and marriage===
In high school, Jones continued to stand out from his peers. Jones went by the nickname &quot;Jimmy&quot; during his youth, and almost always carried his Bible with him. Jones was a good student who enjoyed debating with his teachers. He also had the habit of refusing to respond to anyone who spoke to him first and only engaged in conversations when he started them. In contrast to his peers, Jones was known to dress in his Sunday church clothes every day of the week. His religious views alienated him from other young people. He frequently confronted them for drinking beer, smoking, and dancing. At times, he would even interrupt other young people&#x27;s events and insist that they read the Bible with him.

Jones did not enjoy participating in sports because he detested losing, so he coached teams for younger children instead. Jones was disturbed by the treatment of the African Americans who were in attendance at a baseball game he attended in Richmond, Indiana. The events at that baseball game brought discrimination against African Americans to Jones&#x27;s attention and influenced his strong aversion to racism. Jones&#x27;s father belonged to the Indiana branch of the Ku Klux Klan, which enjoyed considerable support in Indiana during the Great Depression. Jones described how he and his father had a disagreement about race and added that they had not spoken for &quot;many, many years&quot; as a result of his father&#x27;s forbidding one of Jones&#x27;s black friends from entering his home. 

Jones&#x27;s parents separated in 1945 and they eventually divorced. Jones moved to Richmond, Indiana with his mother, where he graduated from Richmond High School in December 1948 early and with honors. Jones and his mother lost the financial support of their relatives following the divorce. To support himself, Jones began working as an orderly at Richmond&#x27;s Reid Hospital in 1946. Jones was well-regarded by the senior management, but staff members later recalled that Jones exhibited disturbing behavior towards some patients and co-workers. Jones began dating a nurse-in-training named Marceline Mae Baldwin while he was working at Reid Hospital.

Jones moved to Bloomington, Indiana in November 1948, where he attended Indiana University Bloomington with the intention of becoming a doctor, but changed his mind shortly thereafter. During his time at University, Jones was impressed by a speech that Eleanor Roosevelt delivered about the plight of African-Americans, and he began to espouse support for communism and other radical political views for the first time.

Jones and Baldwin continued their relationship while he attended college, and the couple married on June 12, 1949. Their first home was in Bloomington, where Marceline worked in a nearby hospital while Jones attended college. Marceline was Methodist, and she and Jones immediately fell into arguments about church. Jones&#x27;s strong opposition to the Methodist church&#x27;s racial segregationist practices was an early strain on their marriage, and throughout the duration of their relationship, Jones frequently emotionally and psychologically abused Marceline. Jones insisted on attending Bloomington&#x27;s Full Gospel Tabernacle, but eventually compromised and began attending a local Methodist church on most Sunday mornings. Despite attending churches every week, Jones privately pressed his wife to accept atheism.

Through the years, Jones&#x27;s marriage was affected by his insecurity. He often felt the need to test Marceline&#x27;s love and loyalty, and at times he used sadistic methods to do so. One recurring tactic he used was to tell her that one of her close friends or family members had suddenly died, and then comfort her over the loss, before finally admitting to her the story was untrue.

After attending Indiana University for two years, the couple relocated to Indianapolis in 1951. Jones took night classes at Butler University to continue his education, finally earning a degree in secondary education in 1961. In 1951, the 20-year-old Jones began attending gatherings of the Communist Party USA in Indianapolis. Jones and his family faced harassment from government authorities for their affiliation with the Communist Party during 1952. Jones later asserted that in one event, his mother was harassed by FBI agents in front of her co-workers because she had attended a communist meeting with her son. Jones became frustrated with the persecution of communists in the U.S. Reflecting back on his participation in the Communist Party, Jones said that he asked himself, &quot;How can I demonstrate my Marxism? The thought was, infiltrate the church.&quot;

== Peoples Temple ==
=== Beginnings in Indianapolis ===
In early 1952, Jones announced to his wife and her family that he would become a Methodist minister, believing the church was ready to &quot;put real socialism into practice.&quot; Jones was surprised when a Methodist district superintendent helped him get a start in the church, even though he knew Jones to be a communist.

In the summer of 1952, Jones was hired as student pastor to the children at the Sommerset Southside Methodist Church, where he launched a project to create a playground that would be open to children of all races. Jones continued to visit and speak at Pentecostal churches while serving as Methodist student pastor. In early 1954 Jones was dismissed from his position in the Methodist Church, ostensibly for stealing church funds, though he later claimed he left the church because its leaders forbade him from integrating African-Americans into his congregation.

Around this time in 1953, Jones visited a Pentecostal Latter Rain convention in Columbus, Indiana, where a woman prophesied that Jones was a prophet with a great ministry. Jones was surprised by the endorsement, but gladly accepted the call to preach and rose to the podium to deliver a message to the crowd. Pentecostalism was in the midst of the Healing Revival and Latter Rain movements during the 1950s.

Believing that the racially integrated and rapidly growing Latter Rain movement offered him a greater opportunity to become a preacher, Jones successfully convinced his wife to leave the Methodist church and join the Pentecostals. In 1953, Jones began attending and preaching at the Laurel Street Tabernacle in Indianapolis, a Pentecostal Assemblies of God church. Jones held healing revivals there until 1955 and began to travel and speak at other churches in the Latter Rain movement. He was a guest speaker at a 1953 convention in Detroit.

The Assemblies of God was strongly opposed to the Latter Rain movement. In 1955, they assigned a new pastor to the Laurel Street Tabernacle who enforced their denominational ban on healing revivals. This led Jones to leave and establish Wings of Healing, a new church that would later be renamed Peoples Temple. Jones&#x27;s new church attracted only twenty members who had come with him from the Laurel Street Tabernacle and was not able to financially support his vision. At one point, he even sold pet monkeys to raise funds for his church. Jones saw a need for publicity, and began seeking a way to popularize his ministry and recruit members.

===Latter Rain movement===

Jones began to closely associate with the Independent Assemblies of God (IAoG), an international group of churches that embraced the Latter Rain movement. The IAoG had few requirements for ordaining ministers and they were also accepting of divine healing practices. In June 1955, Jones held his first joint meetings with William Branham, a healing evangelist and Pentecostal leader in the global Healing Revival.

In 1956, Jones was ordained as an IAoG minister by Joseph Mattsson-Boze, a leader in the Latter Rain movement and the IAoG. Jones quickly rose to prominence in the group and organized and hosted a healing convention to take place June 11–15, 1956, in Indianapolis&#x27;s Cadle Tabernacle. Needing a well-known figure to draw crowds, he arranged to share the pulpit again with Branham.

Branham was known to tell attendees their name, address, and why they came for prayer, before pronouncing them healed. Jones was intrigued by Branham&#x27;s methods and began performing the same feats. Jones and Branham&#x27;s meetings were very successful and attracted an audience of 11,000 at their first joint campaign. At the convention, Branham issued a prophetic endorsement of Jones and his ministry, saying that God used the convention to send forth a new great ministry.

Many attendees believed Jones&#x27;s performance indicated that he possessed a supernatural gift, and coupled with Branham&#x27;s endorsement, it led to rapid growth of Peoples Temple. Jones was particularly effective at recruitment among the African American attendees at the conventions. According to a newspaper report, regular attendance at Peoples Temple swelled to 1,000 thanks to the publicity Branham provided to Jones and Peoples Temple.

Following the convention, Jones renamed his church the &quot;Peoples Temple Christian Church Full Gospel&quot; to associate it with Full Gospel Pentecostalism; the name was later shortened to the Peoples Temple. Jones participated in a series of multi-state revival campaigns with Branham in the second half of the 1950s. Jones claimed to be a follower and promoter of Branham&#x27;s &quot;Message&quot; during the period. Peoples Temple hosted a second international Pentecostal convention in 1957 which was again headlined by Branham. Through the conventions and with the support of Branham and Mattsson-Boze, Jones secured connections throughout the Latter Rain movement.

Jones adopted one of the Latter Rain&#x27;s key doctrines, which he continued to promote for the rest of his life: the Manifested Sons of God. William Branham and the Latter Rain movement promoted the belief that individuals could become manifestations of God with supernatural gifts and superhuman abilities. They believed that such a manifestation signaled the second coming of Christ, and that the people endowed with these special gifts would usher in a millennial age of heaven on earth. Jones was fascinated with the idea, and adapted it to promote his own utopian ideas and eventually the idea that he was himself a manifestation of God. By the late 1960s, Jones came to teach he was a manifestation of &quot;Christ the Revolution&quot;.

Branham was a major influence on Jones who subsequently adopted elements of Branham&#x27;s methods, doctrines, and style. Like Branham, Jones would later claim to be a return of Elijah the Prophet, the voice of God, a manifestation of Christ, and promote the belief that the end of the world was imminent. Jones learned some of his most successful recruitment tactics from Branham. Jones eventually separated from the Latter Rain movement following a bitter disagreement with Branham in which Jones prophesied Branham&#x27;s death. Their disagreement was possibly related to Branham&#x27;s racial teachings or Branham&#x27;s increasingly vocal opposition to communism.

===Peace Mission Movement===
Through the Latter Rain movement, Jones became aware of Father Divine, an African American spiritual leader of the International Peace Mission movement who was often derided by Pentecostal ministers for his claims to divinity. In 1956, Jones made his first visit to investigate Father Divine&#x27;s Peace Mission in Philadelphia. Jones was careful to explain that his visit to the Peace Mission was so he could &quot;give an authentic, unbiased, and objective statement&quot; about its activities to his fellow Pentecostal ministers.

Divine served as another important influence on the development of Jones&#x27;s ministry. While publicly disavowing many of Father Divine&#x27;s teachings, Jones actually began to promote Divine&#x27;s teachings on communal living and gradually implemented many of the outreach practices he witnessed at the Peace Mission, including setting up a soup kitchen and providing free groceries and clothing to people in need.

Jones made a second visit to Father Divine in 1958 to learn more about his practices. Jones bragged to his congregation that he would like to be the successor of Father Divine and made many comparisons between their two ministries. Jones began progressively implementing the disciplinary practices he learned from Father Divine which increasingly took control over the lives of members of Peoples Temple.

===Disciples of Christ===

As Jones gradually separated from Pentecostalism and the Latter Rain movement, he sought an organization that would be open to all of his beliefs. In 1960, Peoples Temple joined the Disciples of Christ denomination, whose headquarters was nearby in Indianapolis. Archie Ijames assured Jones that the organization would tolerate his political beliefs, and Jones was finally ordained by Disciples of Christ in 1964.

Jones was ordained as a Disciples minister at a time when the requirements for ordination varied greatly and Disciples membership was open to any church. In both 1974 and 1977 the Disciples leadership received allegations of abuse at Peoples Temple. They conducted investigations at the time, but they found no evidence of wrongdoing. Disciples of Christ found Peoples Temple to be &quot;an exemplary Christian ministry overcoming human differences and dedicated to human services.&quot; Peoples Temple contributed $1.1 million ($ in 2020) dollars to the denomination between 1966 and 1977. Jones and Peoples Temple remained part of the Disciples until the Jonestown massacre.

=== Racial integration ===
In 1960, Indianapolis Mayor Charles Boswell appointed Jones director of the local human rights commission. Jones ignored Boswell&#x27;s advice to keep a low profile, however, and he used the position to secure new outlets for his views on local radio and television programs. The mayor and other commissioners asked him to curtail his public actions, but he refused. Jones was wildly cheered at a meeting of the NAACP and the Urban League when he encouraged his audience to be more militant, capping his speech with, &quot;Let my people go!&quot;.

During his time as commission director, Jones helped to racially integrate churches, restaurants, the telephone company, the Indianapolis Police Department, a theater, and an amusement park, and the Indiana University Health Methodist Hospital. When swastikas were painted on the homes of two black families, Jones walked through the neighborhood, comforted the local black community and counseled white families not to move.

Jones set up sting operations in order to catch restaurants which refused to serve black customers and wrote to American Nazi Party leaders and passed their responses to the media. In 1961, Jones suffered a collapse and was hospitalized. The hospital accidentally placed Jones in its black ward, and he refused to be moved; he began to make the beds and empty the bedpans of black patients. Political pressures which resulted from Jones&#x27;s actions caused hospital officials to desegregate the wards.

In Indiana, Jones was criticized for his integrationist views. Peoples Temple became a target of white supremacists. Among several incidents, a swastika was placed on the Temple, a stick of dynamite was left in a Temple coal pile, and a dead cat was thrown at Jones&#x27;s house after a threatening phone call. Nevertheless, the publicity which was generated by Jones&#x27;s activities attracted a larger congregation. By the end of 1961, Indianapolis was a far more racially integrated city, and &quot;Jim Jones was almost entirely responsible.&quot;

=== &quot;Rainbow Family&quot; ===

Jones and his wife adopted several non-white children. Jones referred to his household as a &quot;rainbow family&quot;, and stated: &quot;Integration is a more personal thing with me now. It&#x27;s a question of my son&#x27;s future.&quot; He also portrayed the Temple as a &quot;rainbow family&quot;. In 1954, the Joneses adopted their first child, Agnes, who was part Native American. In 1959, they adopted three Korean-American children named Lew, Stephanie, and Suzanne, and encouraged Temple members to adopt orphans from war-ravaged Korea. Stephanie Jones died aged 5 in a car accident in May 1959.

In June 1959, Jones and his wife had their only biological child, naming him Stephan Gandhi. In 1961, they became the first white couple in Indiana to adopt a black child, naming him Jim Jones Jr. (James Jones Jr.). They adopted a white son, originally named Timothy Glen Tupper (shortened to Tim), whose birth mother was a member of the Temple. Jones fathered Jim Jon (Kimo) with Temple member Carolyn Layton.

=== Relocating Peoples Temple ===

In 1961, Jones warned his congregation that he had received visions of a nuclear attack that would devastate Indianapolis. His wife confided to her friends that he was becoming increasingly paranoid and fearful. Like other followers of William Branham who moved to South America during the 1960s, Jones may have been influenced by Branham&#x27;s 1961 prophecy concerning the destruction of the United States in a nuclear war. Jones began to look for a way to escape the destruction he believed was imminent. In January 1962 he read an &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine article that purported South America to be the safest place to reside to escape any impending nuclear war. Jones decided to travel to South America to scout for a site to relocate Peoples Temple.

Jones made a stop in Georgetown, Guyana on his way to Brazil. Jones held revival meetings in Guyana, which was a British colony. Continuing to Brazil, Jones&#x27;s family rented a modest three-bedroom home in Belo Horizonte. Jones studied the local economy and receptiveness of racial minorities to his message, but found language to be a barrier. Careful not to portray himself as a communist, he spoke of an apostolic communal lifestyle rather than Marxism. The family moved to Rio de Janeiro in mid-1963, where they worked with the poor in the &quot;favelas&quot;.

Unable to find a location he deemed suitable for Peoples Temple, Jones became plagued by guilt for abandoning the civil rights struggle in Indiana. During the year of his absence, regular attendance at Peoples Temple declined to fewer than 100. Jones demanded the Peoples Temple send all its revenue to him in South America to support his efforts and the church went into debt to support his mission. In late 1963, Archie Ijames sent word that the Temple was about to collapse, and threatened to resign if Jones did not soon return. Jones reluctantly returned to Indiana.
Jones arrived in December 1963 to find Peoples Temple bitterly divided. Financial issues and low attendance forced Jones to sell the Peoples Temple church building and relocate to a smaller building nearby. To raise money, Jones briefly returned to the revival circuit, traveling and holding healing campaigns with Latter Rain groups. Possibly to distract Peoples Temple members from the issues facing their group, he told his Indiana congregation that the world would be engulfed by nuclear war on July 15, 1967, leading to a new socialist Eden on Earth, and that the Temple must move to Northern California for safety.

During 1964, Jones made multiple trips to California to find a suitable location to relocate. In July 1965, Jones and his followers began moving to their new location in Redwood Valley, California, near the city of Ukiah. Russell Winberg, Peoples Temple&#x27;s assistant pastor, strongly resisted Jones&#x27;s efforts to move the congregation and warned members that Jones was abandoning Christianity. Winberg took over leadership of the Indianapolis church when Jones departed. About 140 of Jones&#x27;s most loyal followers made the move to California, while the rest remained behind with Winberg.

In California, Jones took a job as a history and government teacher at an adult education school in Ukiah. Jones used his position to recruit for Peoples Temple, teaching his students the benefits of Marxism and lecturing on religion. Jones planted loyal members of Peoples Temple in the classes to help him with recruitment. Jones recruited 50 new members to Peoples Temple in the first few months. In 1967, Jones&#x27;s followers coaxed another 75 members of the Indianapolis congregation to move to California.

In 1968, the Peoples Temple&#x27;s California location was admitted to the Disciples of Christ. Jones began to use the denominational connection to promote Peoples Temple as part of the 1.5 million member denomination. He played up famous members of the Disciples, including Lyndon Johnson and J. Edgar Hoover, and misrepresented the nature of his position in the denomination. By 1969, Jones increased the membership in Peoples Temple in California to 300.

===Apostolic Socialism===

Jones developed a theology influenced by the teachings of William Branham and the Latter Rain movement, Father Divine&#x27;s &quot;divine economic socialism&quot; teachings, and infused with Jones&#x27;s personal communist worldview. Jones referred to his views as &quot;Apostolic Socialism&quot;. Jones concealed the communist aspects of his teachings until the late 1960s, following the relocation of Peoples Temple to California, where he began to gradually introduce his full beliefs to his followers. Jones taught that &quot;those who remained drugged with the opiate of religion had to be brought to enlightenment&quot;, which he defined as socialism. Jones asserted that traditional Christianity had an incorrect view of God. By the early 1970s, Jones began deriding traditional Christianity as &quot;fly away religion&quot;, rejecting the Bible as being a tool to oppress women and non-whites. Jones referred to traditional Christianity&#x27;s view of God as a &quot;Sky God&quot; who was &quot;no God at all&quot;. Instead, Jones claimed to be God, and no God beside him.

Jones increasingly promoted the idea of his own divinity, going so far as to tell his congregation that &quot;I am come as God Socialist.&quot; Jones carefully avoided claiming divinity outside of Peoples Temple, but he expected to be acknowledged as god-like among his followers. Former Temple member Hue Fortson Jr. quoted him as saying:

What you need to believe in is what you can see... If you see me as your friend, I&#x27;ll be your friend. As you see me as your father, I&#x27;ll be your father, for those of you that don&#x27;t have a father... If you see me as your savior, I&#x27;ll be your savior. If you see me as your God, I&#x27;ll be your God.

Further attacking traditional Christianity, Jones authored and circulated a tract entitled &quot;The Letter Killeth&quot;, criticizing the King James Bible and dismissing King James VI and I as an &quot;alcoholic&quot; and &quot;slave trader&quot; who &quot;oppressed our early Americans&quot;. Jones further claimed that as such, there was a need for a &quot;prophet&quot; sent from God to properly interpret his teachings. Jones rejected even the few required tenets of the Disciples of Christ denomination. Instead of implementing the sacraments as prescribed by the Disciples, Jones followed Father Divine&#x27;s holy communion practices. Jones created his own baptismal formula, baptizing his converts &quot;in the holy name of Socialism&quot;. Explaining the nature of sin, Jones stated, &quot;If you&#x27;re born in capitalist America, racist America, fascist America, then you&#x27;re born in sin. But if you&#x27;re born in socialism, you&#x27;re not born in sin.&quot; Drawing on a prophecy in the Book of Revelation, he taught that American capitalist culture was irredeemable &quot;Babylon&quot;.

Jones frequently warned his followers of an imminent apocalyptic nuclear race war. He claimed that Nazis and white supremacists would put people of color into concentration camps. Jones said he was a messiah sent to save people. He taught his followers the only way to escape the supposed imminent catastrophe was to accept his teachings, and that after the apocalypse was over, they would emerge to establish a perfect communist society. Publicly, Jones took care to always couch his socialist views in religious terms, such as &quot;apostolic social justice&quot;. &quot;Living the Acts of the Apostles&quot; was his euphemism for living a communal lifestyle. While in the United States, Jones feared the public discovering the full extent of his communist views, which he worried would cost him the support of political leaders and risk Peoples Temple being ejected from the Disciples of Christ. Jones feared losing the church&#x27;s tax-exempt status and having to report his financial dealings to the Internal Revenue Service.

Historians are divided over whether Jones actually believed his own teachings, or was just using them to manipulate people. Jeff Guinn said, &quot;It is impossible to know whether Jones gradually came to think he was God&#x27;s earthly vessel, or whether he came to that convenient conclusion to enhance his authority over his followers.&quot; In a 1976 interview, Jones claimed to be an agnostic and/or an atheist. Marceline stated in a 1977 &quot;New York Times&quot; interview that Jones was trying to promote Marxism in the U.S. by mobilizing people through religion. She said Jones called the Bible a &quot;paper idol&quot; that he wanted to destroy. Jones taught his followers that the ends justify the means and authorized them to achieve his vision by any means necessary. Outsiders would later point to this aspect of Jones&#x27;s teachings to allege that he did not genuinely believe in his own teachings, but was &quot;morally bankrupt&quot; and only manipulating religion and other elements of society &quot;to achieve his own selfish ends&quot;.

===Early reports of abuse===
Jones began using illicit drugs after moving to California, which further heightened his paranoia. He increasingly used fear to control and manipulate his followers. Jones frequently warned his followers that there was an enemy seeking to destroy them. The identity of that enemy changed over time from the Ku Klux Klan, to Nazis, to redneck vigilantes, and finally the American government. He frequently prophesied that fires, car accidents, and death or injury would come upon anyone unfaithful to him and his teachings. He constantly pressed his followers to be aggressive in promoting and fulfilling his beliefs.

Jones established a Planning Commission made up of his lieutenants to direct the Peoples Temples&#x27; communal lifestyle. Jones, through the Planning Commission, began controlling all aspects of the lives of his followers. Members who joined Peoples Temple turned over all their assets to the church in exchange for free room and board. Members who worked outside of the Temple turned over their income to be used for the benefit of the community. Jones directed groups of his followers to work on various projects for additional income and set up an agricultural operation in Redwood Valley to grow food. Large community outreach projects were organized, and Temple members were bussed to perform work and community service across the region.

The first known cases of serious abuse in Peoples Temple arose in California as the Planning Commission carried out discipline against members who were not fulfilling Jones&#x27;s vision or following the rules. Jones&#x27;s control over the members of Peoples Temple extended to their sex lives and who could be married. Some members were coerced to get abortions. Jones began to require sexual favors from the women of the church, and raped several male members of his congregation.

Members who rebelled against Jones&#x27;s control were punished with reduced food rations, harsher work schedules, public ridicule and humiliations, and sometimes with physical violence. As the Temple&#x27;s membership grew, Jones created an armed security group to ensure order among his followers and to guarantee his own personal safety.

=== Focus on San Francisco ===

By the end of 1969, Peoples Temple was growing rapidly. Jones&#x27;s message of economic socialism and racial equality, along with the integrated nature of Peoples Temple, proved attractive, especially to students and racial minorities. By 1970, the Temple opened branches in several cities including San Fernando, San Francisco, and Los Angeles as Jones began shifting his focus to major cities across California because of limited expansion opportunities in Ukiah. He eventually moved the Temple&#x27;s headquarters to San Francisco, which was a major center for radical protest movements. By 1973, Peoples Temple reached 2,570 members, with 36,000 subscribers to its fundraising newsletter.

Jones grew the Temple by purposefully targeting other churches. In 1970, Jones and 150 of his followers took a trip to San Francisco&#x27;s Missionary Baptist Church. Jones held a faith healing revival meeting wherein he impressed the crowd by claiming to heal a man of cancer; his followers later admitted to helping him stage the &quot;healing&quot;. At the end of the event, he began attacking and condemning Baptist teachings and encouraging the members to abandon their church and join him.

The event was successful, and Jones recruited about 200 new members for Peoples Temple. In a less successful attempt in 1971, Jones and a large number of his followers visited the tomb and shrine erected for Father Divine shortly after his death. Jones confronted Divine&#x27;s wife and claimed to be the reincarnation of Father Divine. At a banquet that evening, Jones&#x27;s followers seized control of the event and Jones addressed Divine&#x27;s followers, again claiming that he was Father Divine&#x27;s successor. Divine&#x27;s wife rose up and accused Jones of being the devil in disguise and demanded he leave. Jones managed to recruit only twelve followers through the event.

Jones became active in San Francisco politics and was able to gain contact with prominent local and state politicians. Thanks to their growing numbers, Jones and Peoples Temple played an instrumental role in George Moscone&#x27;s election as mayor in 1975. Moscone subsequently appointed Jones as the chairman of the San Francisco Housing Authority Commission.

Jones hosted local political figures at his San Francisco apartment for discussions. In September 1976, Assemblyman Willie Brown served as master of ceremonies at a large testimonial dinner for Jones attended by Governor Jerry Brown and Lieutenant Governor Mervyn Dymally. At that dinner, Willie Brown touted Jones as &quot;what you should see every day when you look in the mirror&quot; and said he was a combination of Martin Luther King Jr., Angela Davis, Albert Einstein, and Mao. Harvey Milk spoke to audiences during political rallies held at the Temple, and he wrote to Jones after one such visit:

Rev Jim, It may take me many a day to come back down from the high that I reach today. I found something dear today. I found a sense of being that makes up for all the hours and energy placed in a fight. I found what you wanted me to find. I shall be back. For I can never leave.

Through his connections with California politicians, Jones was able to establish contacts with key national political figures. Jones and Moscone met privately with vice presidential candidate Walter Mondale on his campaign plane days before the 1976 election, leading Mondale to publicly praise the Temple.
First Lady Rosalynn Carter met with Jones on multiple occasions, corresponded with him about Cuba, and spoke with him at the grand opening of the San Francisco headquarters—where he received louder applause than she did. Jones forged alliances with key columnists and others at the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; and other press outlets that gave Jones favorable press during his early years in California.

==Jonestown==
===Publicity problems===
Jones began to receive negative press beginning in October 1971 when reporters covered one of Jones&#x27;s divine healing services during a visit to his old church in Indianapolis. The news report led to an investigation by the Indiana State Psychology Board into Jones&#x27;s healing practices in 1972. A doctor involved in the investigation accused Jones of &quot;quackery&quot; and challenged Jones to give tissue samples of the material he claimed fell off people when they were healed of cancer. The investigation caused alarm within the Temple.

Jones had been performing faith healing &quot;miracles&quot; since his joint campaigns with William Branham. &quot;On several occasions his healings were revealed as nothing but a hoax.&quot; In one incident, Jones drugged Temple member Irene Mason, and while she was unconscious, a cast was put on her arm. When she regained consciousness, she was told she had fallen and broken her arm and been taken to the hospital. In a subsequent healing service, Jones removed her cast in front of the congregation and told them she was healed. In other instances, Jones had someone from his inner circle enter the prayer line for healing of cancer. After being &quot;healed&quot; the person would pretend to cough up their tumor, which was actually a chicken gizzard. Jones also pretended to have &quot;special revelations&quot; about individuals which revealed supposed hidden details of their lives:

Jones was fearful that his methods would be exposed by the investigation. In response, Jones announced he was terminating his ministry in Indiana because it was too far from California for him to attend to and downplayed his healing claims to the authorities. The issue only escalated however, and Lester Kinsolving ran a series of articles targeting Jones and Peoples Temple in the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot; in September 1972. The stories reported on Jones&#x27;s claims of divinity and exposed purported miracles as a hoax.

In 1973, Ross Case, a former follower of Jones, began working with a group in Ukiah to investigate Peoples Temple. They uncovered a staged healing, the abusive treatment of a woman in the church, and evidence that Jones raped a male member of his congregation. Reports of Case&#x27;s activity reached Jones, who became increasingly paranoid that the authorities were after him. Case reported his findings to the local police, but they took no action.

Shortly after, eight members of Peoples Temple made accusations of abuse against the Planning Commission and Peoples Temple staff members. They accused members of Planning Commission of being homosexuals and questioned their true commitment to socialism, before leaving the Peoples Temple. Jones became convinced he was losing control and needed to relocate Peoples Temple to escape the mounting threats and allegations.

On December 13, 1973, Jones was arrested and charged with lewd conduct for allegedly masturbating in the presence of a male undercover LAPD vice officer in a movie theater restroom near Los Angeles&#x27;s MacArthur Park. On December 20, 1973, the charge against Jones was dismissed, though the details of the dismissal are not clear. The court file was sealed, and the judge ordered that records of the arrest be destroyed.

=== Escape to Guyana ===
In the fall of 1973, Jones and the Planning Commission devised a plan to escape from the United States in the event of a government raid, and they began to develop a longer-term plan to relocate Peoples Temple. The group decided on Guyana as a favorable location, citing its recent revolution, socialist government, and the favorable reaction Jones received when he traveled there in 1963. In October, the group voted unanimously to set up an agricultural commune in Guyana. In December, Jones and James traveled to Guyana to find a suitable location.

In a newspaper interview, Jones indicated that he would rather settle his commune in a communist country like China or the Soviet Union, and was saddened about his inability to do so. Jones described Lenin and Stalin as his heroes, and saw the Soviet Union as an ideal society.

By the summer of 1974, land and supplies were purchased in Guyana. Jones was put in charge of the project and oversaw the installation of a power generation station, clearance of fields for farming, and the construction of dormitories to prepare for the first settlers. In December 1974, the first group arrived in Guyana to start operating the commune that would become known as Jonestown.

Jones left James to oversee Jonestown while he returned to the United States to continue his efforts to combat the negative press. He was largely unsuccessful and more stories of abuse in Peoples Temple were leaked to the public. In March 1977, Marshall Kilduff published a story in &quot;New West&quot; magazine exposing abuses at the Peoples Temple. The article included allegations by Temple defectors of physical, emotional, and sexual abuse.

The article convinced Jones that it was time to permanently relocate to South America, and he began to compel members of Peoples Temple to make the move with him. Jones promoted the commune as a means to create both a &quot;socialist paradise&quot; and a &quot;sanctuary&quot; from the media scrutiny in San Francisco. Jones purported to establish it as a model communist community, adding that the Temple comprised &quot;the purest communists there are&quot;. Once they arrived in Jonestown, Jones prevented members from leaving the settlement.

Jonestown had about 50 settlers at the start of 1977 who were expanding the commune, but it was not ready to handle a large influx of settlers. Bureaucratic requirements after Jones&#x27; arrival sapped labor resources for other needs. Buildings fell into disrepair and weeds encroached on fields. James warned Jones that the facilities could only support 200 people, but Jones believed the need to relocate was urgent and determined to move immediately. In May 1977, Jones and about 600 of his followers arrived in Jonestown; about 400 more followed in the subsequent months. Jones began moving the Temple&#x27;s financial assets overseas and started to sell off property in the United States. The Peoples Temple had over $10 million ($ in 2020) dollars in assets at the time. Despite the negative press prior to his departure, Jones was still well respected outside of Peoples Temple for setting up a racially integrated church which helped the disadvantaged; 68% of Jonestown residents were black.

For the first several months, Temple members worked six days a week, from approximately 6:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., with an hour for lunch. The work week was shortened to eight hours a day for five days a week in the middle of 1978 after Jones&#x27; health started to fail and his wife started taking on more of the management of Jonestown&#x27;s activities. After the day&#x27;s work ended, Temple members would attend several hours of activities in a pavilion, including classes in socialism. Jones compared this schedule to the North Korean system of eight hours of daily work followed by eight hours of study. This also comported with the Temple&#x27;s practice of gradually subjecting its followers to sophisticated mind control and behavior modification techniques borrowed from Kim Il-sung&#x27;s Korea and Mao Zedong&#x27;s China. Jones would often read news and commentary, including items from Radio Moscow and Radio Havana, and was known to side with the Soviets over the Chinese during the Sino-Soviet split.

Jones&#x27;s news readings usually portrayed the U.S. as a &quot;capitalist&quot; and &quot;imperialist&quot; villain, while casting &quot;socialist&quot; leaders, such as Kim Il Sung, Robert Mugabe, and Joseph Stalin in a positive light. Recordings of commune meetings show how livid and frustrated Jones would get when anyone did not understand or find interesting the message Jones was placing upon them. Jones forced every member of the Peoples Temple to say they were homosexual, while proclaiming himself the only heterosexual. In spite of this, Jones was bisexual, having sex with both male and female followers in Jonestown. Women who slept with him claimed he was the best lover they ever had; Peoples Temple member Tim Carter felt Jones &quot;put them up to that kind of talk.&quot;

=== Mounting pressure and waning political support ===

Among the followers Jones took to Guyana was John Victor Stoen. John&#x27;s birth certificate listed Timothy Stoen and Grace Stoen as his parents. Jones had a sexual relationship with Grace Stoen, and claimed he was the biological father of John. Grace Stoen left Peoples Temple in 1976, leaving her child behind. Jones ordered the child to be taken to Guyana in February 1977 to avoid a custody dispute with Grace. After Timothy Stoen also left Peoples Temple in June 1977, Jones kept the child at his own home in Jonestown.

In January 1977, Jones travelled to Cuba with Carlton Goodlett in order to establish an import-export trading relation with Cuba for a San Francisco Bay Area company that he had founded. While visiting Goodlett&#x27;s business contacts and touring schools and other facilities, Jones was annoyed that President Fidel Castro had not consented to see him, and remarked that Castro had to be living better than the people. While in Cuba, Jones visited the residence of Black Panther Huey Newton in Havana, who had fled there from the United States to avoid murder charges. They talked for an hour about Newton&#x27;s family members who had attended the Peoples Temple. They also discussed his desire to return to the United States. Jones commented that Newton only &quot;missed his luxurious apartment and his favorite bars in Oakland&quot;.

In the autumn of 1977, Timothy Stoen and other Temple defectors formed a &quot;Concerned Relatives&quot; group because they had family members in Jonestown who were not being permitted to return to the United States. Stoen traveled to Washington, D.C., in January 1978 to visit with State Department officials and members of Congress, and wrote a white paper detailing his grievances against Jones and the Temple and to attempt to recover his son. His efforts aroused the curiosity of California Congressman Leo Ryan, who wrote a letter on Stoen&#x27;s behalf to Guyanese Prime Minister Forbes Burnham. The Concerned Relatives began a legal battle with the Temple over the custody of Stoen&#x27;s son.

Most of Jones&#x27;s political allies broke ties after his departure, though some did not. Willie Brown spoke out against the Temple&#x27;s purported enemies at a rally that was attended by Harvey Milk and Assemblyman Art Agnos. Mayor Moscone&#x27;s office issued a press release saying Jones had broken no laws. On April 11, 1978, the Concerned Relatives distributed a packet of documents, letters, and affidavits to the Peoples Temple, members of the press, and members of Congress which they titled an &quot;Accusation of Human Rights Violations by Rev. James Warren Jones&quot;.

In June 1978, Deborah Layton, a Peoples Temple member who escaped Jonestown six months before the massacre, provided the group with a further affidavit detailing crimes by the Temple and substandard living conditions in Jonestown. Layton&#x27;s affidavit stated that Jonestown residents were being deliberately undernourished: &quot;There was rice for breakfast, rice water soup for lunch, and rice and beans for dinner. On Sunday, we each received an egg and a cookie. Two or three times a week we had vegetables. Some very weak and elderly members received one egg per day.&quot; Jonestown stood on poor soil, so it was not self-sufficient and had to import large quantities of commodities such as wheat. However, Layton noted that Jones did not rely on the same diet as his followers. Instead, he consumed more substantial meals that frequently contained meat while &quot;claiming problems with his blood sugar&quot;. He also permitted a few chosen members of his inner circle to eat from his personal supplies.

Jones was facing increasing scrutiny in the summer of 1978 when he hired JFK assassination conspiracy theorists Mark Lane and Donald Freed to help make the case of a &quot;grand conspiracy&quot; against the Temple by U.S. intelligence agencies. Jones told Lane that he wanted to &quot;pull an Eldridge Cleaver&quot;, referring to a fugitive member of the Black Panthers who was able to return to the U.S. after rebuilding his reputation.

Jones attempted to negotiate for his commune to resettle in the Soviet Union. In October 1978, Feodor Timofeyev, Soviet consul to Guyana, visited Jonestown for two days and gave a speech. Jim Jones stated beforehand, &quot;For many years, we have let our sympathies be quite publicly known, that the United States government was not our mother, but that the Soviet Union was our spiritual motherland.&quot; Timofeyev declared Jonestown in &quot;harmony of theory&quot; with &quot;Marx, Engels, Lenin&quot; and the &quot;practical implementation of... some fundamental features of this theory,&quot; and personally thanked Jones.

=== White Nights ===
Jones&#x27;s paranoia increased in Jonestown as he became fearful of a government raid on the commune. Concerned the community would not be able to resist an attack, he began holding drills to test their readiness. He called the drills &quot;White Nights&quot;. Jones would call &quot;Alert, Alert, Alert&quot; over the community loudspeaker to call the community together in the central pavilion. Armed guards with guns and crossbows surrounded the pavilion.

The community members would remain at the pavilion throughout the drill, in which Jones told them that their community had been surrounded by agents who were about to destroy them. Jones led them in prayers, chanting, and singing to ward off the impending attack. Sometimes he would have his guards hide in the forest and shoot their firearms to simulate an attack. Jones&#x27;s terrified followers were only told they were participating in a drill when the event was over. One drill, in September 1977, lasted for six days. Known as the &#x27;Six Day Siege&#x27;, this ordeal was used thereafter by Jones as a symbol of the community&#x27;s indomitable spirit.

The drills served to keep the members of Jonestown fearful of venturing outside of the commune. Following two visits by United States Embassy personnel to check on the situation at Jonestown, and an IRS investigation in early 1978, Jones became increasingly convinced that the attack he feared was imminent. In one 1978 White Night drill, Jones told his followers he was going to distribute poison for everyone to drink in an act of suicide. A batch of fruit punch was served to everyone in the pavilion who sat by weeping and waiting for their death. After some time passed, Jones informed his followers that it was only a drill and there was not any poison in their drink. Through the White Nights, Jones convinced his followers that the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was actively working to destroy their community and conditioned them to accept suicide as a means of escape.

On at least two occasions during White Nights, after a &quot;revolutionary suicide&quot; vote was reached, a simulated mass suicide was rehearsed. Temple defector Deborah Layton described the event in an affidavit:

Everyone, including the children, was told to line up. As we passed through the line, we were given a small glass of red liquid to drink. We were told that the liquid contained poison and that we would die within 45 minutes. We all did as we were told. When the time came when we should have dropped dead, Rev. Jones explained that the poison was not real and that we had just been through a loyalty test. He warned us that the time was not far off when it would become necessary for us to die by our own hands.

The situation at Jonestown was deteriorating in 1978. The community was exhausted and overworked. Most were required to perform manual labor from early morning until evening. Loudspeakers were installed around Jonestown and sermons were played on a constant loop for the entire community to listen to. Jones began to propagate his belief in what he termed &quot;Translation&quot; once his followers settled in Jonestown, claiming that he and his followers would all die and live blissfully together in the afterlife. Meals were meager and workers were often hungry. After spending all day working, the community gathered each evening at the central pavilion to listen to Jones preach. His sermons generally lasted for several hours; most of the community was sleep deprived. According to Teri Buford O&#x27;Shea, one of the few escapees from Jonestown, sleep deprivation was one of the most effective methods of controlling Jones&#x27;s followers. O&#x27;Shea said, &quot;One time Jim said to me... &#x27;Let&#x27;s keep them poor and tired, because if they&#x27;re poor they can&#x27;t escape and if they&#x27;re tired they can&#x27;t make plans.&#x27;&quot; O&#x27;Shea also reported that Jones would maintain his control of Peoples Temple members using punishments such as keeping them in a coffin-shaped box several feet underground, while other members were assigned to constantly berate and reprimand them for their perceived slights against the cult.

The majority of the community members were minors or the elderly, and the fewer people of working age found it difficult to keep up with the workload required to support the community. Healthcare, education, and food rations were all in limited supply and the situation was worsening. Jones&#x27;s orders were increasingly erratic. He was seen staggering and urinating in public, but this was due to prostatitis for a short time towards the end of Jonestown in late October 1978, not the entirety of Jonestown. He found it difficult to walk without assistance around this time, but it cleared up by Ryan&#x27;s visit.

After learning that he might have a lung infection in 1978, Jones told his followers that he actually had lung cancer in an effort to gain their compassion and increase their level of support. Jones was said to be abusing valium, quaaludes, stimulants, and barbiturates. Audio recordings of meetings held in Jonestown in 1978 attest to the commune leader&#x27;s deteriorating health. Jones complained of high blood pressure that he had had since the early 1950s, small strokes, weight loss of 30 to 40 pounds in the last two weeks of Jonestown, temporary blindness, convulsions, and in late October to early November 1978 while he was ill in his cabin, grotesque swelling of the extremities.

=== Murder of Congressman Ryan ===
In November 1978, Congressman Ryan led a fact-finding mission to Jonestown to investigate allegations of human-rights abuses. His delegation included relatives of Temple members, an NBC camera crew, and reporters for several newspapers. The group arrived in the Guyanese capital of Georgetown on November 15.

Two days later, they traveled by airplane to Port Kaituma, then were transported to Jonestown. Jones hosted a reception for the delegation that evening at the central pavilion in Jonestown, during which Temple member Vernon Gosney passed a note meant for Ryan to NBC reporter Don Harris, requesting assistance for himself and another Temple member, Monica Bagby, in leaving the settlement. Tensions began to rise as news spread through the community that some members were attempting to leave. Ryan&#x27;s delegation left hurriedly the afternoon of November 18 after Ryan narrowly avoided being stabbed by Temple member Don Sly. Ryan and his delegation managed to take along 15 Temple members who expressed a desire to leave, and Jones made no attempt to prevent their departure at that time.

Marceline Jones announced on the public address system that everything was fine and urged locals to go back to their houses after Ryan left Jonestown for Port Kaituma. During this time, aides prepared a large metal tub with grape Flavor Aid, poisoned with diphenhydramine, promethazine, chlorpromazine, chloroquine, chloral hydrate, diazepam, and cyanide.

As members of Ryan&#x27;s delegation boarded two planes at the Port Kaituma airstrip, Jonestown&#x27;s Red Brigade of armed guards arrived and began shooting at them. The gunmen killed Ryan and four others near a Guyana Airways Twin Otter aircraft. At the same time, one of the supposed defectors, Larry Layton, drew a weapon and began firing on members of the party inside the other plane, a Cessna, which included Gosney and Bagby. NBC cameraman Bob Brown was able to capture footage of the first few seconds of the shooting at the Otter, just before he himself was killed by the gunmen.

The five killed at the airstrip were Ryan, Harris, Brown, &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot; photographer Greg Robinson, and Temple member Patricia Parks. Surviving the attack were future Congresswoman Jackie Speier, a Ryan staff member; Richard Dwyer, Deputy Chief of Mission from the U.S. Embassy in Georgetown; Bob Flick, an NBC producer; Steve Sung, an NBC sound engineer; Tim Reiterman, an &quot;Examiner&quot; reporter; Ron Javers, a &quot;Chronicle&quot; reporter; Charles Krause, a &quot;Washington Post&quot; reporter; and several defecting Temple members. They escaped into the jungle to avoid being killed.

=== Mass murder-suicide in Jonestown ===

Later the same day, November 18, 1978, Jones received word that his security guards failed to kill all of Ryan&#x27;s party. Jones concluded the escapees would soon inform the United States of the attack and they would send the military to seize Jonestown. Jones called the entire community to the central pavilion. He informed the community that Ryan was dead and it was only a matter of time before military commandos descended on their commune and killed them all.

Jones told Temple members that the Soviet Union would not give them passage after the airstrip shooting. Jones said, &quot;We can check with Russia to see if they&#x27;ll take us in immediately; otherwise, we die,&quot; asking, &quot;You think Russia&#x27;s gonna want us with all this stigma?&quot;

With that reasoning, Jones and several members argued the group should commit &quot;revolutionary suicide&quot;. Jones recorded the entire death ritual on audio tape. One Temple member, Christine Miller, dissented toward the beginning of the tape. Cries and screams of children and adults were also easily heard on the tape recording made. The Temple had received monthly half-pound shipments of cyanide since 1976 after Jones obtained a jeweler&#x27;s license to buy the chemical, purportedly to clean gold. In May 1978, a Temple doctor wrote a memo to Jones asking permission to test cyanide on Jonestown&#x27;s pigs, as their metabolism was close to that of human beings. A drink mixture of Flavor Aid and cyanide was handed out to the members of the community to drink. Those who refused to drink were injected with cyanide via syringe. The crowd was also surrounded by armed guards, offering members the basic dilemma of death by poison or death by a guard&#x27;s hand.

Ruletta Paul and her one-year-old child were the first to consume the poison, according to escaped Temple member Odell Rhodes. The child&#x27;s mouth was filled with poison using a syringe without a needle, and Paul then injected more poison into her own mouth. According to Rhodes, after ingesting the poison, people were taken down a wooden walkway that led outside the pavilion. As parents watched their children perish from the poison, Rhodes described a scene of panic and confusion. He added that many of the assembled Temple members &quot;walked around like they were in a trance&quot; and that the majority &quot;quietly waited their own turn to die.&quot; Over time, as more Temple members perished, the guards themselves were called in to die by poison.

It is not clear if some initially thought the exercise was another White Night rehearsal. When members wept and showed signs of dissent, Jones counselled, &quot;Stop these hysterics. This is not the way for people who are socialists or communists to die. No way for us to die. We must die with some dignity.&quot; Jones can be heard saying, &quot;Don&#x27;t be afraid to die&quot;, adding that death is &quot;just stepping over into another plane&quot;, and adding that death is &quot;a friend&quot;. Jones directed that the children be killed first. Then the other adults poisoned themselves after the children had died. At the end of the tape, Jones concludes, &quot;We didn&#x27;t commit suicide; we committed an act of revolutionary suicide protesting the conditions of an inhumane world.&quot;

In the early evening of November 18, Temple member Sharon Amos in Georgetown received a radio message from Jonestown telling the members there to exact vengeance on the Temple&#x27;s foes before committing revolutionary suicide. Later, after police arrived at the headquarters, Sharon escorted her children, Liane, Christa, and Martin, into a bathroom. Wielding a kitchen knife, Sharon first killed Christa, and then Martin. Then Liane assisted Sharon in cutting her own throat, after which Liane killed herself.

Eighty-five members of the community survived the event. Some slipped into the jungle just as the death ritual began; one man hid in a ditch. One elderly woman hid in her dormitory and slept through the event, awaking to find everyone dead. Three high-ranking Temple members were given an assignment to transfer the Peoples Temple&#x27;s funds to the Soviet Embassy and thereby escaped death (one of them, Michael Prokes, would commit suicide four months later during a press conference in which he sought to reaffirm the Peoples Temple leadership&#x27;s position justifying the mass murder-suicide and blaming it on the United States government). The Jonestown basketball team was away at a game and survived. Others hid in the dormitories or were away from the community on business when the death ritual unfolded. 

Survivor Tim Carter has suggested that, like a previous practice, that day&#x27;s lunch of grilled cheese sandwiches may have been tainted with sedatives to subdue members of the cult. Furthermore, in a 2007 interview with forensic psychiatrist Dr. Michael H. Stone for the program &quot;Most Evil&quot;, Carter stated his belief that Jones had his guards pose the dead bodies of the Jonestown residents to make it appear that more people had willingly committed suicide. In his hierarchy of &quot;evil&quot;, Stone ranked Jones as a Category 22 (a psychopathic torture-murderer). 

The mass murder-suicide resulted in the deaths of 909 inhabitants of Jonestown, 276 of them children, mostly in and around the central pavilion. This resulted in the greatest single loss of American civilian life in a deliberate act until the attacks of September 11, 2001, in New York and Washington. Another four members residing in Georgetown died. The FBI later recovered the 45-minute audio recording of the mass poisoning in progress; the recording became known as the &quot;Death Tape&quot;.

== Death and aftermath ==
Jones’s three sons, Stephan, Jim Jr., and Tim Jones, were with the Peoples Temple&#x27;s basketball team in Georgetown at the time of the mass poisoning. During the events at Jonestown, the three brothers drove to the U.S. Embassy in Georgetown to alert the authorities. Guyanese soldiers guarding the embassy refused to let them in after hearing about the shootings at the Port Kaituma airstrip. Later, the three returned to the Temple&#x27;s headquarters in Georgetown to find the bodies of Sharon Amos and her three children, Liane, Christa and Martin.

The Guyanese military arrived in Jonestown to find the dead. The United States military organized an airlift to bring the remains back to the United States to be buried. Jones was found dead on the stage of the central pavilion; he was resting on a pillow near his deck chair with a gunshot wound to his head. Jones&#x27;s body was later moved for examination and embalming. The official autopsy conducted by Guyanese coroner Cyril Mootoo in December 1978 confirmed Jones&#x27;s cause of death as suicide. His son Stephan speculated that his father may have directed someone else to shoot him. The autopsy showed high levels of the barbiturate pentobarbital in Jones&#x27; body, which may have been lethal to humans who had not developed physiological tolerance. Jones&#x27;s body was cremated and his remains were scattered in the Atlantic Ocean.

Guyanese soldiers kept the Jones brothers under house arrest for five days, interrogating them about the deaths in Georgetown. Stephan was accused of involvement in the deaths and placed in a Guyanese prison for three months. Tim and Johnny Cobb, other members of the Temple basketball team, were taken to Jonestown to identify bodies. After returning to the U.S., Jim Jones Jr. was placed under police surveillance for several months while he lived with his older sister, Suzanne, who had previously turned against the Temple. John Victor Stoen died in Jonestown. His body was found just outside of Jones&#x27;s house.

In a signed note found at the time of her death, Marceline directed that Jones&#x27;s assets be given to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Peoples Temple secretary had already made arrangements for $7.3 million ($ million in 2020 dollars) in Temple funds to be transferred to the Soviet Embassy in Guyana. Most of the money was held in foreign bank accounts and was transferred electronically, but $680,000 ($ in 2020 dollars) was held in cash and three couriers were hired to transport the cash to the Soviets. The couriers were arrested before reaching their destination and claimed to have hidden most of the money.

==Reactions and legacy==
The events at Jonestown were immediately subject to extensive media coverage and became known as the Jonestown Massacre. As awareness reached the public, outsiders refused to accept Jones&#x27;s attempt to blame them for the deaths. Critics and apologists offered a variety of explanations for the events that transpired among Jones&#x27;s followers. The Soviet Union publicly distanced itself from Jones and what they called his &quot;bastardization&quot; of the concept of revolutionary suicide.

American Christian leaders denounced Jones as Satanic and asserted that he and his teachings were in no way connected to traditional Christianity. In an article entitled &quot;On Satan and Jonestown&quot;, Billy Graham argued that it would be a mistake to identify Jones and his cult as Christian. Graham was joined by other prominent Christian leaders in alleging that Jones was demonically possessed.

The Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) responded to the Jonestown deaths with significant changes for ministerial ethics and a new process to remove ministers. The Disciples issued a press release disavowing Jones and reported that the community in Jonestown was not affiliated with their denomination. They subsequently expelled Peoples Temple from their denomination.

In the immediate aftermath, rumors arose that surviving members of Peoples Temple in San Francisco were organizing hit squads to target critics and enemies of the Church. Law enforcement intervened to protect the media and other figures who were purported to be targeted. Peoples Temple&#x27;s San Francisco headquarters was besieged by the media, angry protestors, and family members of the dead. James, who returned from Jonestown to take leadership in San Francisco earlier in 1978, was left to address the public. At first, he denied that Jones had any connection to the deaths and alleged the events were a plot by enemies of the Church, but later acknowledged the truth.

The supporters of Peoples Temple, especially politicians, had a difficult time explaining their connections to Jones following the deaths. After a period of reflection, some admitted they had been tricked by Jones. President Jimmy Carter and First Lady Rosalynn Carter sought to minimize their connections to Jones. San Francisco Mayor George Moscone said he vomited when he heard of the massacre, and called the friends and families of many of the victims to apologize and offer his sympathies.

Investigations into the Jonestown massacre were conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the United States Congress. Although individuals and groups had provided tips to the FBI about Peoples Temple, no investigation was made before the massacre. The investigation primarily focused on why authorities, especially the United States State Department, were unaware of the abuses in Jonestown. Although Peoples Temple collapsed shortly after the events of 1978, some individuals continued to follow Jones&#x27;s teachings during the 1980s.

Since the Jonestown Massacre, a massive amount of literature and study has been produced on the subject. Numerous documentaries, films, books, poetry, music, and art have covered or been inspired by the events of Jonestown. Jim Jones and the events at Jonestown had a defining influence on society&#x27;s perception of cults. The widely known expression &quot;Drinking the Kool-Aid&quot; developed after the events at Jonestown, although the specific beverage used at the massacre was Flavor Aid.

== See also ==
* God complex
* List of people claimed to be Jesus
* List of people who have been considered deities

== Notes ==
==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==

* Bebelaar, Judy and Ron Cabral. &quot;And Then They Were Gone: Teenagers of Peoples Temple&quot;. Sugartown Publishing, 2018. .
* 
* 

== External links ==

* The Jonestown Institute
* &quot;Jim Jones&quot;. &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;. [2002] 2020. 
* Jonestown 30 Years Later, photo gallery published Friday, October 17, 2008.
* Jonestown – FBI records on Jim Jones and Jonestown</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213861" start="0" end="18" title="Jim Jones" label="James Warren Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="70" end="74" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q477125" start="124" end="138" title="Peoples Temple" label="Peoples Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q142824" start="287" end="306" title="mass suicide" label="mass murder-suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="328" end="335" title="Intentional community" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q985684" start="339" end="348" title="Jonestown" label="Jonestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="542" end="556" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016391" start="628" end="657" title="Independent Assemblies of God, International" label="Independent Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497067" start="738" end="749" title="Latter Rain (post–World War II movement)" label="Latter Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690305" start="767" end="782" title="Healing Revival" label="Healing Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q383307" start="919" end="934" title="William Branham" label="William Branham"/>
<link wikidata="Q108677606" start="939" end="959" title="Joseph Mattsson-Boze" label="Joseph Mattsson-Boze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="1071" end="1083" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q739119" start="1134" end="1147" title="Father Divine" label="Father Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052374" start="1156" end="1178" title="International Peace Mission movement" label="Peace Mission movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1216" end="1228" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="1270" end="1280" title="racial integration" label="integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="1352" end="1371" title="Disciples of Christ" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166086" start="1584" end="1613" title="Peoples Temple in San Francisco" label="headquarters in San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q389647" start="2035" end="2050" title="anti capitalism" label="anti-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q518779" start="2930" end="2938" title="Leo Ryan" label="Leo Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458188" start="3302" end="3312" title="Flavor Aid" label="Flavor Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q883082" start="3324" end="3331" title="Cyanide poisoning" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212774" start="3413" end="3427" title="Crete, Indiana" label="Crete, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="3556" end="3561" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094841" start="3566" end="3571" title="Welsh Americans" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="3630" end="3638" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3718" end="3728" title="World War I" label="World WarI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466634" start="3825" end="3841" title="Chemical weapons in World War I" label="chemical weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4198" end="4214" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502413" start="4328" end="4333" title="shack" label="shack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293469" start="4376" end="4380" title="Lynn, Indiana" label="Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="5595" end="5610" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Nazarene Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="5684" end="5689" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="5749" end="5762" title="Holiness movement" label="holiness code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780623" start="6146" end="6174" title="Apostolic Church of Pentecost" label="Apostolic Pentecostal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324130" start="6514" end="6522" title="roadkill" label="roadkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465739" start="7117" end="7131" title="Destroying angel (Bible)" label="Angel of Death"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7354" end="7363" title="Acts 2:38" label="Acts 2:38"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7466" end="7474" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="7861" end="7870" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="8328" end="8340" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="8342" end="8355" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="8357" end="8366" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="8371" end="8385" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="8418" end="8428" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8669" end="8681" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="8734" end="8744" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="8899" end="8911" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542328" start="8977" end="8986" title="goosestep" label="goosestep"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="9114" end="9125" title="Nazi salute" label="Nazi salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q548664" start="9467" end="9484" title="Richmond, Indiana" label="Richmond, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="10003" end="10014" title="Secondary school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q106830522" start="11108" end="11148" title="Racism against Black Americans" label="discrimination against African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="11213" end="11219" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023303" start="11257" end="11271" title="Indiana Klan" label="Indiana branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="11279" end="11291" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561011" start="11629" end="11638" title="marital separation" label="separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330854" start="11751" end="11771" title="Richmond High School (Richmond, Indiana)" label="Richmond High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976637" start="11975" end="11988" title="Old Reid Hospital" label="Reid Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="12282" end="12302" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="12339" end="12369" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="12520" end="12537" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="12623" end="12632" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="12928" end="12937" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="13504" end="13511" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="13978" end="13990" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017974" start="14028" end="14045" title="Butler University" label="Butler University"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="14195" end="14214" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="14425" end="14428" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14555" end="14566" title="Red Scare#Second Red Scare (1947-57)" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="14719" end="14726" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="15039" end="15048" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283382" start="15049" end="15072" title="District Superintendent (Methodism)" label="district superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="15668" end="15679" title="racial integration" label="integrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497067" start="15776" end="15787" title="Latter Rain (post–World War II movement)" label="Latter Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q941870" start="15802" end="15819" title="Columbus, Indiana" label="Columbus, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690305" start="16070" end="16085" title="Healing Revival" label="Healing Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="16470" end="16487" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="16665" end="16672" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016391" start="17394" end="17423" title="Independent Assemblies of God, International" label="Independent Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497067" start="17485" end="17505" title="Latter Rain (post–World War II movement)" label="Latter Rain movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q383307" start="17674" end="17689" title="William Branham" label="William Branham"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="17701" end="17711" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="17786" end="17794" title="Ordination" label="ordained"/>
<link wikidata="Q108677606" start="17818" end="17838" title="Joseph Mattsson-Boze" label="Joseph Mattsson-Boze"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786835" start="18038" end="18054" title="Cadle Tabernacle" label="Cadle Tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464584" start="18714" end="18731" title="Spiritual gift" label="supernatural gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508064" start="19215" end="19226" title="Full Gospel" label="Full Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497067" start="19878" end="19900" title="Manifested Sons of God" label="Manifested Sons of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="20122" end="20145" title="second coming of Christ" label="second coming of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="20217" end="20231" title="Millennialism" label="millennial age"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="20683" end="20701" title="Elijah the Prophet" label="Elijah the Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455108" start="21095" end="21111" title="serpent seed" label="racial teachings"/>
<link wikidata="Q739119" start="21260" end="21273" title="Father Divine" label="Father Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052374" start="21319" end="21355" title="International Peace Mission movement" label="International Peace Mission movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q739119" start="21482" end="21495" title="Father Divine" label="Father Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="22775" end="22794" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q109364239" start="22856" end="22869" title="Archie Ijames" label="Archie Ijames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="22978" end="22997" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407174" start="23722" end="23740" title="List of mayors of Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511443" start="23795" end="23818" title="human rights commission" label="human rights commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="24125" end="24130" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q777636" start="24139" end="24151" title="Urban League" label="Urban League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010072" start="24195" end="24203" title="militant" label="militant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023916" start="24387" end="24417" title="Indianapolis Police Department" label="Indianapolis Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823835" start="24461" end="24505" title="Indiana University Health Methodist Hospital" label="Indiana University Health Methodist Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="24512" end="24520" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283446" start="24702" end="24717" title="sting operation" label="sting operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="24801" end="24820" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940345" start="25053" end="25059" title="bedpan" label="bedpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="25170" end="25181" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="desegregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="25291" end="25309" title="White supremacy" label="white supremacists"/>
<link wikidata="Q80728" start="25384" end="25392" title="dynamite" label="dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="26153" end="26168" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="26198" end="26213" title="Korean-American" label="Korean-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q61833778" start="26784" end="26798" title="Carolyn Moore Layton" label="Carolyn Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="27377" end="27384" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q918126" start="27710" end="27724" title="British Guiana" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="27806" end="27820" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q625559" start="28007" end="28035" title="Christian communism" label="apostolic communal lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="28077" end="28091" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q693827" start="28150" end="28156" title="favela" label="favela"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="29279" end="29283" title="Garden of Eden" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="29327" end="29346" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459093" start="29530" end="29556" title="Redwood Valley, California" label="Redwood Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q837105" start="29575" end="29580" title="Ukiah, California" label="Ukiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="30751" end="30765" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="30770" end="30785" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="31233" end="31242" title="Apostolic succession" label="Apostolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="31748" end="31760" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="31809" end="31814" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639573" start="31937" end="31944" title="Sky deity" label="Sky God"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="32844" end="32860" title="King James Version" label="King James Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="32881" end="32895" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="33243" end="33253" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="33322" end="33336" title="holy communion" label="holy communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="33370" end="33377" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="33528" end="33538" title="Capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617137" start="33548" end="33554" title="Racism in the United States" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="33713" end="33731" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q430079" start="33799" end="33806" title="Whore of Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="33888" end="33896" title="race war" label="race war"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="33914" end="33919" title="Neo-Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="33924" end="33942" title="White supremacy" label="white supremacists"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="33974" end="33993" title="Concentration camp" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="34821" end="34845" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="35236" end="35244" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="35255" end="35262" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459093" start="37133" end="37147" title="Redwood Valley" label="Redwood Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="37655" end="37663" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q846406" start="38461" end="38473" title="San Fernando, California" label="San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="38475" end="38488" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="38494" end="38505" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q705708" start="40245" end="40259" title="George Moscone" label="George Moscone"/>
<link wikidata="Q795295" start="40279" end="40284" title="Mayor of San Francisco" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="40503" end="40514" title="California State Assembly" label="Assemblyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365075" start="40515" end="40527" title="Willie Brown (politician)" label="Willie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="40538" end="40558" title="master of ceremonies" label="master of ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="40611" end="40619" title="Governor of California" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152451" start="40620" end="40631" title="Jerry Brown" label="Jerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238284" start="40636" end="40655" title="Lieutenant Governor of California" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922193" start="40656" end="40670" title="Mervyn Dymally" label="Mervyn Dymally"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="40820" end="40842" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q160456" start="40844" end="40856" title="Angela Davis" label="Angela Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="40858" end="40873" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141" start="40884" end="40895" title="Harvey Milk" label="Harvey Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="41478" end="41492" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="41531" end="41544" title="United States presidential election, 1976" label="1976 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="41593" end="41603" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q219353" start="41604" end="41619" title="Rosalynn Carter" label="Rosalynn Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="41881" end="41904" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q477734" start="43347" end="43354" title="gizzard" label="gizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531894" start="43789" end="43806" title="Lester Kinsolving" label="Lester Kinsolving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="43880" end="43902" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q837105" start="44105" end="44110" title="Ukiah, California" label="Ukiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="44986" end="44998" title="masturbation" label="masturbating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="45025" end="45035" title="undercover operation" label="undercover"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="45036" end="45040" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="LAPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411242" start="45041" end="45053" title="Vice squad" label="vice officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080246" start="45106" end="45120" title="MacArthur Park" label="MacArthur Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="46027" end="46039" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="46104" end="46109" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773669" start="46820" end="46836" title="Marshall Kilduff" label="Marshall Kilduff"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081844" start="46858" end="46887" title="California (magazine, defunct 1991)" label="&amp;quot;New West&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827132" start="46983" end="46991" title="Physical abuse" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339137" start="46993" end="47002" title="Psychological abuse" label="emotional"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="47008" end="47020" title="sexual abuse" label="sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q29553" start="47284" end="47293" title="sanctuary" label="sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="49289" end="49301" title="Brainwashing" label="mind control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883473" start="49306" end="49327" title="behavior modification" label="behavior modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="49353" end="49377" title="North Korea" label="Kim Il-sung&amp;#x27;s Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313758" start="49382" end="49405" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China (1949–76)" label="Mao Zedong&amp;#x27;s China"/>
<link wikidata="Q18555670" start="49472" end="49484" title="Radio Moscow" label="Radio Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972885" start="49489" end="49501" title="Radio Havana" label="Radio Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="49570" end="49587" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="49762" end="49773" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="49775" end="49788" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="49794" end="49807" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="50063" end="50073" title="homosexuality" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="50110" end="50122" title="heterosexuality" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="50152" end="50160" title="bisexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807537" start="50541" end="50554" title="Timothy Stoen" label="Timothy Stoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q638532" start="50828" end="50843" title="Child custody" label="custody dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996990" start="51013" end="51029" title="Carlton Goodlett" label="Carlton Goodlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q360570" start="51447" end="51458" title="Huey Newton" label="Huey Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="52042" end="52058" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="52090" end="52106" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="52132" end="52140" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="52154" end="52165" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q518779" start="52315" end="52323" title="Leo Ryan" label="Leo Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q376006" start="52370" end="52393" title="List of prime ministers of Guyana" label="Guyanese Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q718256" start="52394" end="52408" title="Forbes Burnham" label="Forbes Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365075" start="52601" end="52613" title="Willie Brown (politician)" label="Willie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141" start="52700" end="52711" title="Harvey Milk" label="Harvey Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796675" start="52728" end="52737" title="Art Agnos" label="Art Agnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="52914" end="52923" title="affidavit" label="affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445412" start="53108" end="53122" title="Deborah Layton" label="Deborah Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321697" start="54183" end="54221" title="John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories" label="JFK assassination conspiracy theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768495" start="54222" end="54231" title="Mark Lane (author)" label="Mark Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294393" start="54236" end="54248" title="Donald Freed" label="Donald Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="54327" end="54353" title="United States Intelligence Community" label="U.S. intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325716" start="54403" end="54419" title="Eldridge Cleaver" label="Eldridge Cleaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917380" start="54442" end="54450" title="fugitive" label="fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="54465" end="54479" title="Black Panthers" label="Black Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="54669" end="54675" title="Consul (representative)" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="57064" end="57091" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q142824" start="57327" end="57339" title="mass suicide" label="mass suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="57412" end="57421" title="affidavit" label="affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q372752" start="59796" end="59807" title="prostatitis" label="prostatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="60237" end="60243" title="valium" label="valium"/>
<link wikidata="Q423912" start="60245" end="60253" title="quaalude" label="quaalude"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="60256" end="60265" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="60272" end="60283" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="60419" end="60438" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="60484" end="60491" title="strokes" label="strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q718113" start="60493" end="60504" title="weight loss" label="weight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="60570" end="60579" title="blindness" label="blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q852376" start="60581" end="60592" title="convulsions" label="convulsions"/>
<link wikidata="Q190780" start="60694" end="60705" title="Limb (anatomy)" label="extremities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188085" start="60784" end="60796" title="Trier of fact" label="fact-finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184065" start="60873" end="60883" title="delegation" label="delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="60925" end="60928" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q10717" start="61025" end="61035" title="Georgetown, Guyana" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066884" start="61098" end="61110" title="Port Kaituma" label="Port Kaituma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292750" start="61329" end="61339" title="Don Harris (journalist)" label="Don Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458188" start="62077" end="62087" title="Flavor Aid" label="Flavor Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q413486" start="62103" end="62118" title="diphenhydramine" label="diphenhydramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422970" start="62120" end="62132" title="promethazine" label="promethazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="62134" end="62148" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422438" start="62150" end="62161" title="chloroquine" label="chloroquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q412340" start="62163" end="62178" title="chloral hydrate" label="chloral hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="62180" end="62188" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="62194" end="62201" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q62447" start="62280" end="62288" title="airstrip" label="airstrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622731" start="62417" end="62431" title="Guyana Airways" label="Guyana Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q683041" start="62432" end="62442" title="Twin Otter" label="Twin Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q518779" start="62502" end="62514" title="Larry Layton" label="Larry Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q308889" start="62597" end="62603" title="Cessna" label="Cessna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="62859" end="62881" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q218544" start="62997" end="63010" title="Jackie Speier" label="Jackie Speier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864857" start="63048" end="63071" title="Deputy Chief of Mission" label="Deputy Chief of Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296389" start="63172" end="63185" title="Tim Reiterman" label="Tim Reiterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="63291" end="63306" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="64622" end="64629" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="64855" end="64865" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q254128" start="65141" end="65148" title="dilemma" label="dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="66189" end="66199" title="Socialism" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="66203" end="66213" title="Communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q51796021" start="68191" end="68216" title="grilled cheese sandwiches" label="grilled cheese sandwiches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407263" start="68323" end="68344" title="forensic psychiatrist" label="forensic psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q62000040" start="68349" end="68365" title="Michael H. Stone" label="Michael H. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503618" start="68388" end="68397" title="Most Evil" label="Most Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="68662" end="68669" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="68922" end="68983" title="September 11 attacks" label="the attacks of September 11, 2001, in New York and Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="70130" end="70139" title="embalming" label="embalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="70154" end="70161" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="70398" end="70409" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q409632" start="70410" end="70423" title="pentobarbital" label="pentobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425425" start="70504" end="70527" title="physiological tolerance" label="physiological tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="70551" end="70559" title="cremation" label="cremated"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="70663" end="70675" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="71345" end="71380" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="72597" end="72609" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="72799" end="72837" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="74073" end="74085" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q219353" start="74101" end="74116" title="Rosalynn Carter" label="Rosalynn Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q705708" start="74184" end="74198" title="George Moscone" label="George Moscone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="74410" end="74441" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307741" start="75261" end="75282" title="Drinking the Kool-Aid" label="Drinking the Kool-Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458188" start="75386" end="75396" title="Flavor Aid" label="Flavor Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221130" start="75416" end="75427" title="God complex" label="God complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049509" start="75430" end="75464" title="List of people claimed to be Jesus" label="List of people claimed to be Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633195" start="75467" end="75514" title="List of people who have been considered deities" label="List of people who have been considered deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="75811" end="75834" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="75948" end="75951" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223218" wikidata="Q818075" url="?curid=223218" title="Benny Paret">
<text>Bernardo Paret (March 14, 1937 – April 3, 1962), known as Benny Paret or Benny &quot;Kid&quot; Paret, was a Cuban welterweight boxer who won the World Welterweight Championship twice in the early 1960s.

Paret&#x27;s death occurred 10 days after injuries sustained in a March 24, 1962, title defense against Emile Griffith, televised live and seen by millions on ABC&#x27;s &quot;Fight of the Week&quot;. Paret had a lifetime record of 35 wins (10 knockouts), 12 losses and 3 draws.

==Boxing career==
Paret won the welterweight title for the first time on May 27, 1960, by defeating Don Jordan. In his first defense of the title, Emile Griffith knocked him out in the thirteenth round on April 1, 1961. Paret recaptured the crown on September 30, 1961, in a split-decision over Griffith. Barely two months later, Paret took on middleweight champion Gene Fullmer and was knocked out in the tenth round, being behind on all three judges&#x27; scorecards.

==Last fight and death==

Although Paret had been battered in the two fights with Griffith and the fight with Fullmer, he decided that he would defend his title against Griffith three months after the Fullmer fight. Paret–Griffith III was booked for Madison Square Garden on Saturday, March 24, 1962, and was televised live by ABC. In round six, Paret nearly knocked out Griffith with a multi-punch combination, but Griffith was saved by the bell.

In the twelfth round of the fight, Don Dunphy, who was calling the bout for ABC, remarked, &quot;This is probably the tamest round of the entire fight.&quot; Seconds later, Griffith backed Paret into the corner before he unleashed a massive flurry of punches to the champion&#x27;s head.

It quickly became apparent that Paret was dazed by the initial shots and could not defend himself, but referee Ruby Goldstein allowed Griffith to continue his assault. Finally, after 29 consecutive punches, which knocked Paret through the ropes at one point, Goldstein stepped in and called a halt to the bout.

Paret collapsed in the corner from the barrage of punches (initially thought to be from exhaustion), fell into a coma, and died ten days later at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan from massive brain hemorrhaging. Paret was buried at St. Raymond&#x27;s New Cemetery, Bronx, New York on April 7, 1962.

The last fight between Paret and Griffith was the subject of many controversies. It is theorized that one of the reasons Paret died was that he was vulnerable due to the beatings he took in his previous three fights, all of which happened within twelve months of each other. New York State boxing authorities were criticized for giving Paret clearance to fight just several months after the Fullmer fight. The actions of Paret at the weigh-in before his final fight have come under scrutiny. It is alleged that Paret taunted Griffith by calling him &quot;maricón&quot; (Spanish slang for &quot;faggot&quot;).

Griffith wanted to fight Paret on the spot but was restrained. Griffith would come out as bisexual in his later years, but in 1962 allegations of homosexuality were considered fatal to an athlete&#x27;s career and a particularly grievous insult in the culture both fighters came from. The referee Ruby Goldstein, a respected veteran, came under criticism for not stopping the fight sooner. It has been argued that Goldstein hesitated because of Paret&#x27;s reputation of feigning injury and Griffith&#x27;s reputation as a poor finisher.

Another theory is that Goldstein was afraid that Paret&#x27;s supporters would riot. The incident, combined with the death of Davey Moore a year later for a different injury in the ring, would cause debate as to whether boxing should be considered a sport. Boxing would not be televised on a regular basis again until the 1970s.

The fight also marked the end of Goldstein&#x27;s long and respected career as a referee, as he was unable to find work after that. The fight was the centerpiece of a 2005 documentary entitled &quot;Ring of Fire: The Emile Griffith Story&quot;. At the end of the documentary, Griffith, who had harbored guilt over the incident over the years, is introduced to Paret&#x27;s son. The son embraced Griffith and told him he was forgiven.

==In popular culture==
Paret&#x27;s death was chronicled in a 1962 protest song by folk singer Gil Turner. The song, &quot;Benny &#x27;Kid&#x27; Paret&quot;, was published in &quot;Broadside&quot; magazine that same month and was recorded later in the year by Turner&#x27;s group, The New World Singers, for the 1963 Folkways album &quot;Broadside Ballads, Vol. 1&quot;.

A 1962 poem by Australian ex-boxer Merv Lilley urged us to remember Benny Paret &quot;when they&#x27;re lacing leather on.&quot;

The emotive poem &quot;Muerte en el Ring&quot; (&quot;Death in the Ring&quot;) by Afro-Peruvian poet Nicomedes Santa Cruz recounts Paret&#x27;s life to the moment of his last breath.

A semifictionalized story of the fight was told live by radio dramatist Joe Frank in the 1978 program &quot;80 Yard Run&quot; on WBAI in New York and replayed several times subsequently on NPR. In it, Frank cast Griffith rather than Paret as the defending champion and makes no mention of Paret&#x27;s recent fights or his prior history with Griffith. In the dramatized version, Griffith dominates the fight from the beginning, with the fight ending in the middle rounds and Paret dying later that night.

Paret is also one of many boxers named in the lyrics of Sun Kil Moon&#x27;s 2003 album &quot;Ghosts of the Great Highway&quot;. The album builds several songs around the stories of boxers who died early deaths.

The story of Emile Griffith and Paret&#x27;s death has been turned into an Opera in Jazz, &quot;Champion&quot;. It premiered on the campus of Webster University in Webster Groves, Missouri, on June 15, 2013. The opera was written by composer Terence Blanchard, with a libretto by playwright Michael Cristofer, who went on to develop the stage play &quot;Man in the Ring&quot; on the same subject. The play premiered at the Court Theatre in Chicago in 2016.

==Professional boxing record==

==See also==
*Kim Duk-koo
*List of welterweight boxing champions

==References==
==External links==
* 









*https://boxrec.com/media/index.php/National_Boxing_Association%27s_Quarterly_Ratings:_1960
*https://boxrec.com/media/index.php/National_Boxing_Association%27s_Quarterly_Ratings:_1961
*https://boxrec.com/media/index.php/National_Boxing_Association%27s_Quarterly_Ratings:_1962</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q818075" start="0" end="8" title="Benny Paret" label="Bernardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q818075" start="9" end="14" title="Benny Paret" label="Paret"/>
<link wikidata="Q818075" start="58" end="69" title="Benny Paret" label="Benny Paret"/>
<link wikidata="Q818075" start="73" end="78" title="Benny Paret" label="Benny"/>
<link wikidata="Q818075" start="85" end="88" title="Benny Paret" label="Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q818075" start="95" end="100" title="Benny Paret" label="Paret"/>
<link wikidata="Q766904" start="114" end="126" title="welterweight" label="welterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q59051" start="308" end="322" title="Emile Griffith" label="Emile Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="363" end="366" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447809" start="380" end="397" title="Fight of the Week" label="Fight of the Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="448" end="456" title="knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q59051" start="631" end="645" title="Emile Griffith" label="Emile Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q942573" start="850" end="862" title="Gene Fullmer" label="Gene Fullmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="1205" end="1226" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1282" end="1285" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292550" start="1439" end="1449" title="Don Dunphy" label="Don Dunphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376323" start="1804" end="1818" title="Ruby Goldstein" label="Ruby Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q41559869" start="2151" end="2169" title="Roosevelt Hospital" label="Roosevelt Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="2173" end="2182" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="2188" end="2214" title="Cerebral hemorrhage" label="massive brain hemorrhaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376323" start="3211" end="3225" title="Ruby Goldstein" label="Ruby Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173436" start="3580" end="3591" title="Davey Moore (boxer, born 1933)" label="Davey Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q829147" start="4286" end="4298" title="protest music" label="protest song"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007719" start="4314" end="4324" title="Gil Turner" label="Gil Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972295" start="4400" end="4409" title="Broadside (magazine)" label="Broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="4536" end="4544" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780177" start="4822" end="4842" title="Nicomedes Santa Cruz" label="Nicomedes Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209903" start="4977" end="4986" title="Joe Frank" label="Joe Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651267" start="5034" end="5038" title="WBAI" label="WBAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050372" start="5467" end="5479" title="Sun Kil Moon" label="Sun Kil Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557442" start="5504" end="5531" title="Ghosts of the Great Highway" label="Ghosts of the Great Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13554491" start="5719" end="5727" title="Champion (opera)" label="Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q943352" start="5787" end="5811" title="Webster Groves, Missouri" label="Webster Groves, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q967230" start="5865" end="5882" title="Terence Blanchard" label="Terence Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q503452" start="5914" end="5931" title="Michael Cristofer" label="Michael Cristofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q487323" start="6127" end="6138" title="Kim Duk-koo" label="Kim Duk-koo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562372" start="6140" end="6177" title="List of welterweight boxing champions" label="List of welterweight boxing champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223219" wikidata="Q1206658" url="?curid=223219" title="University of Colorado">
<text>The University of Colorado (CU) is a system of public universities in Colorado. It consists of four institutions: the University of Colorado Boulder, the University of Colorado Colorado Springs, the University of Colorado Denver, and the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus. It is governed by the elected, nine-member board of regents.

==Campuses==

===University of Colorado Boulder (CU Boulder)===

CU Boulder is the flagship university of the University of Colorado System in Boulder, Colorado. Founded in 1876, the university has more than 39,000 undergraduate and graduate students, making it the largest university in Colorado by enrollment. It offers more than 2,500 courses in more than 150 areas of study through its nine colleges and schools.

===University of Colorado Colorado Springs (UCCS)===

UCCS is the fastest growing of the three campuses with an undergraduate and graduate student population of about 12,000 students. It offers 45 bachelor&#x27;s, 22 master&#x27;s, and five doctoral degree programs through its six colleges. The 520-acre campus is located in central Colorado Springs.

===University of Colorado Denver (CU Denver)===

CU Denver is the largest research university in Colorado, attracting more than $420 million in research annually, and granting more master&#x27;s degrees than any other institution in Colorado. The campus provides an urban learning center with liberal arts, sciences, and professional programs in eight schools and colleges, serving over 18,000 students. CU Denver is located in downtown Denver on the Auraria Campus, which is also home to Metropolitan State University of Denver and Community College of Denver.

===University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus (CU Anschutz)===

CU Anschutz in Aurora is home to six professional schools in the health sciences and extensive research and clinical care facilities, including the University of Colorado Hospital, Children&#x27;s Hospital Colorado and the Anschutz Health and Wellness Center. CU Anschutz has more than 4,200 students, and is the largest academic health center in the Rocky Mountain region of the United States.

==Defunct campuses==

===University of Colorado South Denver (CU South Denver)===

CU South Denver, located in Lone Tree, opened in 2015 as a satellite campus of CU Denver, but permanently closed in August 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and concerns surrounding the campus&#x27; financial viability. At the time of its closing, the campus offered four academic programs and served nearly 300 students.

==Related institutions==
* The University of Colorado Hospital Authority (UC Health) was created in 1991 to allow the Regents to reorganize the University of Colorado Hospital.

==See also==
*Sommers–Bausch Observatory

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1206658" start="4" end="26" title="University of Colorado" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206658" start="28" end="30" title="University of Colorado" label="CU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075106" start="37" end="43" title="State university system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="47" end="66" title="Public university" label="public universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="70" end="78" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="118" end="148" title="University of Colorado Boulder" label="University of Colorado Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495841" start="154" end="193" title="University of Colorado Colorado Springs" label="University of Colorado Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468161" start="199" end="228" title="University of Colorado Denver" label="University of Colorado Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770537" start="238" end="284" title="Anschutz Medical Campus" label="University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308138" start="329" end="345" title="Regents of the University of Colorado" label="board of regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="431" end="450" title="flagship university" label="flagship university"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="491" end="508" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="1100" end="1116" title="Colorado Springs" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="1556" end="1562" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822139" start="1570" end="1584" title="Auraria Campus" label="Auraria Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q613736" start="1608" end="1647" title="Metropolitan State University of Denver" label="Metropolitan State University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154691" start="1652" end="1679" title="Community College of Denver" label="Community College of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q49246" start="1765" end="1771" title="Aurora, Colorado" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q527825" start="2101" end="2122" title="Mountain states" label="Rocky Mountain region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278155" start="2257" end="2266" title="Lone Tree, Colorado" label="Lone Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819632" start="2288" end="2304" title="satellite campus" label="satellite campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2368" end="2385" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30287856" start="2583" end="2624" title="University of Colorado Hospital Authority" label="University of Colorado Hospital Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895285" start="2696" end="2727" title="University of Colorado Hospital" label="University of Colorado Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560466" start="2744" end="2770" title="Sommers–Bausch Observatory" label="Sommers–Bausch Observatory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223220" wikidata="Q14625016" url="?curid=223220" title="Associate degree">
<text>An associate degree or associate&#x27;s degree is an undergraduate degree awarded after a course of post-secondary study lasting two to three years. It is a level of academic qualification above a high school diploma and below a bachelor&#x27;s degree.

The first associate degrees were awarded in the UK (where they are no longer awarded) in 1873 before spreading to the US in 1898. In the United States, the associate degree may allow transfer into the third year of a bachelor&#x27;s degree. Associate degrees have since been introduced in a small number of other countries.

==Americas==
===Argentina===
In Argentina, tertiary colleges (&quot;institutos terciarios&quot;) offer associate degrees in a variety of areas, including elementary and high school teacher, and technical fields, upon completion of three or four years of study. Some of these degrees may be articulated with university programs, to obtain a bachelor degree after, usually, two additional years. Associate degrees are also offered by some universities, as a final degree or as an intermediate stage before a bachelor degree.

In Hispanic America, an associate degree is called a &quot;carrera técnica&quot;, &quot;tecnicatura&quot; or &quot;Técnico Superior Universitario&quot; (TSU), while a bachelor&#x27;s degree would be known as a &quot;licenciatura&quot; or &quot;ingeniería&quot;.

===Brazil===

In Brazil, undergraduate degrees are known as (&#x27;graduate&#x27;) while graduate degrees are known as (&#x27;postgraduate&#x27;). Brazil follows the major traits of the continental European system; free public schools are available from kindergarten up to postgraduate degrees, both as a right established in Article 6, caput of the Brazilian Constitution and as a duty of the State in Article 208, Items I, IV, and V, of the Brazilian Constitution.

In 2001, Brazil added (&#x27;technologist&#x27;) as a form of undergraduate degree (). A technologist&#x27;s degree varies between two and three years of full time studies to complete. This degree takes a shorter time period to obtain than a bachelor or teaching degree (some of which may take between four and six years to complete), and it aims to provide highly specialized knowledge (e.g., agribusiness technical degree, tourism management degree, web development technical degree, etc.). There is also official recognition for a type of course called (&#x27;sequential&#x27; - students receive this associate degree like in junior college.

===Canada===
Education in Canada is a provincial power: each province and territory regulates tertiary education and degree system in their jurisdictions, with pan-Canadian co-ordination in a Council of Ministers of Education, Canada. British Columbia is the only Canadian province offering American-style associate degrees. Similar to the U.S., these consist of a two-year program and allow for articulation onto the third year of a bachelor&#x27;s degree program. Other provinces do not offer associate degrees but do offer similar higher education qualifications below the bachelor&#x27;s level: These are two-year courses resulting in a diploma in a broad range of technical, professional and academic subjects. Articulation into bachelor&#x27;s programs are the norm but can differ by subject (with some specialties rarer among bachelor&#x27;s). Ontario also offers three-year advanced diplomas which are not considered as associate degrees. The territories have fewer but similar diploma programs, some being particularly geared to Arctic environments, and northern Indigenous cultures and languages, with bachelor&#x27;s programs being a mix of local provision, partnerships with institutions based elsewhere in Canada and international consortia. Indigenous nations in most provinces have education systems also provide First Nations-focused diplomas programs, with North American Aboriginal education bodies. In Quebec, the &quot;Diplôme d&#x27;études collégiales&quot; (diploma of college studies), taught at post-secondary &quot;collèges d&#x27;enseignement général et professionnel&quot; (colleges of general and professional education; &quot;cégeps&quot;) can be a two-year pre-university qualification that is a pre-requisite for entry into the bachelor&#x27;s degree. However, because a bachelor&#x27;s degree in Quebec takes 3 years to complete instead of 4 years, it can be thought as an articulation onto the second year of a standard North American bachelor&#x27;s degree program. Quebec also has a three-year Cégep technical programme preparing students for employment.

===United States===
In the United States, associate degrees are awarded after completion of sixty semester or ninety quarter college credits.

The two most commonly awarded associate degrees are the Associate in/of Arts (AA) and Associate in/of Science (AS) degrees. AA degrees are awarded in the liberal arts, humanities, and social science fields; AS degrees are awarded in the natural science, applied science, and formal science fields.

Generally, one year of study is focused on college level general education in disciplines such as Communications, English, History, Mathematics, Natural Science, and Social Science, and the second year is focused on the area of a student&#x27;s major.

Students who complete a vocational program can often earn a terminal associate degree such as the Associate of Applied Arts (AAA) or the Associate of Applied Science (AAS).

Transfer admissions in the United States sometimes allows courses taken and credits earned on an AA or AS to be counted toward a bachelor&#x27;s degree more commonly through articulation or transfer credit agreements but sometimes through recognition of prior learning, depending on the courses taken, applicable state laws/regulations, and the transfer requirements of the university.

Common associate-level degree titles include:

* Associate of Arts (AA)
* Associate of Applied Arts (AAA)
* Associate of Applied Business (AAB)
* Associate of Applied Science (AAS)
* Associate of Forestry (AF)
* Associate of Fine Arts (AFA)
* Associate of Theology (ThA or ATh)
* Associate of Science (AS)
* Associate of Occupational Studies (AOS)

====California====
The Student Transfer Achievement Reform Act was signed into legislation on September 29, 2010, which is legislation that grants any California Community College student who has earned the Associate in Arts degree for Transfer (AA-T) or the Associate in Science degree for Transfer (AS-T) priority admission to CSU (California State University) into a similar baccalaureate (BA) degree program with a guarantee of junior standing.

====Historical development====
The University of Chicago was established in 1891 with four groups of colleges – liberal arts, literature, science, and practical arts (later commerce and administration). These were subdivided into &#x27;junior&#x27; (or &#x27;academic&#x27;) and &#x27;senior&#x27; (or &#x27;university&#x27;) colleges. Bachelor&#x27;s degrees were awarded by the senior colleges, and certificates were initially awarded by the junior colleges. In 1899 the board of trustees voted to replace these certificates with associate degrees (Associate in Arts, Associate in Literature, and Associate in Science), which were first awarded in 1900. Eells concludes that it is &quot;not unlikely&quot; that people at Chicago knew of the associate degrees being awarded in the United Kingdom, but there is no direct evidence of this. Chicago discontinued its associate degrees in 1918.

The associate degree spread across the US, with California College in Oakland (now the American Baptist Seminary of the West) introducing Associate in Arts and Associate in Letters degrees in 1900, and the Lewis Institute in Chicago (now part of the Illinois Institute of Technology) introducing Associate in Literature and Associate in Science degrees in 1901 (both replaced by the Associate in Arts in 1904) followed by the Associate in Domestic Economy degree in 1908. Associate degrees were not always two-year sub-bachelor&#x27;s awards in the early 20th century: Harvard University and associated colleges awarded Associate in Arts degrees to students who had passed university extension courses &quot;equal in number and standard to the courses required of a resident student for the degree of Bachelor of Arts&quot; from 1910 to 1933.

By 1918, 23% of junior colleges were awarding Associate in Arts degrees. By 1941–42, 40% of junior colleges awarded some form of associate degree, and by 1960 this had grown to 75%, with 137 different associate degrees in use. Over a third of associate degrees awarded in the US in 1958–59 were granted by Californian junior colleges.

===West Indies===
Two year associate degrees are found throughout the West Indies. They are offered by regional organisations such as the Caribbean Examinations Council and the University of the West Indies, and at institutions of higher education in particular, within The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, Jamaica, and St. Kitts and Nevis, among others.

==Oceania==
===Australia===
In 2004, Australia added &quot;associate degree&quot; to the Australian Qualifications Framework. This title was given to courses more academically focused than advanced diploma courses, and typically designed to articulate to bachelor&#x27;s degree courses.

==Europe==
Qualifications on the short cycle of the Bologna Process/level 5 on the European Qualifications Framework sit between secondary education and bachelor&#x27;s degree level and are thus approximately equivalent to an associate degree. Such qualifications include the Foundation degree (FdA, FdSc, FdEng), Certificate of Higher Education (CertHE) and Diploma of Higher Education (DipHE) in the United Kingdom, the Higher Certificate in the Republic of Ireland, and the French &quot;Diplôme universitaire de Technologie&quot; (DUT) and &quot;Brevet de Technicien supérieur&quot; (BTS).

===Czech Republic===
In Czech Republic one achieves the title &quot;DiS.&quot; &quot;Diplomovaný specialista&quot; (Certificated Specialist).

===Denmark===
A 2–2.5 year education on BA-level is called &quot;Erhvervsakademiuddannelse&quot;. This is called an AP-Degree (Academy Professional Degree) in English.

===France===
For many decades, a diploma comparable to an associate degree was considered a very adequate degree for those willing to work as qualified technicians. Yet as the general population spends an increasing amount of time studying, they are no longer as attractive to students who wish to distinguish themselves. In 2021, the &quot;Diplôme Universitaire de Technologie&quot; (DUT) was reframed as an intermediate degree part of a three-year curriculum now referred to as BUT. Prior to the reform of 2006, universities awarded a two-year diploma called DEUG, the purpose of which was also to help the student pursue studies in a field that differed from what was initially intended. The degree was considered a &#x27;stepping stone&#x27; ahead of the completion of a bachelor&#x27;s degree. Aside from the &quot;Brevet de Technicien Supérieur&quot; (BTS) which remains relevant in many fields for which long academic studies are not deemed crucial and for which young professionals are in demand, degrees comparable to an associate degree are gradually being phased out, although their legitimacy remains in theory (but not always in practice) unchanged for those who were awarded one in the past.

===Greece===
See: IEK

===Netherlands===
In the Netherlands, there were four pilots between 2005 and 2011 to assess the added value of the associate degree. In 2007 the associate degree was added to the Dutch system of higher education within the Higher Professional Education (&quot;HBO&quot;) stream taught at universities of applied sciences (&quot;hogeschool&quot;). Associate degree courses form part of HBO bachelor&#x27;s degree courses, and advising requirements are the same for the two-year associate degree and the related four-year bachelor&#x27;s degree. Those gaining the associate degree may proceed to an HBO bachelor&#x27;s degree in only two years, but it does not articulate to bachelor&#x27;s degrees in the research-oriented (&quot;WO&quot;) stream.

===Norway===
A two-year education on BA-level is called &quot;Høgskolekandidat&quot;, translated &quot;university college graduate&quot;. Only a few professions require 120 ECTS, e.g. piano tuner, driving instructor.

===Sweden===
A 2–2.5 year education on BA-level is called an AP-Degree (Academy Professional Degree). See also: List of universities and colleges in Sweden.
Business academies offer two-year academy profession programmes; some business academies also offer professional bachelor programmes, further adult education and diploma programmes.

===United Kingdom===
The title of &quot;Associate in Physical Science&quot; (&quot;Associate in Science&quot; (ASc) from 1879) was introduced in 1865 by the University of Durham College of Physical Sciences (now Newcastle University) and awarded from 1873.
It required (in 1884) passes in three of mathematics, physics, chemistry and geology, and allowed students to go on to take the examination for the Bachelor of Science. As a university-level qualification lying below the bachelor&#x27;s degree, this is considered to be the world&#x27;s first associate degree in the modern sense, having been first awarded 25 years prior to the introduction of associate degrees into the US by the University of Chicago. The ASc was withdrawn in 1904. Durham also introduced an &quot;Associate in Theology&quot; (ATh) in 1901, which was only offered in 1901 and 1902. Yorkshire College (now the University of Leeds) offered &quot;Associate in Engineering&quot; and &quot;Associate in Coal Mining&quot; degrees from 1877 and there were thirteen different types of associate degrees offered in British universities in 1927.

The title of &quot;Associate in Arts&quot;, introduced by the University of Oxford in 1857 and sometimes referred to as the degree of Associate in Arts, predates the Durham degree. However, it was an examination for &quot;those who are not members of the university&quot; and who were under the age of 18; as such it was at the level of a high school qualification rather than a modern associate degree. Examinations were held in English, languages, mathematics, science, drawing and music, with the title being conferred on those students who passed any two (as long as the two were not drawing and music).

British equivalents to associate degrees vary depending on the national system which issued them. Based on assessment by the UK NARIC, American and Canadian associate degrees are considered equivalent to one year higher education courses such as the Higher National Certificate at level 4 of the British Framework for Higher Education Qualifications. Australian associate degrees, however, are considered equivalent to two-year higher education courses such as the Higher National Diploma at level 5 on the framework.

==Asia==
===Hong Kong===
In Hong Kong, associate degrees were first introduced in 2000 with the aim of increasing the number of students with post-secondary qualifications. As originally introduced, the qualification took two or three years, but this was reformed in 2012 to a two-year course. The associate degree is designed as a general academic education qualification, compared to the more vocational Diploma/Higher/Advanced Diploma (Qualifications Frameworks Level 4), and allows articulation onto the third year of a four-year (US-style) bachelor&#x27;s degree or the second year of a three-year (British-style) bachelor&#x27;s degree. A survey in 2016 showed that most students believe associate degrees will help them to get onto bachelor&#x27;s degree courses, but not (by themselves) in gaining a career; however only 30% of associate degree graduates gained places for further study, leading to accusations that the degree is &quot;a waste of time and money&quot; and calls for the government to address this by making more bachelor&#x27;s degree places available. This has been criticized, with others saying that education had benefits beyond income, which is only a short-term measure.

===Turkey===
Associate degrees are called in Turkey, while bachelor&#x27;s degrees are known as .

===Pakistan===
The Higher Education Commission (HEC) of Pakistan has approved the Associate Degree Programs (ADP) to replace the traditional two-year BA/BSc programs. This transition aligns with HEC&#x27;s Undergraduate Education Policy, which mandates that all ADPs must receive approval from the relevant statutory bodies of the respective universities. 
Associate degrees is a two-years undergraduate degree program abbreviated as ADP in Pakistan and is authorized by Higher Education Commission through Authorization Letter. In place of two-year BA/BSc Programs (Which have been terminated vide Notification No. 9-2(16)/ phasing out BA/BSc/Curri/HEC/2016/982 dated March 15, 2017). universities and colleges affiliated with public sector universities may offer Associate Degree Programs (AD) for post-higher secondary students, in accordance with the give policies. All universities in pakistan are notified to offer Associate Degree upon receiving the appropriate authorization from HEC Pakistan.

==References==
=== Citations ===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="3" end="19" title="Associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="23" end="46" title="Associate degree" label="associate&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008527" start="53" end="73" title="undergraduate degree" label="undergraduate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="100" end="120" title="Tertiary education" label="post-secondary study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312529" start="197" end="216" title="high school diploma" label="high school diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="229" end="251" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1383" end="1389" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386422" start="1716" end="1738" title="Brazilian Constitution" label="Brazilian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="2228" end="2240" title="agribusiness" label="agribusiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q15816013" start="2259" end="2277" title="Hospitality management studies" label="tourism management"/>
<link wikidata="Q386275" start="2286" end="2301" title="web development" label="web development"/>
<link wikidata="Q370258" start="2463" end="2477" title="junior college" label="junior college"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251556" start="2493" end="2512" title="Education in Canada" label="Education in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="2541" end="2563" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="province and territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="2715" end="2731" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="3014" end="3030" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="3331" end="3338" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094626" start="3362" end="3379" title="Ontario College Advanced Diploma" label="advanced diplomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211981" start="3632" end="3647" title="Yukon University" label="local provision"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701244" start="3667" end="3679" title="Akitsiraq Law School" label="institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q962467" start="3710" end="3733" title="University of the Arctic" label="international consortia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758340" start="3854" end="3896" title="Higher education in Canada" label="North American Aboriginal education bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="3901" end="3907" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029062" start="3919" end="3952" title="Diplôme d&amp;#x27;études collégiales" label="Diplôme d&amp;#x27;études collégiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="4868" end="4880" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="4882" end="4892" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="4898" end="4912" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="4951" end="4966" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797" start="4968" end="4983" title="applied science" label="applied science"/>
<link wikidata="Q816264" start="4989" end="5003" title="formal science" label="formal science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680831" start="5111" end="5125" title="Communication studies" label="Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="5127" end="5134" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="5136" end="5143" title="History" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q853077" start="5145" end="5156" title="Mathematics education" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="5158" end="5173" title="Natural science" label="Natural Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="5179" end="5193" title="Social science" label="Social Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q10291413" start="5326" end="5334" title="terminal degree" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834003" start="5440" end="5480" title="Transfer admissions in the United States" label="Transfer admissions in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800957" start="5614" end="5626" title="Articulation (education)" label="articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834008" start="5630" end="5645" title="transfer credit" label="transfer credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302610" start="5679" end="5708" title="recognition of prior learning" label="recognition of prior learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460112" start="6327" end="6355" title="California Community College" label="California Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q815352" start="6510" end="6537" title="California State University" label="California State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="6661" end="6682" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7408" end="7422" title="#United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743139" start="7605" end="7642" title="American Baptist Seminary of the West" label="American Baptist Seminary of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q659706" start="7768" end="7800" title="Illinois Institute of Technology" label="Illinois Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="8087" end="8105" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q370258" start="8378" end="8392" title="junior college" label="junior college"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039378" start="8836" end="8866" title="Caribbean Examinations Council" label="Caribbean Examinations Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q746153" start="8875" end="8904" title="University of the West Indies" label="University of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="9005" end="9013" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="9015" end="9022" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="9028" end="9047" title="St. Kitts and Nevis" label="St. Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824589" start="9153" end="9188" title="Australian Qualifications Framework" label="Australian Qualifications Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q187073" start="9404" end="9419" title="Bologna Process" label="Bologna Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303025" start="9435" end="9468" title="European Qualifications Framework" label="European Qualifications Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474382" start="9628" end="9645" title="Foundation degree" label="Foundation degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065093" start="9666" end="9697" title="Certificate of Higher Education" label="Certificate of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279886" start="9711" end="9738" title="Diploma of Higher Education" label="Diploma of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758025" start="9774" end="9792" title="Higher Certificate" label="Higher Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="9800" end="9819" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970538" start="11483" end="11486" title="IEK" label="IEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q749620" start="12410" end="12414" title="European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System" label="ECTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305063" start="12421" end="12432" title="Piano tuning" label="piano tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q678003" start="12434" end="12452" title="driving instructor" label="driving instructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="12575" end="12587" title="universities" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="12592" end="12600" title="colleges" label="colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="12604" end="12610" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="12952" end="12972" title="University of Durham" label="University of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12973" end="13001" title="Edward Fenwick Boyd#College of Physical Science" label="College of Physical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q837164" start="13007" end="13027" title="Newcastle University" label="Newcastle University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="13484" end="13505" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="13681" end="13700" title="University of Leeds" label="University of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="13971" end="13991" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970104" start="14646" end="14651" title="NARIC" label="NARIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758208" start="14768" end="14795" title="Higher National Certificate" label="Higher National Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14822" end="14867" title="National qualifications frameworks in the United Kingdom#Higher education qualifications" label="Framework for Higher Education Qualifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q11305953" start="14983" end="15006" title="Higher National Diploma" label="Higher National Diploma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223225" wikidata="Q14761450" url="?curid=223225" title="Member of congress">
<text>A member of congress (MOC), also known as a congressman or congresswoman, is a person who has been appointed or elected and inducted into an official body called a congress, typically to represent a particular constituency in a legislature. The term member of parliament (MP) is an equivalent term within a parliamentary system of government.

==Philippines==
In the Congress of the Philippines, the title &quot;member of congress&quot; is almost never used; instead, legislators are called &quot;congressmen&quot; or &quot;congresswomen&quot;. However, these terms apply only to members of the House of Representatives, not to members of the Senate, who are called &quot;senators&quot;.

==United States==
In referring to an individual lawmaker in that person&#x27;s capacity of serving in the United States Congress, a bicameral federal legislature, the term &quot;Member of Congress&quot; is used less often than other terms in the United States. This is because in the United States the word &quot;Congress&quot; is used as a descriptive term for the collective body of legislators from both of its houses: the Senate and the House of Representatives. 

While a reference to a member of the Senate is typically referred to quite straightforwardly as Senator (followed by from ), a member of the House of Representatives is typically idiomatically referred to as Congressman or Congresswoman (followed by from the district of ); or, removing any ambiguity, Representative ( from the district of ). Although senators are members of Congress, they are not normally referred to or addressed as &quot;Congressman&quot; or &quot;Congresswoman&quot;.

Members of Congress in both houses are elected by direct popular vote. Senators are elected via a statewide vote and representatives by votes in each congressional district. Congressional districts are apportioned to the states, once every ten years, based on population figures from the most recent nationwide census. Each of the 435 members of the House of Representatives is elected to serve a two-year term representing the people of that person&#x27;s district. Each state, regardless of its size, has at least one representative. Each of the 100 members of the Senate is elected to serve a six-year term representing the people of that person&#x27;s state. Each state, regardless of its size, has two senators. Senatorial terms are staggered, so every two years approximately one-third of the Senate is up for election. Each staggered group of one-third of the senators is called a &#x27;class&#x27;. No state has both its senators in the same class.

===History of the United States Congress===
The United States Congress was created in Article I of the Constitution, which laid out the limitations and powers of Congress. Article I grants Congress legislative power, lists the enumerated powers and allows Congress to make laws that are necessary and proper to carry out the enumerated powers. It specifies the election and composition of the House of Representatives, and the election and composition of the Senate, and the qualifications necessary to serve in each chamber.

The Seventeenth Amendment changed how senators were elected. Originally, senators were elected by state legislatures. The Seventeenth Amendment changed this to senators being elected directly by popular vote.

Controversy surrounds the question of whether the federal government or any other governmental entity has the right to regulate how many times representatives and senators can hold office.

==See also==
* Non-voting members of the United States House of Representatives
* Shadow congressperson

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="2" end="20" title="Member of congress" label="member of congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="22" end="25" title="Member of congress" label="MOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="44" end="55" title="Member of congress" label="congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="59" end="72" title="Member of congress" label="congresswoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495862" start="164" end="172" title="congress" label="congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="228" end="239" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="250" end="270" title="member of parliament" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="307" end="327" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542985" start="367" end="394" title="Congress of the Philippines" label="Congress of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q678545" start="595" end="619" title="House of Representatives of the Philippines" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418426" start="643" end="649" title="Senate of the Philippines" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="795" end="817" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="821" end="830" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="831" end="838" title="federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="839" end="850" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="935" end="948" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1002" end="1010" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1115" end="1121" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1130" end="1154" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297935" start="1254" end="1261" title="List of current United States senators" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615342" start="1460" end="1474" title="List of current members of the United States House of Representatives by seniority" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="1699" end="1718" title="direct popular vote" label="direct popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q505410" start="1799" end="1821" title="congressional district" label="congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892376" start="1851" end="1862" title="United States congressional apportionment" label="apportioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="1870" end="1876" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145286" start="1909" end="1919" title="Representation by population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="1949" end="1966" title="United States Census" label="nationwide census"/>
<link wikidata="Q524572" start="2254" end="2258" title="Term of office" label="term"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596928" start="2387" end="2396" title="Staggered elections" label="staggered"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="2693" end="2702" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="2710" end="2722" title="United States Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="2805" end="2822" title="legislative branch" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773061" start="2834" end="2851" title="Enumerated powers (United States)" label="enumerated powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985427" start="2894" end="2914" title="necessary and proper" label="necessary and proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="3138" end="3159" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="3232" end="3250" title="state legislature (United States)" label="state legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253588" start="3549" end="3613" title="Non-voting members of the United States House of Representatives" label="Non-voting members of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460634" start="3616" end="3637" title="Shadow congressperson" label="Shadow congressperson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223229" wikidata="Q3547371" url="?curid=223229" title="USS Adams">
<text>USS &quot;Adams&quot; may refer to the following ships of the United States Navy:
* , was a 28-gun frigate launched in 1799 and active in the War of 1812 and scuttled to prevent capture in 1814.
* , was a wooden screw steamer commissioned in 1876 and decommissioned in 1919.
* , was a destroyer minelayer serving at the end of World War II, named for World War II aviator Lieutenant Samuel Adams

==See also==
* - list of US Naval ships named for President Adams
* a guided missile destroyer that served during the Cold War.
* &quot;Adams&quot;, a 200-ton brig purchased during the summer of 1812 but captured by the British and renamed HMS &quot;Detroit&quot;. The Americans briefly recaptured her but had to abandon her when she grounded; she was then burnt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3547371" start="0" end="15" title="USS Adams" label="USS &amp;quot;Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="62" end="80" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="99" end="106" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="142" end="153" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786766" start="158" end="166" title="Scuttling" label="scuttled"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="218" end="225" title="Steamship" label="steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="285" end="294" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="327" end="339" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410726" start="383" end="395" title="Samuel Adams (naval officer)" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607934" start="467" end="491" title="guided missile destroyer" label="guided missile destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="515" end="523" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632117" start="527" end="544" title="HMS Detroit (1812)" label="&amp;quot;Adams&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223230" wikidata="Q3547369" url="?curid=223230" title="USS Adams (1799)">
<text>USS &quot;Adams&quot; was a 28-gun (rated) sailing frigate of the United States Navy. She was laid down in 1797 at New York City by John Jackson and William Sheffield and launched on 8 June 1799. Captain Richard Valentine Morris took command of the ship.
==Quasi-War with France==
The frigate departed New York in mid-September 1799 and headed for the West Indies to protect American shipping from attacks by French privateers, during the Quasi-War with France. She arrived at Saint Christopher on 10 October and soon began cruising nearby waters in search of French men of war and any prizes which had been captured by warships flying French colors.

Later that month, she recaptured the brig &quot;Zylpha&quot; and assisted in taking an unidentified 4-gun French privateer and freeing an English brig and a schooner from Boston which that vessel had seized.

On 12 November, she again teamed with &quot;Insurgent&quot; in recapturing the 14-gun English brig &quot;Margaret&quot;. On the 20th, they cooperated in liberating the schooner &quot;Nancy&quot; off Guadeloupe which had struck her colors on the 18th. On 20 November off Guadeloupe they recaptured schooner &quot;Nancy&quot;, captured on 18 November by a French privateer. On 15 December, she took the French privateer &quot;Le Onze Vendémiaire&quot;.

On 10 January 1800, &quot;Adams&quot; and made the French schooner &quot;La Fougeuse&quot; their prize and, late in the month, &quot;Adams&quot; recaptured the schooner &quot;Alphia&quot;. Sometime in January she captured schooner &quot;Le Gambeaux&quot;. French schooner &quot;L&#x27;Heureuse Rencontre&quot; was captured, and privateer &quot;General Massena&quot; also, and &quot;Isabella&quot;, a prize of Berceau was recaptured, in February. The following month, she freed the sloop &quot;Nonpareil&quot; and she did the same for the schooner &quot;Priscilla&quot; in April. 

But &quot;Adams&quot; most successful month came in May when she recaptured an unidentified schooner and teamed up with &quot;Insurgent&quot; once more in freeing a British letter of marque. During the same month she also recaptured schooner &quot;Nancy&quot;, schooner &quot;Grinder&quot;(There is an unclear reference to HMS Unity in connection to this ship), and an unidentified brig, she captured the brig &quot;Dove&quot; and the schooner &quot;Renomie&quot;.

In need of repairs, &quot;Adams&quot; returned to New York on 3 June 1800, after briefly running aground off Cape Hatteras, On 18 August Capt. Thomas Robinson was made her new Captain replacing Capt. Morris. Early in the fall she headed back to the Caribbean. However, on this cruise she did not have the success which she had enjoyed under Capt. Richard Morris but for the most part was limited to patrol and escort duty. She did manage to recapture the British schooner &quot;Grendin&quot;, but the date of the action is unknown. On 23 March 1801, the Secretary of the Navy ordered her home. She arrived prior to 7 June and was laid up at New York.

==First Barbary War==
However, trouble in the Mediterranean prevented her respite from being long. The Barbary states on the northern coast of Africa were capturing American merchantmen attempting to trade in that ancient sea and enslaving their crews. Capt. Edward Preble was ordered to New York to take command by the Navy Secretary on 12 January, 1802. In a letter dated 13 April, 1802 Preble asked for a furlough due to a rapid decline in his health since arriving in New York in January. His request was granted in a letter dated 16 April. Capt. Hugh G. Campbell was ordered to take command in a letter dated 17 April. On 10 June 1802, she departed New York and headed for the Strait of Gibraltar carrying orders for Commodore Richard V. Morris, her first commanding officer who was now in command of the American Mediterranean Squadron. She arrived there on 22 July and remained in that port blockading the Tripolitan cruiser &quot;Meshuda&quot; lest she escape and prey on American shipping. It was not until 8 April 1803 that she was freed of this duty. She then joined the rest of Morris&#x27; squadron in operations off Tripoli.

However, as a squadron commander, Morris seemed to have lost the dash and daring he had displayed in operations against the French in the West Indies while in command of a single ship. His indecisiveness in the Mediterranean prompted Washington to order his recall and he sailed for home in &quot;Adams&quot; on 25 September. The frigate carried Morris to Washington, arriving 15 November, 1803 and was placed in ordinary at the navy yard.

==1805–1811==
Reactivated under command of Capt. Alexander Murray in July 1805, &quot;Adams&quot; cruised along the coast of the United States from New York to Florida protecting American commerce. In the autumn of the following year she was again laid up in Washington and – but for service enforcing the Embargo Act in 1809 – remained inactive at the nation&#x27;s capital until the outbreak of the War of 1812. In August 1811 she became the receiving ship at the Washington Navy Yard.

==War of 1812==
In June 1812, &quot;Adams&quot; was cut in half amidships and lengthened 15 feet in the course of being completely rebuilt as a sloop-of-war of 26 × 18-pounder guns. Commanded by Capt. Charles Morris, she was ready for action by the end of the year, but was bottled up in the Chesapeake Bay by blockading British warships until she finally managed to slip out to sea on 18 January 1814. She cruised in the eastern Atlantic and along the African coast and took five merchantmen prizes before putting in at Savannah, Georgia, in April.

Underway again in May, she headed for the Newfoundland Banks and ultimately sailed eastward to waters off the British Isles. During this cruise, she took five more merchant ships chased two more into the River Shannon, and barely managed to escape from a much larger British warship. She captured &quot;Woodbridge&quot;, which was sailing from India to Britain, but had to give her up when and arrived on the scene while escorting a convoy to the .

Near the end of her homeward passage, &quot;Adams&quot; ran aground on the Isle au Haut on 17 August 1814 and was damaged seriously. Skillful seamanship aided by a rising tide managed to refloat the ship and despite heavy leaking she made it into the Penobscot River and reached Hampden, Maine (then part of the District of Maine under Massachusetts). There on 3 September 1814, during the Battle of Hampden, she was scuttled and set ablaze to prevent capture by a British squadron under the command of Rear-Admiral Edward Griffiths supporting British offensive operations in Maine. The crew largely escaped, walking overland to Portsmouth, New Hampshire.

==See also==
* List of sailing frigates of the United States Navy
* Bibliography of early United States naval history

==Citations==
==Further Information==


==Further reading==
* Frost, John (1845). &quot;The pictorial book of the commodores: comprising lives of distinguished commanders in the navy of the United States&quot;. Nafis and Cornish, New York. p. 432, , E&#x27;Book
* Mackenzie, Alexander Slidell (1840). &quot;The life of Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry, Volume 1&quot;,
:Harper &amp; Brothers, New York. p. 443, E&#x27;Book
* Smith, Joshua M. &quot;Making Maine: Statehood and the War of 1812&quot; (2022) Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3547369" start="0" end="15" title="USS Adams (1799)" label="USS &amp;quot;Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="51" end="58" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="66" end="84" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="115" end="128" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892236" start="204" end="228" title="Richard Valentine Morris" label="Richard Valentine Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="352" end="363" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="416" end="425" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q655480" start="439" end="448" title="Quasi-War" label="Quasi-War"/>
<link wikidata="Q204989" start="477" end="494" title="Saint Kitts" label="Saint Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="798" end="802" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="1029" end="1037" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116086" start="1081" end="1098" title="Striking the colors" label="struck her colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502067" start="1722" end="1729" title="French corvette Berceau (1794)" label="Berceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414906" start="2067" end="2083" title="letter of marque" label="letter of marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502181" start="2217" end="2226" title="French frigate Gracieuse (1787)" label="HMS Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q978032" start="2469" end="2482" title="Cape Hatteras" label="Cape Hatteras"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="3115" end="3129" title="Barbary states" label="Barbary states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494562" start="3271" end="3284" title="Edward Preble" label="Edward Preble"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="3694" end="3713" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719717" start="4642" end="4658" title="Alexander Murray (1755–1821)" label="Alexander Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686420" start="4899" end="4910" title="Embargo Act of 1807" label="Embargo Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="4994" end="5005" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416413" start="5037" end="5051" title="receiving ship" label="receiving ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637241" start="5059" end="5079" title="Washington Navy Yard" label="Washington Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="5226" end="5238" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloop-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081102" start="5283" end="5297" title="Charles Morris (naval officer)" label="Charles Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="5374" end="5388" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="5603" end="5620" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913793" start="5675" end="5693" title="Grand Banks of Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="5743" end="5756" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="5837" end="5850" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45771006" start="5930" end="5952" title="Bheemoolah (1808 ship)" label="&amp;quot;Woodbridge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449956" start="6158" end="6170" title="Isle au Haut" label="Isle au Haut"/>
<link wikidata="Q945954" start="6334" end="6349" title="Penobscot River" label="Penobscot River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458109" start="6362" end="6376" title="Hampden, Maine" label="Hampden, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="6407" end="6412" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871186" start="6473" end="6490" title="Battle of Hampden" label="Battle of Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786766" start="6500" end="6507" title="Scuttling" label="scuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343187" start="6599" end="6615" title="Edward Griffith Colpoys" label="Edward Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851178" start="6755" end="6805" title="List of sailing frigates of the United States Navy" label="List of sailing frigates of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903414" start="6808" end="6857" title="Bibliography of early United States naval history" label="Bibliography of early United States naval history"/>
<link wikidata="Q535898" start="7123" end="7151" title="Alexander Slidell Mackenzie" label="Mackenzie, Alexander Slidell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223231" wikidata="Q7410726" url="?curid=223231" title="Samuel Adams (naval officer)">
<text>Samuel Adams (April 10, 1912 – June 5, 1942) was an officer in the United States Navy decorated for action in the Battle of Midway during World War II.

==Biography==
Born in Northampton, Massachusetts, Adams was appointed to the United States Naval Academy from the state&#x27;s second Congressional district in 1931, and graduated in 1935 with an appointment to the rank of ensign. One of his classmates was Eugene B. Fluckey. Adams was assigned to sea duty on battleships, serving aboard in June and July 1935 before being reassigned to until January 2, 1938. He was then accepted to flight school at NAS Pensacola, where he earned wings as a naval aviator on January 17, 1939.

Soon promoted to lieutenant (j.g.), Adams was assigned to aircraft carrier duty, first aboard for one month (April–May 1939) and then with Bombing Squadron (VB) 5 aboard , from May 13, 1939 to the end of his career. While with &quot;Yorktown&quot;, Adams flew Northrop BT-1s, later transitioning with the rest of the squadron to the SBD Dauntless aircraft, flying escort for North Atlantic convoys until the U.S. entered the war. He was promoted to lieutenant on October 1, 1941.

After the attack on Pearl Harbor, &quot;Yorktown&quot; was sent to the Pacific theater. Adams took part in raids in the Gilbert and Marshall Islands. He led raids on land and sea targets in and around Jaluit on February 1, 1942, against shipping off New Guinea on March 10, and on the island of Tulagi on May 4. He participated in the Battle of the Coral Sea on May 7 and 8. During this period Adams was twice awarded the Navy Cross.

The six Japanese aircraft carriers that had played a crucial role in the attack on Pearl Harbor became a primary focus of U.S. naval efforts in the ensuing Pacific campaign. Four of these ships were part of a battle group involved in the Battle of Midway; three were set ablaze in that battle on June 4, 1942. The fourth, the &quot;Hiryū&quot;, remained unscathed. At about 2:40 P.M. local time on June 5, Adams and his wingman, Lt. Harlan Dickson, spotted her and her battle group, consisting of two battleships, three heavy cruisers and four destroyers. Under fire from a Zero fighter, Adams radioed the ships&#x27; location (31°15&#x27; N., 179°05&#x27; W., moving north at approximately 20 knots). Because of this, the U.S. battle group was able to put the &quot;Hiryū&quot; out of action, and inflict major damage on the rest of the battle group.

On June 5, Adams spotted the Japanese destroyer &quot;Tanikaze&quot; and attacked; his plane disappeared in the clouds and was never seen again, presumed downed by anti-aircraft fire from the destroyer. Also killed in the attack was Adams&#x27;s radioman Joseph Karrol.

Adams was posthumously awarded a third Navy Cross for the mission in which he located the &quot;Hiryū&quot;.

==Namesake==
The U.S. Navy destroyer , which saw duty in the latter part of World War II, was named in his honor and christened by his widow, Mrs. Maude Ryan Adams.

==Award Citations==

===Navy Cross (first award)===

The President of the United States of America takes pride in presenting the Navy Cross (Posthumously) to Lieutenant Samuel Adams (NSN: 0-74937), United States Navy, for extraordinary heroism in operations against the enemy while serving as Pilot of a carrier-based Navy Dive Bomber in Bombing Squadron FIVE (VB-5), attached to the U.S.S. YORKTOWN (CV-5), in action against enemy Japanese forces at Salamaua and Lae, New Guinea, on 10 March 1942. Leading his division in a dive-bombing attack against a formation of Japanese cruisers and destroyers, Lieutenant Adams, in the face of heavy anti-aircraft fire, personally made one of several direct heavy bomb hits on a light cruiser, causing serious damage and probable destruction of the hostile vessel. His superb leadership and outstanding courage were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service.

===Navy Cross (second award)===

The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting a Gold Star in lieu of a Second Award of the Navy Cross to Lieutenant Samuel Adams (NSN: 0-74937), United States Navy, for extraordinary heroism in operations against the enemy while serving as Pilot of a carrier-based Navy Dive Bomber in Bombing Squadron FIVE (VB-5), attached to the U.S.S. YORKTOWN (CV-5), in dive bombing attacks against enemy Japanese forces at Tulagi Harbor on 4 May 1942, and in an attack on an enemy aircraft carrier in the Battle of the Coral Sea on 7 and 8 May 1942. Pressing home these attacks in the face of tremendous anti-aircraft fire and, on 8 May, also harassed by heavy aircraft opposition, Lieutenant Adams assisted greatly in the sinking or damaging of the carrier and eight other enemy vessels. His conscientious devotion to duty and gallant self-command against formidable odds contributed materially to the success of our forces in the Battle of the Coral Sea.

===Navy Cross (third award)===

The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting a Second Gold Star in lieu of a Third Award of the Navy Cross to Lieutenant Samuel Adams (NSN: 0-74937), United States Navy, for extraordinary heroism in operations against the enemy while serving as Pilot of a carrier-based Navy Scouting Plane in Scouting Squadron FIVE (VS-5), attached to the U.S.S. YORKTOWN (CV-5), in action against enemy Japanese during the Air Battle of Midway, 4–6 June 1942. Locating major enemy units, Lieutenant Adams, in a persistent and vigorous effort to maintain contact, pressed home repeated attacks against harassing enemy aircraft until he finally succeeded in driving them off. Throughout the duration of his bold assaults, despite the distraction of concentrated anti-aircraft fire and power fighter opposition, he, with superb presence of mind and keen appreciation of the value of uninterrupted information, kept sending out complete contact and amplifying reports, which later enabled our forces to attack the last remaining Japanese aircraft carrier. His gallant perseverance and conscientious devotion to duty contributed in large measure to the defeat of the enemy and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service.

===Air Medal ===

The President of the United States of America takes pride in presenting the Air Medal (Posthumously) to Lieutenant Samuel Adams (NSN: 0-74937), United States Navy, for meritorious achievement in aerial flight as a Section Leader in Bombing Squadron FIVE (VB-5), attached to the U.S.S. YORKTOWN (CV-5), in action against enemy Japanese forces on Jaluit Atoll, Marshall Islands, 1 February 1942. Participating in the first raid of the war by Naval forces against Japanese-controlled territory, Lieutenant Adams led his section through darkness and extremely hazardous weather conditions over an area on which little advance information had been obtained and, reaching the target, executed a dive-bombing and strafing attack in the face of heavy anti-aircraft fire to inflict severe damages on shore installations and enemy vessels in the harbor. By his courage, skilled airmanship and devotion to duty, Lieutenant Adams upheld the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service.

==See also==
*List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea

==References==
*

==Attribution==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7410726" start="0" end="12" title="Samuel Adams (naval officer)" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="67" end="85" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="114" end="130" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="138" end="150" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="175" end="201" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="230" end="257" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271906" start="410" end="427" title="Eugene B. Fluckey" label="Eugene B. Fluckey"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="604" end="617" title="Naval Air Station Pensacola" label="NAS Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890793" start="646" end="659" title="Naval aviator (United States)" label="naval aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824398" start="699" end="716" title="Lieutenant, Junior Grade (United States)" label="lieutenant (j.g.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941683" start="942" end="955" title="Northrop BT-1" label="Northrop BT-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q118070" start="1015" end="1028" title="SBD Dauntless" label="SBD Dauntless"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683250" start="1131" end="1141" title="Lieutenant (United States)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="1173" end="1195" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="1283" end="1290" title="Kiribati" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="1295" end="1311" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q168576" start="1364" end="1370" title="Jaluit" label="Jaluit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="1413" end="1423" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q864870" start="1458" end="1464" title="Tulagi" label="Tulagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="1498" end="1521" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Battle of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q833465" start="1585" end="1595" title="Navy Cross" label="Navy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1606" end="1611" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="1615" end="1631" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="1836" end="1852" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q570007" start="1924" end="1941" title="Japanese aircraft carrier Hiryū" label="&amp;quot;Hiryū&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="2172" end="2176" title="Mitsubishi Zero" label="Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990150" start="2505" end="2513" title="Japanese destroyer Tanikaze (1940)" label="Tanikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q65070295" start="7257" end="7307" title="List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea" label="List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223232" wikidata="Q986765" url="?curid=223232" title="Samuel Adams (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Samuel Adams]] (1722–1803) was a Boston leader in the era of the American Revolution.

Samuel Adams or Sam Adams may also refer to:
==Politics==
*Samuel Adams (Arkansas politician) (1805–1850), acting Governor of Arkansas in 1844
*Sam Adams (Oregon politician) (born 1963), mayor of Portland, Oregon
*Samuel Hunter Adams (1878–1975), mayor of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

==Military and intelligence==
*Samuel Adams (Loyalist) (1730–1810), Loyalist officer in the Revolutionary War, physician, surgeon
*Samuel Adams (naval officer) (1912–1942), United States naval officer
*Samuel A. Adams (1934–1988), CIA analyst known for challenging official enemy troop estimates during the Vietnam War

==Sports==
*Sam Adams (golfer) (born 1946), PGA Tour golfer
*Sam Adams Sr. (1948–2015), American football player
*Sam Adams (American football) (born 1973), American football player
*Sam Adams (Canadian football) (1928–2015), Canadian football player
*Sam Adams (footballer, born 1989), Ghanaian footballer

==Other people==
*Samuel Adams Sr. (1689–1748), American brewer
*Soren Sorensen Adams or Sam Adams (1879–1963), Danish-born American inventor of the Joy Buzzer and other novelties
*Sam Adams (explorer) (1828–1915), surveyor of the American West
*Samuel S. Adams (1937–2006), economic geologist
*Samuel Hopkins Adams (1871–1958), American writer and investigative journalist
*Samuel Adams (composer) (born 1985), American composer
*Sammy Adams (born 1987), American rapper
*Samuel Adams (priest) (1886–1856), Irish Anglican priest and Dean of Cashel
*Samuel B. Adams (1853–1938), Supreme Court of Georgia judge
*Samuel Hoppus Adams (1835–1895), British surgeon, physician and botanist

==Other uses==
*Samuel Adams (beer), an American brand of beer
*Sam Adams Award

== See also ==
*Adams (surname)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q986765" start="0" end="16" title="Samuel Adams (disambiguation)" label="[[Samuel Adams]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q986765" start="89" end="101" title="Samuel Adams (disambiguation)" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q986765" start="105" end="114" title="Samuel Adams (disambiguation)" label="Sam Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q889219" start="148" end="182" title="Samuel Adams (Arkansas politician)" label="Samuel Adams (Arkansas politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q444501" start="233" end="262" title="Sam Adams (Oregon politician)" label="Sam Adams (Oregon politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411754" start="303" end="322" title="Samuel Hunter Adams" label="Samuel Hunter Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410725" start="402" end="425" title="Samuel Adams (Loyalist)" label="Samuel Adams (Loyalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410726" start="502" end="530" title="Samuel Adams (naval officer)" label="Samuel Adams (naval officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410693" start="573" end="588" title="Samuel A. Adams" label="Samuel A. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407074" start="703" end="721" title="Sam Adams (golfer)" label="Sam Adams (golfer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407072" start="752" end="765" title="Sam Adams Sr." label="Sam Adams Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7407071" start="805" end="834" title="Sam Adams (American football)" label="Sam Adams (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921294" start="874" end="903" title="Sam Adams (Canadian football)" label="Sam Adams (Canadian football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106654317" start="943" end="976" title="Sam Adams (footballer, born 1989)" label="Sam Adams (footballer, born 1989)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24205848" start="1017" end="1033" title="Samuel Adams Sr." label="Samuel Adams Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7563424" start="1064" end="1084" title="Soren Sorensen Adams" label="Soren Sorensen Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407073" start="1180" end="1200" title="Sam Adams (explorer)" label="Sam Adams (explorer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412534" start="1245" end="1260" title="Samuel S. Adams" label="Samuel S. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q185406" start="1294" end="1314" title="Samuel Hopkins Adams" label="Samuel Hopkins Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156575" start="1374" end="1397" title="Samuel Adams (composer)" label="Samuel Adams (composer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409698" start="1430" end="1441" title="Sammy Adams" label="Sammy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632447" start="1472" end="1493" title="Samuel Adams (priest)" label="Samuel Adams (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61665618" start="1549" end="1564" title="Samuel B. Adams" label="Samuel B. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q115493438" start="1610" end="1629" title="Samuel Hoppus Adams" label="Samuel Hoppus Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q21286736" start="1700" end="1719" title="Samuel Adams (beer)" label="Samuel Adams (beer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407078" start="1748" end="1763" title="Sam Adams Award" label="Sam Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q351735" start="1781" end="1796" title="Adams (surname)" label="Adams (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223235" wikidata="Q19922755" url="?curid=223235" title="Frenchman (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[Frenchman]] is a French person.

Frenchman may also refer to:

==Places==
* Frenchman, Nevada, an unincorporated community
* Frenchman Bay, Maine
* Frenchman Bay, within King George Sound (Western Australia)
* Frenchman Butte, Saskatchewan, Canada
* Frenchman Creek (disambiguation)
* Frenchman Hills, Washington
* Frenchman Island, New York
* Frenchman Lake (California)
* Frenchman Lake (Nova Scotia), Canada
* Frenchman Lake (Yukon), Canada
* Frenchman Mountain, Nevada
* Frenchman&#x27;s Pass, Aruba
* Frenchman Range, a mountain range in Nevada
* Frenchman River, Saskatchewan, Canada

==Other uses==
* Nap Lajoie (1874-1959), American Hall-of-Fame Major League Baseball player nicknamed &quot;The Frenchman&quot;
* The Merovingian, also known as &quot;The Frenchman&quot;, a minor character in the Matrix series
* &quot;The Frenchman&quot;, an episode of the TV series &quot;Bonanza&quot;

==See also==
* Scott LeDoux (1940-2011), American politician, heavyweight boxer and professional wrestler nicknamed &quot;The Fighting Frenchman&quot;
* Frenchmans Bluff, a summit in Minnesota
* Frenchmans Cap, a mountain in Tasmania, Australia
* Frenchman&#x27;s Cay, an island in the British Virgin Islands
* Frenchman Flat, a hydrographic basin in Nevada
* Frenchman Knob, a summit in Kentucky</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19922755" start="2" end="15" title="Frenchman (disambiguation)" label="[[Frenchman]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q19922755" start="37" end="46" title="Frenchman (disambiguation)" label="Frenchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502715" start="80" end="97" title="Frenchman, Nevada" label="Frenchman, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087497" start="129" end="142" title="Frenchman Bay" label="Frenchman Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q682405" start="174" end="211" title="King George Sound (Western Australia)" label="King George Sound (Western Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414622" start="214" end="229" title="Frenchman Butte" label="Frenchman Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128086" start="254" end="286" title="Frenchman Creek (disambiguation)" label="Frenchman Creek (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151236" start="289" end="304" title="Frenchman Hills" label="Frenchman Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866029" start="319" end="335" title="Frenchman Island" label="Frenchman Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348352" start="348" end="375" title="Frenchman Lake (California)" label="Frenchman Lake (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502719" start="378" end="406" title="Frenchman Lake (Nova Scotia)" label="Frenchman Lake (Nova Scotia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22511227" start="417" end="439" title="Frenchman Lake (Yukon)" label="Frenchman Lake (Yukon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502721" start="450" end="468" title="Frenchman Mountain" label="Frenchman Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502716" start="479" end="500" title="Frenchman&amp;#x27;s Pass" label="Frenchman&amp;#x27;s Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502723" start="510" end="525" title="Frenchman Range" label="Frenchman Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q177469" start="556" end="571" title="Frenchman River" label="Frenchman River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335869" start="612" end="622" title="Nap Lajoie" label="Nap Lajoie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="725" end="740" title="List of minor characters in the Matrix series#Merovingian" label="The Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="824" end="849" title="List of Bonanza episodes#Season 3 (1961–62)" label="&amp;quot;The Frenchman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436678" start="915" end="927" title="Scott LeDoux" label="Scott LeDoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q22034054" start="1053" end="1069" title="Frenchmans Bluff" label="Frenchmans Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q728828" start="1095" end="1109" title="Frenchmans Cap" label="Frenchmans Cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502699" start="1147" end="1167" title="Frenchman&amp;#x27;s Cay" label="Frenchman&amp;#x27;s Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434915" start="1211" end="1225" title="Frenchman Flat" label="Frenchman Flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19986605" start="1260" end="1274" title="Frenchman Knob" label="Frenchman Knob"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223239" wikidata="Q8919" url="?curid=223239" title="Euratom">
<text>The European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC or Euratom) is an international organisation established by the Euratom Treaty on 25 March 1957 with the original purpose of creating a specialist market for nuclear power in Europe, by developing nuclear energy and distributing it to its member states while selling the surplus to non-member states. However, over the years its scope has been considerably increased to cover a large variety of areas associated with nuclear power and ionising radiation as diverse as safeguarding of nuclear materials, radiation protection and construction of the International Fusion Reactor ITER.

It is legally distinct from the European Union (EU) although it has the same membership, and is governed by many of the EU&#x27;s institutions; but it is the only remaining community organisation that is independent of the EU and therefore outside the regulatory control of the European Parliament. Since 2014, Switzerland has also participated in Euratom programmes as an associated state.

The United Kingdom ceased to be a full member of the organisation on 31 January 2020. However, under the terms of the UK–EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement, the United Kingdom participates in Euratom as an associated state following the end of the transition period on 31 December 2020.

==History==
The driving force behind the creation of Euratom was France&#x27;s desire to develop nuclear energy and nuclear weapons without having to rely on the United States and/or the United Kingdom. The costs of nuclear development were also large, motivating France to share the costs with the other members of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC).

During the negotiations to create Euratom, the United States and the United Kingdom sought to gain influence over nuclear development in Europe. The US and the UK created the European Nuclear Energy Agency (ENEA) as a way to limit the value of Euratom and gain influence over the spread of nuclear technology. The Soviet Union launched a propaganda campaign against Euratom, as it sought to stoke fears among Europeans that the organization would enable West Germany to develop nuclear weapons.

The Common Assembly proposed extending the powers of the ECSC to cover other sources of energy. However, Jean Monnet, ECSC architect and President, wanted a separate community to cover nuclear power. Louis Armand was put in charge of a study into the prospects of nuclear energy use in Europe; his report concluded that further nuclear development was needed to fill the deficit left by the exhaustion of coal deposits and to reduce dependence on oil producers. However, the Benelux states and Germany were also keen on creating a general single market, although it was opposed by France due to its protectionism, and Jean Monnet thought it too large and difficult a task. In the end, Monnet proposed the creation of separate atomic energy and economic communities to reconcile both groups.

The Intergovernmental Conference on the Common Market and Euratom at the Château of Val-Duchesse in 1956 drew up the essentials of the new treaties. Euratom would foster cooperation in the nuclear field, at the time a very popular area, and would, along with the EEC, share the Common Assembly and Court of Justice of the ECSC, but not its executives. Euratom would have its own Council and Commission, with fewer powers than the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community. On 25 March 1957, the Treaties of Rome (the Euratom Treaty and the EEC Treaty) were signed by the six ECSC members and on 1 January 1958 they came into force.

To save on resources, these separate executives created by the Rome Treaties were merged in 1965 by the Merger Treaty. The institutions of the EEC would take over responsibilities for the running of the ECSC and Euratom, with all three then becoming known as the European Communities even if each legally existed separately. In 1993, the Maastricht Treaty created the European Union, which absorbed the Communities into the European Community pillar, yet Euratom still maintained a distinct legal personality.

The European Constitution was intended to consolidate all previous treaties and increase democratic accountability in them. The Euratom treaty had not been amended as the other treaties had, so the European Parliament had been granted few powers over it. However, the reason it had gone unamended was the same reason the Constitution left it to remain separate from the rest of the EU: anti-nuclear sentiment among the European electorate, which may unnecessarily turn voters against the treaty. The Euratom treaty thus remains in force relatively unamended from its original signing.

==EU evolution timeline==
This overall timeline includes the establishment and development of Euratom, and shows that currently, it is the only former EC body that has not been incorporated into the EU.

== Cooperation ==

* Since 2014, Switzerland has participated in Euratom programmes as an associated state.
* Since January 2021, the United Kingdom participates in Euratom programmes as an associated state under the terms of the UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement.
* As of 2024, Euratom maintains Co-operation Agreements of various scopes with ten countries: Armenia, Australia, Canada, India, Japan, Kazakhstan, South Africa, Ukraine, United States, and Uzbekistan.

== Withdrawal of the United Kingdom ==

The United Kingdom announced its intention to withdraw from the EAEC on 26 January 2017, following on from its decision to withdraw from the European Union. Formal notice to withdraw from the EAEC was provided in March 2017, within the Article 50 notification letter, where the withdrawal was made explicit. Withdrawal only became effective following negotiations on the terms of the exit, which lasted two years and ten months.

A report by the House of Commons Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee, published in May 2017, questioned the legal necessity of leaving Euratom and called for a temporary extension of membership to allow time for new arrangements to be made.

In June 2017, the European Commission&#x27;s negotiations task force published a &quot;Position paper transmitted to EU27 on nuclear materials and safeguard equipment (Euratom)&quot;, titled &quot;Essential Principles on nuclear materials and safeguard equipment&quot;. The following month, a briefing paper from the House of Commons Library assessed the implications of leaving Euratom.

In 2017, an article in &quot;The Independent&quot; questioned the availability of nuclear fuel to the UK after 2019 if the UK were to withdraw, and the need for new treaties relating to the transportation of nuclear materials. A 2017 article in the &quot;New Scientist&quot; stated that radioisotope supply for cancer treatments would also need to be considered in new treaties.

UK politicians speculated that the UK could stay in Euratom. In 2017, some argued that this would require – beyond the consent of the EU27 – amendment or revocation of the Article 50 letter of March 2017.

The &quot;Nuclear Safeguards Act 2018&quot;, making provision for safeguards after withdrawal from Euratom, received royal assent on 26 June 2018.

The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement, outlining the UK&#x27;s relationship with the European Union from 1 January 2021, makes provision for the United Kingdom&#x27;s participation &quot;as an associated country of all parts of the Euratom programme&quot;.

== Achievements ==
In the history of European regulation, Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty represents pioneering legislation concerning binding transfrontier obligations with respect to environmental impact and protection of humans.

==President==

The five-member Commission was led by only three presidents while it had independent executives (1958–1967), all from France:

==See also==

* EU Directorate General Joint Research Centre – often incorrectly referred to as Euratom due to EURATOM being its origin.
* Energy Community
* Energy policy of the European Union
* History of the European Union
* Institutions of the European Union
* International Atomic Energy Agency
* Nuclear energy in the European Union
* The nuclear part of the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development, the European Union&#x27;s chief instrument for funding research.

== References ==
== External links ==
* (
* Documents of the European Atomic Energy Community are consultable at the Historical Archives of the EU in Florence
* History of the Rome Treaties Online collection by the CVCE
*European Commission Fusion Research
*European Commission Fission Research</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="4" end="36" title="Euratom" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="38" end="42" title="Euratom" label="EAEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="46" end="53" title="Euratom" label="Euratom"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="61" end="87" title="international organization" label="international organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411078" start="107" end="121" title="Euratom Treaty" label="Euratom Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="201" end="214" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="460" end="473" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="478" end="496" title="ionising radiation" label="ionising radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068140" start="527" end="544" title="nuclear materials" label="nuclear materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574099" start="546" end="566" title="radiation protection" label="radiation protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q191788" start="620" end="624" title="ITER" label="ITER"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="659" end="673" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="704" end="714" title="Member state of the European Union" label="membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="747" end="769" title="Institutions of the European Union" label="EU&amp;#x27;s institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="938" end="949" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="1038" end="1050" title="Brexit" label="ceased to be"/>
<link wikidata="Q104469222" start="1137" end="1174" title="EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement" label="UK–EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1267" end="1284" title="Brexit withdrawal agreement#Transition_period" label="transition period"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="1627" end="1660" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q369760" start="1845" end="1875" title="European Nuclear Energy Agency" label="European Nuclear Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1984" end="1996" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="2170" end="2185" title="European Parliament" label="Common Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q159700" start="2271" end="2282" title="Jean Monnet" label="Jean Monnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="2351" end="2364" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398" start="2366" end="2378" title="Louis Armand" label="Louis Armand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700433" start="2592" end="2609" title="energy security" label="reduce dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="2641" end="2648" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="2705" end="2718" title="single market" label="single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="2765" end="2778" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12908594" start="2962" end="3023" title="Intergovernmental Conference on the Common Market and Euratom" label="Intergovernmental Conference on the Common Market and Euratom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741952" start="3031" end="3054" title="Château of Val-Duchesse" label="Château of Val-Duchesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="3256" end="3272" title="European Court of Justice" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q282075" start="3388" end="3443" title="High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community" label="High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411078" start="3489" end="3503" title="Euratom Treaty" label="Euratom Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="3512" end="3522" title="Treaty of Rome" label="EEC Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369938" start="3547" end="3559" title="Inner Six" label="ECSC members"/>
<link wikidata="Q622766" start="3709" end="3722" title="Merger Treaty" label="Merger Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="3868" end="3888" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="3943" end="3960" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="4029" end="4047" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="4120" end="4141" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="European Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="4314" end="4333" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q104469222" start="5136" end="5173" title="EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement" label="UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="5269" end="5276" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5278" end="5287" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="5289" end="5295" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5297" end="5302" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5304" end="5309" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="5311" end="5321" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5323" end="5335" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="5337" end="5344" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5346" end="5359" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="5365" end="5375" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="5541" end="5573" title="Brexit" label="withdraw from the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q104900360" start="5881" end="5931" title="Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee" label="Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="6523" end="6538" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q525592" start="6749" end="6762" title="New Scientist" label="New Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55392018" start="7090" end="7117" title="Nuclear Safeguards Act 2018" label="Nuclear Safeguards Act 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q104469222" start="7232" end="7269" title="EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement" label="UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500915" start="7882" end="7926" title="EU Directorate General Joint Research Centre" label="EU Directorate General Joint Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989312" start="8005" end="8021" title="Energy Community" label="Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q535437" start="8024" end="8059" title="Energy policy of the European Union" label="Energy policy of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q212114" start="8062" end="8091" title="History of the European Union" label="History of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="8094" end="8128" title="Institutions of the European Union" label="Institutions of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="8131" end="8165" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089497" start="8168" end="8204" title="Nuclear energy in the European Union" label="Nuclear energy in the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="8211" end="8218" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438124" start="8231" end="8301" title="Seventh Framework Programme" label="Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946113" start="8584" end="8588" title="Centre virtuel de la connaissance sur l&amp;#x27;Europe" label="CVCE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223240" wikidata="Q173373" url="?curid=223240" title="Content management">
<text>Content management (CM) are a set of processes and technologies that support the collection, managing, and publishing of information in any form or medium. When stored and accessed via computers, this information may be more specifically referred to as digital content, or simply as content. 
* Digital content may take the form of text (such as electronic documents), images, multimedia files (such as audio or video files), or any other file type that follows a content lifecycle requiring management.
* The process of content development and management is complex enough that various commercial software vendors (large and small), such as Interwoven and Microsoft, offer content management software to control and automate significant aspects of the content lifecycle.

==Process==
Content management practices and goals vary by mission and by organizational governance structure.
News organizations, e-commerce websites, and educational institutions all use content management, but in different ways. This leads to differences in terminology and in the names and number of steps in the process.

For example, some digital content is created by one or more authors. Over time that content may be edited. One or more individuals may provide some editorial oversight, approving the content for publication.

Publishing may take many forms: it may be the act of &quot;pushing&quot; content out to others, or simply granting digital access rights to certain content to one or more individuals. Later that content may be superseded by another version of the content and thus retired or removed from use (as when this wiki page is modified).

Content management is an inherently collaborative process. It often consists of the following basic roles and responsibilities:

* Creator – responsible for creating and editing content.
* Editor – responsible for tuning the content message and the style of delivery, including translation and localization.
* Publisher – responsible for releasing the content for use.
* Administrator – responsible for managing access permissions to folders, collections and files, usually accomplished by assigning access rights to user groups or roles. Admins may also assist and support users in various ways.
* Consumer, viewer or guest – the person who reads or otherwise consumes the content after it is published or shared.

A critical aspect of content management is the ability to manage versions of content as it evolves (&quot;see also&quot; version control). Authors and editors often need to restore older versions of edited products due to a process failure or an undesirable series of edits. Time-sensitive content may also require updates as the subject matter evolves over time.

Another equally important aspect of content management involves the creation, maintenance, and application of review standards. Each member of the content creation and review process has a unique role and set of responsibilities in the development or publication of the content. Each review team member requires clear and concise review standards. These must be maintained on an ongoing basis to ensure the long-term consistency and health of the knowledge base.

A content management system is a set of automated processes that may support the following features:

* Import and creation of documents and multimedia material
* Identification of all key users and their roles
* The ability to assign roles and responsibilities to different instances of content categories or types
* Definition of workflow tasks often coupled with messaging so that content managers are alerted to changes in content
* The ability to track and manage multiple versions of a single instance of content
* The ability to publish the content to a repository to support access
* The ability to personalize content based on a set of rules

Increasingly, the repository is an inherent part of the system, and incorporates enterprise search and retrieval. Content management systems take the following forms:

* Web content management system—software for web site management (often what &quot;content management&quot; implicitly means)
* Output of a newspaper editorial staff organization
* Workflow for article publication
* Document management systems
* Knowledge management software
* Single source content management system—content stored in chunks within a relational database
* Variant management system—where personnel tag source content (usually text and graphics) to represent variants stored as single source &quot;master&quot; content modules, resolved to the desired variant at publication (for example: automobile owners manual content for 12 model years stored as single master content files and &quot;called&quot; by model year as needed)—often used in concert with database chunk storage (see above) for large content objects

==Governance structures==
Content management expert Marc Feldman defines three primary content management governance structures: localized, centralized, and federated—each having its unique strengths and weaknesses.

===Localized governance===
By putting control in the hands of those closest to the content, the context experts, localized governance models empower and unleash creativity. These benefits come, however, at the cost of a partial-to-total loss of managerial control and oversight.

===Centralized governance===
When the levers of control are strongly centralized, content management systems are capable of delivering an exceptionally clear and unified brand message. Moreover, centralized content management governance structures allow for a large number of cost-savings opportunities in large enterprises, realized, for example, through (1) the avoidance of duplicated efforts in creating, editing, formatting, repurposing and archiving content; (2) process management and the streamlining of all content related labor; and/or (3) an orderly deployment or updating of the content management system.

===Federated governance===
Federated governance models potentially realize the benefits of both localized and centralized control while avoiding the weaknesses of both. While content management software systems are inherently structured to enable federated governance models, realizing these benefits can be difficult because it requires, for example, negotiating the boundaries of control with local managers and content creators. In the case of larger enterprises, in particular, the failure to fully implement or realize a federated governance structure equates to a failure to realize the full return on investment and cost savings that content management systems enable.

==Implementation==
Content management implementations must be able to manage content distributions and digital rights in content life cycle. Content management systems are usually involved with digital rights management in order to control user access and digital rights. In this step, the read-only structures of digital rights management systems force some limitations on content management, as they do not allow authors to change protected content in their life cycle. Creating new content using managed (protected) content is also an issue that gets protected contents out of management controlling systems. A few content management implementations cover all these issues.

==See also==

* Content delivery
* Content engineering
* Content Management Interoperability Services
* Content management system (CMS)
* Digital asset management
* Enterprise content management
* Enterprise information management
* Information architecture
* List of content management systems
* Single source publishing
* Snippet management
* Web content lifecycle
* Web design
* Website governance
* Personalization management system
==References==
==External links==
* Teleperformance Content Moderation Service
* Multimedia Digital Content Management Platform
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173373" start="0" end="18" title="Content management" label="Content management"/>
<link wikidata="Q173373" start="20" end="22" title="Content management" label="CM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="283" end="290" title="Content (media and publishing)" label="content"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="904" end="914" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="1309" end="1319" title="Publishing" label="Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189439" start="2477" end="2492" title="version control" label="version control"/>
<link wikidata="Q593744" start="3168" end="3182" title="knowledge base" label="knowledge base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344700" start="3918" end="3935" title="enterprise search" label="enterprise search"/>
<link wikidata="Q45211" start="4007" end="4036" title="Web content management system" label="Web content management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="4037" end="4045" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="4050" end="4058" title="web site" label="web site"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="4145" end="4154" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q627335" start="4186" end="4194" title="Workflow" label="Workflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="4199" end="4206" title="essay" label="article"/>
<link wikidata="Q831677" start="4221" end="4247" title="Document management system" label="Document management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427675" start="4251" end="4280" title="Knowledge management software" label="Knowledge management software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289277" start="4283" end="4296" title="Single source publishing" label="Single source"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="6825" end="6850" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="6945" end="6970" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q269415" start="7325" end="7341" title="Content delivery" label="Content delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165065" start="7344" end="7363" title="Content engineering" label="Content engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931729" start="7366" end="7410" title="Content Management Interoperability Services" label="Content Management Interoperability Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q131093" start="7413" end="7438" title="Content management system" label="Content management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224694" start="7447" end="7471" title="Digital asset management" label="Digital asset management"/>
<link wikidata="Q247423" start="7474" end="7503" title="Enterprise content management" label="Enterprise content management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532578" start="7506" end="7539" title="Enterprise information management" label="Enterprise information management"/>
<link wikidata="Q845921" start="7542" end="7566" title="Information architecture" label="Information architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80975" start="7569" end="7603" title="List of content management systems" label="List of content management systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289277" start="7606" end="7630" title="Single source publishing" label="Single source publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120538" start="7633" end="7651" title="Snippet management" label="Snippet management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978576" start="7654" end="7675" title="Web content lifecycle" label="Web content lifecycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190637" start="7678" end="7688" title="Web design" label="Web design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978834" start="7691" end="7709" title="Website governance" label="Website governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q115939726" start="7712" end="7745" title="Personalization management system" label="Personalization management system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223242" wikidata="Q288381" url="?curid=223242" title="CM">
<text>CM or its variants may refer to:

== Arts and media==
===Gaming===
* &quot;Championship Manager&quot;, a popular football management simulation game
* &quot;Chessmaster&quot;, a chess computer program series
===Music===
* C minor, abbreviated Cm, a minor scale or chord based on C
* CM (school), a youth and community music organisation
* Classical music, Western art music
* Common metre, abbreviated CM, a poetic metre frequently used in hymns
===Other media===
* &quot;Correio da Manhã&quot; (Portugal), a Portuguese daily newspaper
==Science and technology==
=== Computing ===
* Configuration management, a systems engineering process for establishing and maintaining consistency
* Connection Machine, series of supercomputers
* Content management, technologies that support the collection, management, and publishing of information
* CyanogenMod, alternative firmware for Android phones, rebranded as LineageOS

=== Medicine ===

* Centromedian nucleus, a part of the thalamus
* Chiari malformation, a narrowing of the skull which puts pressure on the cerebellum
* Chylomicron, lipoprotein with extremely low density
* Contingency management, a type of treatment where patients are rewarded (or, less often, punished) for their behavior

===Physics and chemistry===
* &quot;C&quot;&quot;m&quot;, the pitching moment coefficient in aerodynamics
* Curium, symbol Cm, a chemical element

===Units of measure===
* Centimetre (cm), a unit of length equal to one hundredth of a metre
* Coulomb-metre (C m), SI unit of electrical dipole moment
*Centimolar (cM), molarity
* Centimorgan (cM), a unit for measuring genetic linkage

=== Other uses in science and technology ===
* CM Draconis, an eclipsing binary system in the constellation of Draco
* Apollo command module, a segment of the Apollo command and service module
* Commercial Message, Japanese abbreviation using Latin script
* Condition monitoring, the process of monitoring a parameter of condition in machinery
* Construction morphology, a theory of linguistic morphology

== Organizations ==
* Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (TSX/NYSE: CM), a Canadian bank
* CM (commerce), a mobile services company formerly called ClubMessage
* Cooler Master, a Taiwan computer hardware manufacturer

== Places ==
* Cameroon, which has the ISO and FIPS country code &quot;CM&quot;
** .cm, the country code top-level domain for Cameroon
* CM postcode area, central Essex, England
* Chiang Mai, Thailand
* Northern Mariana Islands, formerly with the U.S. postal code &quot;CM&quot; (now &quot;MP&quot; to avoid confusion with Cameroon)

== Titles and awards ==
* Candidate Master, an international chess title
* Certified Manager, an internationally recognized professional credential for managers and leaders 
* Certified Midwife, health care profession
* Chaconia Medal of the Order of the Trinity, a national award of Trinidad and Tobago, post-nominal CM
* Chief Mate, also chief officer, first mate or first officer, is the second-in-command on the ship, directly under the Captain
* Chief Minister, an appointed head of government. 
* Order of Canada Member, post-nominal letters C.M.
* Congregation of the Mission, a Roman Catholic religious institute
* Construction mechanic (United States Navy), a Seabee occupational rating in the U.S. Navy
* Knight Commander Royal Order of Monisaraphon, post-nominal letters CM

==Transportation==
* Chemins de fer du Morbihan, a metre gauge railway network in Brittany, France
* CM Airlines, a domestic airline in Honduras
* Copa Airlines, Panama City, Panama, IATA designator

== Other uses==
* CM, number 900 in Roman numerals
* Change management, system for dealing with organisational change
* Construction management/Construction manager
* Contract manufacturer, a company that manufactures items for other companies
* Contribution margin, a measure in management accounting
* Cypro-Minoan syllabary, a form of writing used in Cyprus during the Late Bronze Age
* Central midfielder, a position in association football
* A US Navy hull classification symbol: Minelayer (CM)

==See also==

* CM&amp;, a Colombian TV production company
* CMS (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q288381" start="0" end="2" title="CM" label="CM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15062904" start="75" end="95" title="Championship Manager" label="Championship Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q593001" start="157" end="168" title="Chessmaster" label="Chessmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q309994" start="222" end="229" title="C minor" label="C minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701823" start="283" end="294" title="CM (school)" label="CM (school)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="339" end="354" title="Classical music" label="Classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153569" start="376" end="388" title="Common metre" label="Common metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135311" start="466" end="505" title="Correio da Manhã (Portugal)" label="&amp;quot;Correio da Manhã&amp;quot; (Portugal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153495" start="583" end="607" title="Configuration management" label="Configuration management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126252" start="686" end="704" title="Connection Machine" label="Connection Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173373" start="733" end="751" title="Content management" label="Content management"/>
<link wikidata="Q855981" start="839" end="850" title="CyanogenMod" label="CyanogenMod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233644" start="937" end="957" title="Centromedian nucleus" label="Centromedian nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071707" start="984" end="1003" title="Chiari malformation" label="Chiari malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q423126" start="1070" end="1081" title="Chylomicron" label="Chylomicron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165351" start="1124" end="1146" title="Contingency management" label="Contingency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198892" start="1305" end="1332" title="pitching moment coefficient" label="pitching moment coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876" start="1351" end="1357" title="Curium" label="Curium"/>
<link wikidata="Q174728" start="1415" end="1425" title="Centimetre" label="Centimetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q735135" start="1485" end="1498" title="Coulomb-metre" label="Coulomb-metre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1543" end="1553" title="Centimolar" label="Centimolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q284100" start="1571" end="1582" title="Centimorgan" label="Centimorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065889" start="1674" end="1685" title="CM Draconis" label="CM Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="1746" end="1767" title="Apollo command module" label="Apollo command module"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="1822" end="1840" title="Commercial Message" label="Commercial Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q643012" start="1885" end="1905" title="Condition monitoring" label="Condition monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571337" start="1973" end="1996" title="Construction morphology" label="Construction morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q666694" start="2055" end="2089" title="Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce" label="Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402421" start="2124" end="2137" title="CM (commerce)" label="CM (commerce)"/>
<link wikidata="Q619227" start="2195" end="2208" title="Cooler Master" label="Cooler Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="2266" end="2274" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40698" start="2334" end="2337" title=".cm" label=".cm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013056" start="2388" end="2404" title="CM postcode area" label="CM postcode area"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="2431" end="2441" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="2454" end="2478" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690563" start="2611" end="2627" title="Candidate Master" label="Candidate Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040014" start="2660" end="2677" title="Certified Manager" label="Certified Manager"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2771" end="2778" title="Midwife#Education, training and regulation" label="Midwife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066118" start="2805" end="2819" title="Chaconia Medal" label="Chaconia Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436517" start="2908" end="2918" title="Chief Mate" label="Chief Mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670755" start="3036" end="3050" title="Chief Minister" label="Chief Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="3088" end="3103" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q849726" start="3140" end="3167" title="Congregation of the Mission" label="Congregation of the Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164433" start="3208" end="3250" title="Construction mechanic (United States Navy)" label="Construction mechanic (United States Navy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064282" start="3300" end="3344" title="Knight Commander Royal Order of Monisaraphon" label="Knight Commander Royal Order of Monisaraphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962480" start="3392" end="3418" title="Chemins de fer du Morbihan" label="Chemins de fer du Morbihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013054" start="3472" end="3483" title="CM Airlines" label="CM Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q849404" start="3518" end="3531" title="Copa Airlines" label="Copa Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="3607" end="3621" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q116348" start="3624" end="3641" title="Change management" label="Change management"/>
<link wikidata="Q811501" start="3691" end="3714" title="Construction management" label="Construction management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408259" start="3738" end="3759" title="Contract manufacturer" label="Contract manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545019" start="3817" end="3836" title="Contribution margin" label="Contribution margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751985" start="3875" end="3897" title="Cypro-Minoan syllabary" label="Cypro-Minoan syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="3961" end="3979" title="Central midfielder" label="Central midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4056" end="4070" title="List of mine warfare vessels of the United States Navy#Minelayers (CM)" label="Minelayer (CM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012827" start="4088" end="4095" title="CM&amp;amp;" label="CM&amp;amp;"/>
<link wikidata="Q225127" start="4133" end="4153" title="CMS (disambiguation)" label="CMS (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223243" wikidata="Q5220773" url="?curid=223243" title="Danny Rivera">
<text>Danny Rivera (born 27 February 1945) is a Puerto Rican singer and songwriter born in San Juan whose career spans nearly 50 years. He is well known in Puerto Rico for his political activism. In 2008, Rivera acquired Dominican Republic citizenship. 
After 12 years of work, Danny Rivera and Nelson González in 2014 finished work putting new life into the classical bolero - in Spanish. &quot;Rivera and González Hit the Heart of the Latin American Song Book&quot; on Obsesión (release 25 March 2014)

==Musical career==
Danny Rivera is often called “the national voice of Puerto Rico&quot;, but his passionate singing style is known in the Spanish-speaking world. In Latin America, he has been a familiar face on television since 1968. Over the course of fifty years, Rivera has recorded over seventy albums and is the only Puerto Rican to star at Carnegie Hall in four different decades (1979, 1989, 1999, 2010).

He was born of humble origins in one of the deepest Afro-Rican culture zones—Santurce, Puerto Rico, the home of many of the island&#x27;s most popular musicians and now part of the modern metropolitan area of San Juan. Born on 27 February 1945 in the neighborhood of 23 Abajo, named for one of the stops on a now-defunct trolley line, his first experiences with singing were in the chorus of an evangelical church and in the bars of his neighborhood, and with the &quot;barriles&quot; (barrel drums) of the street-side bomba that is Puerto Rico’s strongest link to the era of plantation slavery.

He made his first professional impression as a big-band singer in 1968, in the Hotel San Juan with César Concepción’s orchestra, the finest of its day. Televised music festivals are important talent showcases in Latin America, and after Rivera was chosen as Revelation of the Year in the 1968 Popularity Festival, he became a familiar face in Puerto Rico through television appearances. With a repertoire that emphasized the bolero and looked to progressive song movements, he was an emblematic figure of the &quot;bohemia&quot; of the 1970s that based itself at the nightclub in Viejo San Juan called Ocho Puertas (Eight Doors).

After making his recording debut in 1968 (&quot;Amor, Amor&quot;, with a group called The Clean Cuts), he began a string of hits that included &quot;Porque yo te amo&quot;, &quot;Fuiste mía un verano&quot;, &quot;Manolo&quot;, &quot;Mi viejo&quot;, &quot;Yo y la rosa&quot;, and &quot;Va cayendo una lágrima&quot;. In 1971 he had a superhit with a version of Roberto Carlos&#x27;s &quot;Jesucristo&quot;, followed up the next year with his album &quot;Mi Hijo&quot;, which included two of his career-defining songs, &quot;Tu pueblo es mi pueblo&quot; and &quot;Amada amante&quot;. For years after that, he recorded and concertized constantly, becoming an international star while maintaining a presence on Puerto Rican radio and TV.

He delved into the rich past of Puerto Rican music, something practically unheard of for Latin pop artists. He signed with the Venezuelan label TH in 1980, and his albums during this period are considered classics, including &quot;Alborada&quot;, &quot;Serenata&quot; (with a song that became a standard of his, Don Felo&#x27;s &quot;Madrigal&quot;,) and &quot;Danza para mi pueblo&quot;, an album of Puerto Rican danzas. He subsequently began his own label, DNA, producing among other titles &quot;Así cantaba Cheíto González&quot;, volumes 1 and 2, and an album of Tito Rodríguez&#x27;s ballads, &quot;Inolvidable Tito&quot;. On 15 September 1987 he performed a successful duo concert with Michel Camilo at the Centro de Bellas Artes in San Juan, called &quot;Danny regresa a Ocho Puertas&quot; (Danny returns to Ocho Puertas)

As his work became increasingly socially, spiritually, and historically conscious, he continued recording and touring internationally, but found himself less in step with the Latin music industry. Still, in the late 1980s he signed with Sony Music and recorded the successful album &quot;Amar o morir&quot;, as well as &quot;Subiendo y bajando&quot; with Gilberto Santa Rosa, but increasingly he devoted himself to his social projects.

==Social activity==
Rivera made international news in the summer of 2001 when he spent thirty days in the US federal prison at Guaynabo, Puerto Rico, accused of civil disobedience in demonstrating for the withdrawal of the US Navy from the Puerto Rican island of Vieques. Later that year his prison diary and poems were published in the book &quot;Enamorado de la paz: Diario en la Cárcel Federal&quot; (&quot;In Love with Peace: A Diary at the Federal Prison&quot;).

His commitment to a style of song that expresses both personal and social love led him naturally to Cuba, where he has been a frequent visitor. In 2004 he inaugurated the Cátedra Internacional de Artes Plásticas y Música (International School of Plastic and Musical Arts) in Havana. In collaboration with the Cuban Artists and Writers Union (UNEAC), he made a documentary about Puerto Rican cultural traces in eastern Cuba, published in the book &quot;Ecos Boricuas en el Oriente de Cuba&quot;. In 2008 he became a naturalized citizen of the Dominican Republic in recognition of his work with the &quot;Dajaos&quot; – the people of the Dajabón area, on both sides of the Dominican / Haitian border.

In 2009, Rivera sang &quot;Madrigal&quot;, &quot;Tu pueblo es mi pueblo&quot;, and &quot;Amar o morir&quot; before 1.2 million listeners in Havana (almost all of them wearing all white) at the Paz Sin Fronteras concert organized by Juanes; the concert was seen throughout the hemisphere and in Europe by millions of television and online viewers, the biggest Latin music broadcast event ever.

In March 5, 2020, Danny Rivera was the featured singer on Norberto Vélez&#x27;s YouTube channel titled &quot;Sesiones Desde La Loma Ep. 6&quot;.

==Discography==

* &quot;Mi Hijo&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Danny Rivera La Distancia &quot; (1973)
* &quot; Danny Rivera &quot; (1974)
* &quot; Eramos, Mi Viejo &quot; (1974)
* &quot; Danny Rivera en Concierto &quot; (1974) [2 LPs]
* &quot;Canciones de Amor&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Danny Rivera&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Danny Rivera y Alborada&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Temas de Películas &quot; (1976)
* &quot;Para Toda la Vida&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Danny Rivera&quot; (1977)
* &quot;La Tierra Mia..!&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Muy Amigos&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Serenata&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Muchachito &quot; (1979)
* &quot;Otra vez...Danny Rivera&quot; (1980)
* &quot; Gitano &quot; (1981)
* &quot;15 Grandes Éxitos&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Por Amar Se Da Todo&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Así Cantaba Cheito González &quot;(1984)
* &quot;Danny Rivera en la Intimidad...con Guitarras &quot; (1984)
* &quot;Pido Paz &quot; ((1984)
* &quot;Controversia&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Así Cantaba Cheito González, Vol. 2&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Inolvidable Tito&quot;, &quot;A Mi Me Pasa lo Mismo Que A Usted&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Ofrenda&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Amar o Morir&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Mi Canción Es Paz&quot; (1987)
* &quot;El Día Que Me Quieras&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Los Niños Jesús Del Mundo&quot; (1988)
* &quot;15 Éxitos&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Canto a la Humanidad&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Canciones de Amor&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Mosaico Vol. 1&quot; (1990)
* &quot;20 Éxitos&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Mosaico Vol. 2&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Tiempo al Tiempo&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Cada Vez Otra Vez&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Daniel&quot; (1993)
* &quot;No Hay Distancia&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Danza Para Mi Pueblo&quot; (1993)
* &quot;16 Canciones de Amor&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Como Si El Amor No Importara&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Brillantes&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Caras Del Amor&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Serie Platino&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Hágase La Luz&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Éxitos&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Oro Romántico: 20 Grandes Éxitos&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Borinquen Vive&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Regalo De Amor y Paz&quot; (1999)
* &quot;En Vivo Desde El Carnegie Hall&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Latin Stars Series&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Enamorado de la Paz&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Quiere Nacer&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Mi Tierra Me Llama&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Corazón Jíbaro&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Viva Nuestra Tradición&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Renace en Navidad&quot; (2011)
* &quot;20 Exitos Navideños&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Romanza&quot; (2013)
==Awards==
The following is a list of Rivera&#x27;s Grammy Awards nominations:
==See also==

*List of Puerto Ricans

==References==

==External links==
*Official web page </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5220773" start="0" end="12" title="Danny Rivera" label="Danny Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="85" end="93" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="150" end="161" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="215" end="233" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278063" start="1432" end="1437" title="Bomba (Puerto Rico)" label="bomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q15830404" start="1935" end="1941" title="bolero" label="bolero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136674" start="2090" end="2104" title="Old San Juan" label="Viejo San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="3276" end="3288" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109360" start="3289" end="3294" title="danza" label="danza"/>
<link wikidata="Q712383" start="3567" end="3580" title="Michel Camilo" label="Michel Camilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700225" start="3588" end="3610" title="Centro de Bellas Artes" label="Centro de Bellas Artes"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="3942" end="3952" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q361555" start="4060" end="4079" title="Gilberto Santa Rosa" label="Gilberto Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q590060" start="4269" end="4290" title="Guaynabo, Puerto Rico" label="Guaynabo, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="4303" end="4321" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027864" start="4365" end="4412" title="United States Navy in Vieques, Puerto Rico" label="US Navy from the Puerto Rican island of Vieques"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="4711" end="4715" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="4886" end="4892" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268493" start="4989" end="5017" title="Culture of Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rican cultural traces"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="5153" end="5171" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43189" start="5543" end="5549" title="Juanes" label="Juanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="5587" end="5597" title="Western hemisphere" label="hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q208239" start="5753" end="5759" title="Salsa music" label="singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334390" start="5763" end="5784" title="NG2 (duo)" label="Norberto Vélez&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="5785" end="5792" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984652" start="6153" end="6188" title="Danny Rivera / Alborada" label="&amp;quot;Danny Rivera y Alborada&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246664" start="6748" end="6772" title="Controversia (album)" label="&amp;quot;Controversia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090785" start="6930" end="6937" title="Ofrenda (Danny Rivera album)" label="Ofrenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="8352" end="8365" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595198" start="8394" end="8415" title="List of Puerto Ricans" label="List of Puerto Ricans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223245" wikidata="Q449689" url="?curid=223245" title="John W. Snow">
<text>John William Snow (born August 2, 1939) is an American economist, attorney, and businessman who is the former CEO of CSX Corporation and served as the 73rd United States secretary of the treasury under U.S. President George W. Bush. He replaced Secretary Paul H. O&#x27;Neill on February 3, 2003, and was succeeded by Henry Paulson on July 3, 2006. Snow submitted a letter of resignation on May 30, 2006, effective &quot;after an orderly transition period for my successor.&quot; Snow announced on June 29, 2006, that he had completed his last day on the job; Robert M. Kimmitt served as acting secretary until Paulson was sworn in. Snow has since worked as chairman of Cerberus Capital Management.

==Early life and education==
Snow was born in Toledo, Ohio, the son of Catherine (Howard), a school teacher, and William Dean Snow, a tax attorney. Snow attended high school at Gilmour Academy in Gates Mills, Ohio. He did his undergraduate studies at Kenyon College (where he was a member of the Delta Tau Delta fraternity) and the University of Toledo, from which he received a Bachelor of Arts in 1962. He received a Doctor of Philosophy in economics from the University of Virginia in 1965. He completed a Juris Doctor at the George Washington University Law School in 1967 and then worked at the Washington, D.C. law firm of Wheeler &amp; Wheeler from 1967 to 1972.

== Career ==
From 1965 to 1968, he was an assistant professor of economics at the University of Maryland, College Park.

=== Nixon and Ford administrations ===
In 1972 Snow left Wheeler &amp; Wheeler and took up a position as assistant professor of law at the George Washington University Law School. During the three years he spent with the GWU Law School, Snow also held positions in the U.S. government. From 1972 to 1973, he served as assistant general counsel for the Department of Transportation. From 1973 to 1974, he was deputy assistant secretary for policy, plans and international affairs. From 1974 to 1975, he served as assistant secretary for governmental affairs in the Department of Transportation.

In 1975 Snow left GWU Law School and took up the full-time position of deputy undersecretary in the Department of Transportation. In 1976 he left this post when he was named as administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

With the election of Jimmy Carter, Snow departed public life in 1977. During his transition period out of public life, in Spring 1977, he served as a visiting professor of economics at the University of Virginia and as a visiting fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. In addition, he was named a Distinguished Fellow at the Yale School of Management from 1978 until 1980.

=== Railway industry ===
Snow&#x27;s years with the Department of Transportation proved useful to him, as in 1977, he became the Vice President in charge of Governmental Affairs for Chessie System, a holding company that owned three American railroads: the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway, a.k.a. the C&amp;O (for which the Chessie System was named); the Western Maryland Railway; and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad.

In 1980 Chessie System merged with another railroad holding company, Seaboard Coast Line Industries, to form CSX Corporation, and Snow became CSX&#x27;s Senior Vice President-Corporate Services at their new headquarters in Richmond, Virginia. In 1984, he was promoted to Executive Vice President.

In 1985 CSX installed Snow as president and CEO of their B&amp;O Railroad and he oversaw its merger with their C&amp;O Railway in 1986. This created a new entity, CSX Transportation, headquartered in Jacksonville, Florida. Snow became the President and CEO of CSX Transportation. In 1988, Snow left CSX Transportation (the railroad) to become President and Chief Operating Officer of CSX Corporation (the holding company). As of April 1989 he was President and Chief Executive Officer of CSX. From 1991, he also served as CSX&#x27;s chairman. He continued to hold all three posts until he was named Secretary of the Treasury in 2003. During Snow&#x27;s tenure at CSX, deferred maintenance of the railroad&#x27;s physical plant became prevalent. This is a common practice used by railroads to improve the bottom line for investors while the tracks themselves fall into disrepair. Miles of mainline were subjected to slow orders as a result, increasing the need for more locomotives and rail cars, and thus costing the company more money. CSX was forced to lease hundreds of locomotives to make up the difference further adding to the increased costs. This practice ended with Snow&#x27;s successor, Michael Ward.

Part of CSX, CSX Lines was sold to the Carlyle Group in early 2003. After Snow left the company for the White House, CSX sold its international port operations to the UAE company, Dubai Transport.

=== Public service during time in the private sector ===
During Ronald Reagan&#x27;s campaign for the presidency in 1980, Snow was a member of Governor Reagan&#x27;s four-man advisory group on regulatory policy. Following his election victory, President-Elect Reagan named Snow as Vice Chairman of his Transportation Transition Team.

Snow would go on to serve on the White House Conference for a Drug-Free America; the Services Policy Advisory Committee of the U.S. Trade Representative; as Co-Chair of the National Commission on Financial Institution Reform, Recovery and Enforcement; the National Commission on Intermodal Transportation; the National Commission on Economic Growth and Tax Reform; as a Trustee of the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts; and as a Member of the Richmond City School Board.

He was the co-chairman of the Conference Board&#x27;s Blue-Ribbon Commission on Public Trust and Private Enterprise. He also served as co-chairman of the National Commission on Financial Institution Reform, Recovery and Enforcement in 1992 that made recommendations following the savings and loan crisis.

From 1994 through 1996 he was Chairman of the Business Roundtable, a business policy group of 250 chief executive officers of the nation&#x27;s largest companies, and played a major role in supporting passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.

=== Further affiliations ===

Former Secretary of Treasury, Mr. Snow, served as Chairman of the Business Roundtable, as well as being a longstanding member of the Business Roundtable.
As well as being on the Executive Committee of The Business Council; the Virginia Business Council; and the National Coal Council.

Snow has served as a director for NationsBank Corp.; Textron Inc.; USX Corporation; the U.S.-Japan Business Council; Verizon Communications; the Association of American Railroads.

Snow was also the founding Chairman of the Center for Energy and Economic Development (CEED), a coal and rail industry-funded advocacy organization. CEED was a predecessor organization to the American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity (ACCCE).

He has served on the Board of Trustees of Johns Hopkins University and the University of Virginia Darden School Foundation.

On October 19, 2006, Snow was named chairman of Cerberus Capital Management.

On August 15, 2007, Snow was appointed the inaugural Newman Visiting Fellow at the Miller Center of Public Affairs at the University of Virginia.

He joined the Board of Directors of Marathon Petroleum Corporation in 2011, when that company was spun off from Marathon Oil Corporation.

Since 1992, Snow has been an avid supporter of Israel as he stated on Charleston, South Carolina&#x27;s &quot;Good Morning Charleston&quot; television program.

=== Secretary of the Treasury ===
Snow was nominated as secretary of the Treasury by President George W. Bush on January 13, 2003, and unanimously confirmed by the U.S. Senate.

In July and August 2003, Snow and his colleagues, Labor Secretary Elaine Chao and Commerce Secretary Donald Evans, took a bus across the country on their &quot;Jobs and Growth Tour&quot;, aimed at promoting the benefits of the Bush Administration&#x27;s tax cuts.

In January 2005, The Washington Post quoted a senior administration official as saying that Mr. Snow could &quot;stay as long as he wants, provided it&#x27;s not very long.&quot;

In May 2004, it was revealed that Snow&#x27;s brokers had bought $10 million of debt issued by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac on the day and day after Snow was sworn into office as Treasury Secretary. Snow claimed this was done without his knowledge in February 2003. When Snow found out, he divested the debt holdings. A Treasury ethics lawyer has found that the holdings did not represent a conflict of interest but had the potential to do so in the future.

On May 26, 2006, Snow announced that he would resign effective July 3. He said the White House would make an official statement the following week. On May 30, it was formally announced that Snow would leave this position. On this same day, it was announced that President George W. Bush had nominated Henry Paulson, CEO of Goldman Sachs, to replace Snow.
Snow was forced to resign when it was uncovered that Snow failed to pay income taxes on the $24 million of loan forgiveness he received while CEO of CSX Corporation. Bush stated publicly that he wanted a &quot;new face&quot; to head the Treasury Dept., even though the stock market grew 40% during Snow&#x27;s tenure as secretary.

=== Current positions ===
Snow belongs to the IAG (International Consolidated Airlines Group S.A) board. IAG is the result of Iberia Líneas Aéreas de España S.A and British Airways Plc. merger.

In April 2016, he was one of eight former Treasury secretaries who called on the United Kingdom to remain a member of the European Union ahead of the June 2016 Referendum.

== Personal life ==
Snow lives in Richmond, Virginia. His was married to Carolyn (Kalk), b. Apr 11, 1940 - d. June 5, 2024. He has three children, Ian Snow, Bradley Snow and Christopher. He has twelve grandchildren between Ian, Bradley, and Chris.

Snow&#x27;s alma mater, Kenyon College, awarded him an honorary Doctor of Laws in 1993. He has also received the U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary&#x27;s Outstanding Achievement Award and has been named a Distinguished Fellow by the Yale School of Management.

==References==
==External links==
* White House Biography
* Treasury Department Biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q449689" start="0" end="17" title="John W. Snow" label="John William Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024454" start="117" end="132" title="CSX Corporation" label="CSX Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="156" end="195" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="United States secretary of the treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="202" end="216" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="217" end="231" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q456921" start="255" end="275" title="Paul H. O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Paul H. O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q311025" start="318" end="331" title="Henry Paulson" label="Henry Paulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q822657" start="560" end="577" title="Robert M. Kimmitt" label="Robert M. Kimmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q289362" start="670" end="697" title="Cerberus Capital Management" label="Cerberus Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="746" end="758" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562547" start="877" end="892" title="Gilmour Academy" label="Gilmour Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666663" start="896" end="913" title="Gates Mills, Ohio" label="Gates Mills, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797768" start="951" end="965" title="Kenyon College" label="Kenyon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254760" start="996" end="1011" title="Delta Tau Delta" label="Delta Tau Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302319" start="1032" end="1052" title="University of Toledo" label="University of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1079" end="1095" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1119" end="1139" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1143" end="1152" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="1162" end="1184" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="1209" end="1221" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546035" start="1229" end="1268" title="George Washington University Law School" label="George Washington University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1300" end="1316" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="1317" end="1325" title="law firm" label="law firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="1453" end="1489" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546035" start="1631" end="1670" title="George Washington University Law School" label="George Washington University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q564612" start="1820" end="1835" title="General Counsel" label="general counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="1844" end="1872" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="2285" end="2331" title="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" label="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="2355" end="2367" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="2523" end="2545" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="2578" end="2607" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047426" start="2665" end="2690" title="Yale School of Management" label="Yale School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070640" start="2896" end="2910" title="Chessie System" label="Chessie System"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="2914" end="2929" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070560" start="2971" end="2998" title="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway" label="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q504423" start="3065" end="3089" title="Western Maryland Railway" label="Western Maryland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q805757" start="3099" end="3126" title="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad" label="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440181" start="3198" end="3228" title="Seaboard Coast Line Industries" label="Seaboard Coast Line Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024454" start="3238" end="3253" title="CSX Corporation" label="CSX Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="3352" end="3370" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="3590" end="3608" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="3627" end="3648" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="4679" end="4692" title="Carlyle Group" label="Carlyle Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="4902" end="4915" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013975" start="5558" end="5586" title="Virginia Museum of Fine Arts" label="Virginia Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727322" start="5666" end="5686" title="the Conference Board" label="the Conference Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="5920" end="5943" title="savings and loan crisis" label="savings and loan crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001792" start="5992" end="6011" title="Business Roundtable" label="Business Roundtable"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="6162" end="6197" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001792" start="6296" end="6315" title="Business Roundtable" label="Business Roundtable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001792" start="6363" end="6382" title="Business Roundtable" label="Business Roundtable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337010" start="6550" end="6567" title="NationsBank Corp." label="NationsBank Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q2140315" start="6569" end="6581" title="Textron Inc." label="Textron Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="6583" end="6598" title="USX Corporation" label="USX Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="6633" end="6655" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q616953" start="6661" end="6694" title="Association of American Railroads" label="Association of American Railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743430" start="6889" end="6934" title="American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity" label="American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="6987" end="7011" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165769" start="7016" end="7067" title="Darden Graduate School of Business Administration" label="the University of Virginia Darden School Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q289362" start="7118" end="7145" title="Cerberus Capital Management" label="Cerberus Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="7231" end="7262" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="7270" end="7292" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="7481" end="7487" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7544" end="7567" title="Good Morning Charleston" label="Good Morning Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="7690" end="7704" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7759" end="7770" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q263322" start="7839" end="7850" title="Elaine Chao" label="Elaine Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240095" start="7874" end="7886" title="Donald Evans" label="Donald Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q621096" start="8313" end="8323" title="Fannie Mae" label="Fannie Mae"/>
<link wikidata="Q935969" start="8328" end="8339" title="Freddie Mac" label="Freddie Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q311025" start="8976" end="8989" title="Henry Paulson" label="Henry Paulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="8998" end="9011" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9638" end="9652" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="9679" end="9693" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="9707" end="9727" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="June 2016 Referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="9764" end="9772" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="9774" end="9782" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9877" end="9885" title="Ian Snow" label="Ian Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="10043" end="10057" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047426" start="10222" end="10247" title="Yale School of Management" label="Yale School of Management"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223246" wikidata="Q3526167" url="?curid=223246" title="John Snow (cricketer)">
<text>John Augustine Snow (born 13 October 1941) is a retired English international cricketer who played for Sussex from 1961 to 1977 and represented England in 49 Test matches. He was born in Peopleton, Worcestershire.

A right-arm fast bowler, Snow led the England attack from 1965 to 1976 and bridged the gap between Fred Trueman and Bob Willis; he played with both of them at either end of his career. His main achievements were bowling England to victory against West Indies in 1967–68, and against Australia in 1970–71. Snow batted right-handed as a useful tail-ender who scored eleven first-class half-centuries. He was considered a good outfielder with a strong throw. He was selected by &quot;Wisden Cricketers&#x27; Almanack&quot; (Wisden) as one of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year in its 1973 edition. In 1974, his Sussex benefit season realised £18,000 (£ in 2021 terms).

Snow was involved in several on-field incidents stemming from his aggressive, short-pitched bowling. He was considered difficult to handle, had definite ideas on how and when he should bowl and was disciplined by both Sussex and England, but he fitted the public image of a fiery fast bowler. His disdain for the cricketing authorities at Sussex and Lord&#x27;s was aptly summed up in the title of his 1976 autobiography, &quot;Cricket Rebel&quot;, as was his decision to join World Series Cricket in 1977.

==Early life==
John Snow was born on 13 October 1941 in Peopleton, Worcestershire. His father, the Reverend William Snow, was a Scottish vicar who had taken up his living in the village of Elmley Castle, part of the Worcester Diocese. The Reverend Snow was a keen cricketer who wanted his son to become a first-class player. From the age of four, coached by his father, Snow learned how to play in the vicarage garden. His mother and three sisters joined in, mainly as fielders. As remarked in &quot;Wisden Cricketers&#x27; Almanack&quot;, the scenario recalled the Grace family in the 1850s. In April 1948, when Snow was six, his father took him to New Road, Worcester where Don Bradman was playing for the Australian tourists against Worcestershire. The Australians won the match by innings and 17 runs.

In the 1950s, the family left Worcestershire and moved to Sussex after the Reverend Snow was appointed to a ministry in Bognor Regis. Snow went to school at Christ&#x27;s Hospital, near Horsham. He played cricket there and was coached by the former Warwickshire player Len Bates, who encouraged him to become a fast bowler. Snow played for the school&#x27;s first XI as an all-rounder in his last two years there (1957–1958). When he was sixteen, his future team mate Ken Suttle recommended him to Sussex County Cricket Club as a promising batsman. Suttle held out little hope for Snow as a bowler, though, telling Sussex that &quot;he sprays it around like a garden hose&quot;. Snow recalled that he decided to take Bates&#x27; advice because &quot;more boys wanted to bat than bowl&quot;.

He joined the Bognor Colts club, whose former players included Peter May and David Sheppard. Snow played for the Colts against a team from the Antilles and was bowled out by Frank Worrell. At Sussex, he began playing in matches for their Junior Marlets team and, in 1960, the Sussex Young Amateurs. Snow also played rugby throughout his teens, as a full-back, but he gave up the game in 1961 to concentrate on cricket and education.

After he left Christ&#x27;s Hospital, he was at the Chichester High School for Boys for a year. He gained a place at the Teachers&#x27; Training College in Culham, near Abingdon, Oxfordshire, taking a three-year course studying geography and physical education. As part of his training, he taught at Woodingdean County Primary School in what is now East Sussex to qualify as a teacher. During that time, he was only available for cricket in July and August, during the summer holidays.

==Cricket playing career==

===Bowling action===
In the early part of his career, Snow was classed as a seam bowler of fast-medium pace. He tended to bowl chest-on, which enabled him to bowl in-swing but restricted his speed. 

====Change of action at age 24====
During the winter of 1965-1966, at age 24 and having already played for England, Snow changed his action towards the classic sideways-on style used by Fred Trueman and other top bowlers. He did this while coaching and playing club cricket in South Africa, and Snow has said the process was helped by the less intense playing schedule in South Africa and the hard, fast and bouncy wickets. His work was successful and he became &quot;a bowler of genuine pace&quot;. He also became able to bowl from nearer the wicket and with more control. His new style also pleased the purists who referred to his &quot;graceful, yet deadly, action&quot;, and &quot;beautifully easy and controlled bowling method, slanting the ball into the batsman but also cutting it sharply off the pitch&quot;. He had the ability, like Charlie Griffith of the West Indies, to drop the ball slightly short and &quot;get it to lift painfully into the batsmen&#x27;s body&quot;.

===County career with Sussex===
====First-class debut====
On 19 August 1961, when Snow was aged 19, he made his first-class debut for Sussex against Glamorgan at Cardiff Arms Park in a County Championship match. Sussex, captained by Don Smith, won the toss and chose to bat first. Snow was ninth man in and scored 12 runs in a total of 270. He was brought on to bowl near the end of the Glamorgan innings and took the wickets of Brian Evans (caught behind by Jim Parks) and Don Shepherd (caught by Richard Langridge for a return of 2/12 in just 4.2 overs. Glamorgan were all out for 95. With a lead of 175, Sussex batted again and Smith declared during the final morning at 197/3, setting Glamorgan a target of 373 to win. Despite a century by Jim Pressdee, Glamorgan were all out for 248 and Sussex won by 124 runs. Snow bowled fifteen overs and took 3/67. His victims were Pressdee (caught by Robin Waters for 115), Don Ward (lbw) and Evans (bowled).

On 30 August, Snow made his home debut at the Manor Sports Ground in Worthing against Leicestershire, who won by 62 runs after Maurice Hallam scored 203* and 143*. Snow&#x27;s figures were 1/76 and 0/19; he took the wicket of Robin Gardner who was caught by Langridge for 18. Batting at number 11, Snow scored 15* and 35*.

Also in 1961, Snow made his debut for the Sussex Second XI and played in six Second XI Championship matches between 6 July and 29 August. He played in five more matches for the Second XI over the next three seasons; his last appearance was in May 1964.

====1962–1977====
Snow made one only appearance in 1962 but his availability increased in 1963 and he played in twelve matches for Sussex, taking 29 wickets at 24.55. He achieved five wickets in an innings for the first time when he took 6/52 (8/85 in the match) against Derbyshire on the Central Recreation Ground at Hastings, although Sussex lost the match by 13 runs. In 1964, now playing a full season, he became a first team regular and, having taken 77 wickets at 22.20, was awarded his county cap. Sussex won the first two Gillette Cup competitions in 1963 and 1964. Snow played in both finals, taking 3/13 on his limited overs debut against Worcestershire in 1963, and 2/28 against Warwickshire in 1964.

In the early 1960s, Sussex had four specialist seam bowlers but for spin bowling they could only use the limited skills of their batsmen. This team structure served its purpose in the Gillette Cup and on the &quot;green wicket&quot; at Hove, but not elsewhere. Snow believes the lack of at least one specialist spin bowler cost them the County Championship in 1963, when they finished fourth, let down by being unable to win enough away matches.

Snow played for Sussex until 1977 and, taking 883 wickets (21.30), was by far their most successful bowler of the 1960s and 1970s. He was awarded a benefit season in 1974, which realised £18,000 (worth £ in 2021). In 1975, he took his best first-class bowling figures of 8/87 (11/112 in the match) playing for Sussex against Middlesex at Lord&#x27;s; Sussex won by 8 wickets.

===Test career===
====New Zealand and South Africa, 1965====
Snow made his Test debut for England against New Zealand at Lord&#x27;s in the second Test of the 1965 series. New Zealand had already slumped to 28–4 when Snow was brought on, and he took two wickets before lunch: New Zealand captain John Reid was caught behind by Jim Parks and wicket-keeper Artie Dick was clean bowled. Snow strained a side muscle before the third Test, but returned to play in the second Test against South Africa at Trent Bridge. Here, brothers Graeme (126) and Peter Pollock (10/87) won the match for South Africa. Snow (1/63 &amp; 3/83) was dropped for the last Test and was not included in the squad for the 1965–1966 tour of Australia.

====1966–1967====
In 1966, Gary Sobers&#x27; powerful West Indies team toured England and Snow was recalled after taking 7/29 and 4/18 against them at Hove, Sussex winning by 9 wickets. He took 4/84 and 0/117 in the third Test at Trent Bridge and 3/143 in the fourth at Headingley but the West Indies won them both to go 3–0 up in the series and Yorkshire&#x27;s Brian Close was made captain for the final Test at The Oval. Snow was initially dropped for the match, but was recalled due to an injury sustained by John Price, then considered the fastest bowler in England.

England collapsed to 166/7, before Tom Graveney (165) and John Murray (112) consolidated, but it still left England short of a commanding score until Snow hit eight boundaries in his 59 not out and added 128 for the tenth wicket with fellow bowler Ken Higgs, who made 63. This was two runs short of the then Test record for the tenth wicket. Snow&#x27;s 59 not out was the first Test 50 by an England number 11 batsman and remained a record until Jimmy Anderson made 81 against India in 2014. Snow removed the West Indian openers Conrad Hunte and Easton McMorris for 12 runs in the second innings before Close caught Sobers off him for a first ball duck and England went on to win by an innings and 34 runs.

This match established Snow as an England regular and, until 1973, he was the team&#x27;s premier fast bowler. The Test was the first in a run of forty with only one defeat, until 1971, of which Snow played in 32. There was no overseas tour in 1966–67 and, in the summer of 1967, Snow took 13 wickets (30.00) against India and Pakistan, but missed the last two Tests because of a back injury.

====West Indies, 1967–68====
Snow was selected for the MCC tour of the West Indies in 1967–68. Although he was not picked for the first Test, which was drawn, he had the advantage of being fully acclimatised when the second Test in Jamaica began. Snow took 7/49 in Jamaica, his victims including Gary Sobers, who was out lbw for another first ball duck, and Basil Butcher, as West Indies were dismissed for 143. Rioting interrupted play when the crowd objected to Butcher&#x27;s dismissal, even though he walked. Riot police and tear gas were used to restore order.

In the Barbados Test, Sobers decided to bat on a flat wicket, but Snow with 5/80 restricted them to 349. England made 449 and the home team batted out the game with 284/6, Snow claiming 3/39. England won the series at Trinidad after a controversially sporting declaration by Sobers gave England two and three quarter hours to make 215 for victory, which they did for the loss of three wickets with three minutes to spare. Snow finished the series with 4/84 and 6/60 in Guyana, his 10/144 being his best match figures in Test cricket.

Snow took 27 wickets @ 18.66 in four Tests, the most wickets taken by an England bowler in a series in the West Indies. The record was equalled by Angus Fraser in 1997–98 when he took 27 wickets @ 18.22 in six Tests.

====Australia, 1968====
In 1968, the Australians toured England and they retained The Ashes in a rain-impacted 1–1 series draw. They beat England by 159 runs in the first Test at Old Trafford, Snow taking 4/94 on his Ashes debut, but England had only one spinner on a wicket that increasingly turned. In the next Test at Lord&#x27;s, Australia were out for 78 (Snow 1/14) and followed on, but the match was drawn because of rain. It is also notable as the first of 27 consecutive Tests through 1968 to 1971 that England would play without losing, of which Snow played in 22. The final Test at The Oval was won by Derek Underwood with three minutes to spare after the ground was flooded. Snow recalled that he and the other eight fielders were almost playing &quot;Ring a Ring o&#x27; Roses&quot; by clustering around the Australian batsman. Snow took 3/67 in the first innings and ended the series with 17 wickets (29.08), only Underwood with 20 wickets (15.10) taking more.

====Ceylon and Pakistan, 1968–69====
Snow&#x27;s second tour was to Ceylon and then to East and West Pakistan. East Pakistan was in a state of confusion, with armed students taking control of Dacca. Snow says the MCC team were assured by the British High Commission that they would be safe, although they themselves were making plans for an emergency evacuation. Eventually, the tour was abandoned when rioting broke out on the third day of the Test in Lahore and the stadium was set on fire.

====West Indies, 1969====
The England selectors made the surprise choice of Ray Illingworth to replace the injured Colin Cowdrey as England captain. Illingworth was another tough Yorkshireman like Close, but he had recently moved to Leicestershire as captain in 1969 following a contract dispute. He was seen as a caretaker captain, but he made the job his own and kept it after Cowdrey had recovered. Snow says he respected and appreciated Illingworth&#x27;s captaincy because &quot;he harboured and nurtured his bowlers like no other captain I have served&quot;.

Illingworth started well as West Indies crashed to 147 all out (Snow taking 4/54) at Old Trafford. England won by an innings. At Lord&#x27;s, West Indies chose to bat and reached 324/5 before Snow took five wickets to dismiss them for 380. Illingworth saved the English innings with a century to cement his place as captain and the Test ended in a thrilling draw when England needed just 37 runs with three wickets in hand. During this match, Snow wrote his poem &quot;Lord&#x27;s Test&quot;.

In the third Test at Headingley, there was a problem after Illingworth asked Snow to &quot;give me everything you&#x27;ve got&quot; when the West Indians were 240/7 and needing 303 to win. Snow found the pitch lifeless and changed his action to medium-paced seamers, but he failed to take a wicket and Illingworth was not best pleased. England still won the Test by 30 runs and the series 2–0. Snow was the chief wicket-taker with 15 @ 27.06. It was the last time England would defeat West Indies until the 2000 series.

====New Zealand, 1969====
Snow was left out of the England team for the first Test against New Zealand at Lord&#x27;s. He was replaced by Alan Ward. Snow was annoyed because it meant a television programme about his poetry, due to be filmed at Lord&#x27;s, had to be cancelled. He said in his autobiography that Alec Bedser, the chairman of selectors, told him he had been dropped because they wanted see how Ward would perform in a Test match. Later, however, he received a phone call from Illingworth during the Essex v Sussex match. Illingworth told Snow he had been dropped for disobeying orders in the previous Test at Headingley. Snow responded with match-winning performances against Essex (6/20) and Hampshire (5/29 &amp; 5/51) to give Sussex their first two wins of the season. He says he sorted out his differences with Illingworth and: &quot;I was to know exactly where I stood with him as did every other player who came under his captaincy&quot;. He was recalled for the second and third Tests against New Zealand.

====Rest of the World, 1970====
South Africa had been due to tour in 1970, but this was cancelled in the aftermath of the Basil d&#x27;Oliveira Affair, amid concerns about anti-apartheid demonstrations. Rather than send an unprepared team to Australia, MCC created a Rest of the World XI of the overseas players in the County Championship. Led by Gary Sobers, their matches were given the status of &quot;unofficial Tests&quot;, but the runs scored and wickets taken were added to official Test statistics until it was decided by the International Cricket Council (ICC) that they should not count. England were beaten by what was arguably the strongest team ever assembled and did well to win one of the &quot;Tests&quot; and strongly contest two others. Snow took 19 wickets (35.84) with 4/120 at Edgbaston, 4/82 at Headingley and 4/81 at The Oval.

====Australia, 1970–71====

The highlight of Snow&#x27;s Test career was the tour of Australia in 1970–71. He was easily the outstanding bowler in the series, taking 31 wickets (22.83) to help England regain the Ashes. He was repeatedly warned over his short-pitched bowling, but the Australians had no real answer to his pace and fire.

In the first Test at Brisbane, Bill Lawry won the toss and decided to bat on a good wicket, but became Snow&#x27;s 100th Test victim, caught by Alan Knott for 4. Australia reached 418–3, but Snow took four late wickets to dismiss them for 433, ending with 6/114. He took 4/143 in the second Test at Perth, having Australia 17/3 before they rebuilt their innings. Both these Tests were draws, and the third was abandoned. The first-ever One Day International (ODI) was arranged instead, Snow making his ODI debut.

The fourth Test, at Sydney, proved decisive. In the second innings, Snow achieved his best Test bowling return of 7/40. He soon dismissed Ian Chappell, Ian Redpath and Greg Chappell. Australia were overnight at 66/4. Next morning, Snow had Keith Stackpole caught, followed by Rod Marsh for a duck. Graham McKenzie retired hurt after a Snow bouncer hit him in the face. Snow then bowled John Gleeson and Alan Connolly for ducks and Australia were all out for 116, Lawry carrying his bat. It was an outstanding piece of fast bowling from Snow, aggressive, hostile and decisive. England won by 299 runs, their biggest victory in Australia since 1936–37, to lead the series. This margin was held until the seventh and last Test, also held at Sydney.

=====Snow-Jenner incident=====
In the final Test, Terry Jenner retired hurt after he ducked into a short delivery from Snow in the first innings. Umpire Lou Rowan warned the fast bowler for intimidatory bowling yet again, but Snow and Illingworth objected strongly. Snow recalled Illingworth saying: &quot;That&#x27;s the only bouncer he&#x27;s bowled&quot; and that he would complain to the Australian Cricket Board (ACB). Rowan later claimed Illingworth and Snow swore at him, which they denied. The bowler was loudly booed and &quot;when he returned to his fielding position at long-leg Snow was pelted with bottles, cans and partially-eaten pies&quot;.

Some of the crowd, in the Paddington Hill area of the ground, wanted to shake Snow&#x27;s hand but then he was grabbed by a drunk who was forced to let go by other spectators. In 1998, 88-year old Trevor Guy told &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; that he was the man who had grabbed Snow in order to tell him what he thought about him hitting Jenner. Guy and Snow, in Australia for the 1998–99 Ashes series agreed there were no hard feelings.

To avoid injury to his team, Illingworth took his men back to the dressing room without the permission of the umpires, an unprecedented move in Test cricket. The England manager Clark tried to push Illingworth back onto the field and Alan Barnes of the ACB demanded that they return immediately or they would forfeit the match and the Ashes. A furious Illingworth said he would not return until the playing area had been cleared and the crowd had calmed down.

Jenner returned to bat at 235–8 and made a brave 30, last man out on 264 to give Australia a lead of 80 runs. England scored 302 in their second innings and set Australia 223 to win. Snow took a wicket in his first over, but smashed his finger on the wooden boundary fence trying to catch a six off Stackpole. He was taken to hospital and needed surgery. England&#x27;s spinners did the job, dismissing Australia for 160 to win by 62 runs and regain the Ashes while Snow was on the operating table. Snow&#x27;s 31 wickets (22.83) was the most by an England bowler in Australia since Harold Larwood&#x27;s 33 wickets (19.51) in 1932–33.

=====Trouble with management=====
Snow wrote that the series in Australia &quot;emphasised the gulf between players and administrators&quot; and &quot;I was sick of the biased attitude and incompetence which was apparent in cricket administration&quot;. The MCC tour manager was David Clark, described by Illingworth as &quot;an amiable, but somewhat ineffectual man&quot;, and there were soon divisions between him and the players.

After Snow had bowled more than 50 eight-ball overs in the first Test he was rested for the state match against Western Australia, but Clark insisted that he practice in the nets with the others. Snow bowled a couple of desultory overs and Clark berated him for five minutes after which Snow told him &quot;that as far as my good conduct money was concerned he could swallow it&quot; and went walkabout until the next day. Illingworth smoothed things over but, after the second Test, Clark criticised both captains for cautious play, Snow for his short-pitched bowling and indicated that he would prefer to see Australia win 3–1 than see four more draws. The team only discovered this when they read the newspapers at the airport.

As a result, Illingworth effectively took over the running of the tour with the support of the players and Clark&#x27;s influence declined. When the team returned to England, Illingworth said &quot;all hell would break loose&quot; if any player was denied his good conduct bonus. That did not happen but Snow and Geoff Boycott had to report to Lord&#x27;s for a dressing down by MCC Secretary Billy Griffith about some of their behaviour.

=====Problems with umpires=====
After six Tests, no Australian batsman had been given out lbw in the series, whereas five English batsmen had. Snow said this formed the clearest evidence of umpiring bias in the minds of the England players. In the fifth Test, Max O&#x27;Connell made the worst decision in the series when he called &quot;over&quot; and turned to walk to square leg after Snow bowled the last ball of the first over. As a result, he missed Alan Knott catching Stackpole and had to give him not out. This was O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s first over in Test cricket and Snow &quot;could quite understand his actions which illustrate the pressure umpires are also under in a Test&quot;, and they were able to joke about it afterwards.

Snow had problems with Lou Rowan, who retired at the end of the series. In 1972, Rowan wrote &quot;The Umpire&#x27;s Story&quot; which was highly critical of the England team, particularly of Illingworth and Snow. In return, Snow devoted a whole chapter to &quot;Bitter Rows with Umpire Rowan&quot; in his autobiography &quot;Cricket Rebel&quot;. Rowan in particular warned Snow for his short-pitched bowling and Snow thought this was partisanship as Alan Thomson was not called to book when he bowled bouncers at Snow and six in one eight-ball over against Ray Illingworth. Snow was twice warned by Rowan for intimidatory bowling in the second Test at Perth, but refused to accept that rib-high balls were intimidatory and continued to bowl them. As a result, Snow was given an official warning, which meant that he would not be allowed to bowl if he was warned again. Illingworth told him that this was to be his last over in any case and the fast bowler sent his last ball flying over the head of Doug Walters, turned to Rowan and said: &quot;Now that&#x27;s a bouncer for you&quot;.

====India, 1971====
Snow was exhausted after the long tour of Australia and, apart from his broken finger, he was suffering from a strained back and shoulder. He was dropped from the Sussex team because his &quot;bowling performances, and more especially his fielding have been so lacking in effort that the selection committee had no alternative&quot;. However, instead of playing for the Sussex Second XI, Snow was declared unfit by his doctor and missed the first half of the season and the whole Test series against Pakistan. He recovered to take 4/45 &amp; 7/73 against Essex

Snow was then picked for the first Test against India at Lord&#x27;s. He rescued the England first innings when he came in at 183/7 and made 73 to hoist the total up to 304. This was Snow&#x27;s highest Test and equal highest first-class score, but Snow was disappointed not to realise his boyhood dream of a century at Lord&#x27;s when he was caught off a Chandrasekhar googly.

=====Snow-Gavaskar incident=====
India needed 183 to win in the fourth innings. Snow had the opener Ashok Mankad caught by Knott for 8 and India were 21–2 when Sunil Gavaskar was called for a quick single after hitting the ball to mid-wicket. Snow went for the ball and knocked him over, &quot;I could imagine the horror on the faces of everybody watching the game from the committee room at Lord&#x27;s&quot;. They were both uninjured, got up and continued with the game after Snow tossed Gavaskar&#x27;s bat back to him. A similar incident had happened in Georgetown in 1967–68 with Clive Lloyd, but the 5&#x27;4&quot; Indian received far more sympathy than the 6&#x27;4&quot; West Indian who had nearly trampled Snow into the ground. From afar, the incident had looked much worse and was replayed repeatedly on slow-motion television followed by a media furore and the press demanding disciplinary action. The replay can be seen in the Indian episode of the BBC documentary &quot;Empire of Cricket&quot;. Many were more angry about Snow throwing the bat back than about the collision.

At lunch when Snow returned to the dressing room, he apologised to Alec Bedser, and promised he would do likewise to Gavaskar. Snow was about to do that when an enraged Billy Griffith charged in and shouted: &quot;That&#x27;s the most disgusting thing I&#x27;ve ever seen on the field&quot;. Illingworth told Griffith to get out and Snow apologised to Gavaskar on the field after lunch. When he later saw the replay of the incident, Snow said: &quot;Oh well, the scene&#x27;s been far too quiet without me anyway&quot;. He accepted that he was bound to be dropped for the second Test. The first Test ended in a draw after it was rained off. India needed 38 runs to win, but with only two wickets in hand. Rain also caused the second Test to be drawn.

Snow returned for the third Test at The Oval and tore off Gavaskar&#x27;s chain and medallion with a bouncer that zipped under his chin and made him fall over. He bowled Gavaskar for 6 in the first innings and had him lbw for a duck in the second, but this was not enough to prevent India winning the Test by four wickets and the series with it. This was only the second Test defeat Snow had conceded since he had become an England regular in 1966 and it ended England&#x27;s run of 27 Tests without loss.

====Australia, 1972====
There was no tour in 1971–72 and in 1972 Ian Chappell&#x27;s young team met the England veterans of 1970–71. England won the limited overs Prudential Trophy 2–1, Snow taking 3/35 at Lord&#x27;s. Australia lost the first Test at Old Trafford by 89 runs thanks to Snow, who took 4/41 &amp; 4/87. They fought back at Lord&#x27;s where Bob Massie&#x27;s swing bowling took 16/137. Snow took 5/57 to peg back the Australians to a 36-run lead in the first innings, but couldn&#x27;t stop Australia&#x27;s first win in the Ashes for 13 Tests. At Trent Bridge in the drawn third Test, Snow dismissed Ian and Greg Chappell, Doug Walters, Ross Edwards and Massie with 5/92 in the first innings and Stackpole, Greg Chappell and Walters with 3/94 in the second as England held out for a draw.

Snow took only two wickets at Headingley as &quot;Deadly&quot; Derek Underwood spun England to an Ashes retaining victory with 10/82, but he was the second highest scorer in the England first innings, adding 104 with Illingworth (57) before he was stumped for 48 and given a standing ovation by the Yorkshire crowd. With the Ashes safe, England lost the fifth Test at The Oval by 5 wickets, Snow taking only one wicket after a Dennis Lillee bouncer bruised his wrist in the first innings, leading to more accusations that he did not try in the Australian fourth innings run chase. Even so, he was easily the leading England wicket-taker with 24 (23.12).

====New Zealand, 1973====
Along with Illingworth, Geoff Boycott and John Edrich, Snow declined to tour India in 1972–73, wanting to rest his back for the summer and concerned about the dysentery he had caught in Pakistan in 1968–69. Tony Lewis led the team, but lost 2–1 and Illingworth was re-appointed captain against New Zealand in 1973. In the first Test at Trent Bridge Snow took 3/23 as New Zealand were shot out for 97 in the first innings and lost by 38 runs, but went for 2/104 in the second innings and 3/109 at Lord&#x27;s before bouncing back with 2/52 and 3/34 in the innings victory at Headingley. Geoff Arnold took the most wickets with 16 (21.93) and Snow&#x27;s 13 wickets (24.61) suffered in comparison, but he returned 4/32 in England&#x27;s 5 wicket win in the One Day International at Swansea.

====West Indies, 1973====
Kanhai returned with the West Indies for the second half of the summer and more than made up the previous two series defeats with a 2–0 victory. They won the first Test at The Oval by 158 runs, Snow, bowled for 0 &amp; 1 by Keith Boyce and hit for 0/71 in the first innings, was described as lethargic by his critics. The wickets of Kanhai, Lloyd and Sobers in the second innings (3/62) could not save him and he was dropped. He was aged only 31, but it appeared to be the end of his Test career. England were due to tour the Caribbean in 1973–74, but Illingworth was sacked within minutes of losing the disastrous third Test at Lord&#x27;s by an innings and 226 runs and Mike Denness was appointed instead.

====Missed England tours====
Denness asked for Snow to go to the West Indies in 1973–74, remembering his record 27 wickets (18.66) in 1967–68, but Alec Bedser as chairman of selectors overruled him because Snow &quot;was not a good team man&quot;. Denness drew the series 1–1, beat India 3–0 and drew 0–0 with Pakistan in 1974. He expressly asked for Snow for the upcoming tour of Australia, but when &quot;Alec accepted the managership in Australia, Snow&#x27;s chances flew out the window&quot;. Denness lost heavily to the hostile pace of Lillee and Jeff Thomson and despite numerous injuries to batsmen and bowlers alike, Snow was not sent as a replacement.

====D. H. Robins&#x27; XI in South Africa, 1973–74====
As he could not tour the West Indies, Snow toured South Africa with D. H. Robins&#x27; XI. The team included John Edrich and John Gleeson under the leadership of Brian Close, who was a strong advocate of maintaining cricketing ties. Despite playing two &quot;Tests&quot; against a South African Invitation XI, the tour did not produce the strong reaction encountered by the &quot;Rebel&quot; tours of the 1980s. Snow took 18 wickets (22.83) including 4/91 in the Durban &quot;Test&quot;. They beat Natal and Eastern Province and drew the other games.

====World Cup, 1975====
The inaugural World Cup was held in England in 1975 and Snow was recalled after England&#x27;s disastrous tour of Australia. He took 0/24 off 12 overs against India at Lord&#x27;s in England&#x27;s record 202-run victory, 4/11 against East Africa at Edgbaston, his best bowling in a One Day International, and 2/32 off 12 overs against Australia as England lost the semi-final at Headingley. His average of 10.83 (6 wickets taken) was the third best in the series and the best for England.

====Australia, 1975====
South Africa had been due to tour in 1975, but that series had been cancelled years before and the Australians were asked to stay for a four-match series after the World Cup. Snow was recalled after almost two years for the first Test at Edgbaston and was the best England bowler with 3/86, but Australia won by an innings and it cost Denness the captaincy. He was replaced by Tony Greig, a combative 6&#x27;7&quot; South African-born all-rounder who had been Snow&#x27;s Sussex team-mate since 1967 and county captain from 1972. He led England to three successive draws, starting in the second Test at Lord&#x27;s. Snow finished the series with 11 wickets (32.27), the most by an England player.

====West Indies, 1976====
There was no England tour in 1975–76 and Snow toured Rhodesia with the International Cavaliers, taking 4–36 and hitting 36 not out in the second match at Salisbury. The West Indies toured England in 1976, and their captain Clive Lloyd took offence at Greig&#x27;s claim that he would make them &quot;grovel&quot;. The West Indies won the series 3–0 in Lloyd&#x27;s first great series victory. Viv Richards scored an outstanding 829 runs (118.32) including three centuries, but Snow still managed a haul of 15 wickets (28.20). Only Underwood took more wickets for England – 17 wickets (37.11) – and only Willis averaged less – 7 wickets (26.00).

Snow was punished in the first innings at Trent Bridge (1/123), but fought back in the second (4/53) with the wickets of Roy Fredericks, Richards, Lloyd and Bernard Julien. With England seeking a draw, Snow slowed down the game by stuffing bread-crumbs in his pocket during lunch and scattering them over the wicket. Umpire Dickie Bird had to use his cap to scare away the pigeons that kept flying down to eat them. Veterans Edrich and Close grimly held out for a draw against fast, short-pitched bowling.

Snow struck again at Lord&#x27;s with 4/68 as he and Underwood (5/39) bowled the tourists out for 182 in their first innings. The match ended in a draw with West Indies on 241/6, needing 332 to win. Snow was dropped for the third Test at Old Trafford, which England lost by 425 runs, but was recalled for his final Test at Headingley. Here he reduced the West Indians from 413/5 to 450 all out with 4/77, including his 200th Test wicket, Andy Roberts. Snow took 2/82 in the second innings but England lost by 55 runs.

====World series cricket====
Snow still had a formidable reputation in Australia and was recruited by Tony Greig for World Series Cricket, which was about to be launched by Kerry Packer. The secret came out at a party held by Greig during the rain affected Sussex v Australians match in 1977 and there was widespread condemnation by the press and cricketing authorities. Before the start of the 1978 season, Snow and Greig had their Sussex contracts cancelled. They successfully went to court with Mike Procter when the Test and County Cricket Board (TCCB) tried to ban them from first-class cricket.

Snow did not play in any of the &quot;Supertests&quot;, but was a regular for the World XI and WSC Cavaliers in the one-day games, hitting 42 and taking 3/30 to help win the final against Australia at Canberra in 1977–78.

===Retirement===
After World Series, at the age of 38, Snow returned to English cricket in 1980 and played in one Gillette Cup and six Sunday League matches for Warwickshire, taking a total of eight wickets (29.62) and scoring 57 runs (57.00). He then retired from cricket.

===Bowling partners===
Snow rarely had the same partner for more than a few matches. Peter Lever was a very effective new-ball partner in the 1970–71 Ashes series. Besides Lever, he teamed up with David Brown, Jeff Jones, Alan Ward, Chris Old, Ken Shuttleworth, Bob Willis, Geoff Arnold and others. His career overlapped with that of Willis through 1971 to 1976, but injuries and selection problems frequently prevented them from playing together.

===Overbowling concerns===
In 1967, Snow jarred his back while bowling against India in the Edgbaston Test. X-rays found that he had a sacroiliac joint abnormality which had become inflamed and that the only cure was traction and complete rest. 

As a result, he became insistent that he must not be &quot;overbowled&quot;, as he put it in his autobiography. He contended that he and his contemporaries Andy Roberts and Dennis Lillee all had their effectiveness reduced because of that. Snow himself usually bowled only fast-medium in run-of-the-mill county and tour games, saving his fastest pace for Test Matches and whenever the mood took him on the quick wickets at Hove. Snow said in a 2020 interview with &quot;The Hindu&quot; that mental preparation was important before a big match to stop the pressure taking its toll.

===Other cricket views===
Late in 1976, Snow caused controversy by wearing illegal advertising on his cricket clothing, and more when he published his autobiography &quot;Cricket Rebel&quot;, which was highly critical of the administration by Sussex and MCC. Snow called for better playing conditions, improved pay, four-day county matches and international umpires.

===Helping other bowlers===
Snow was generous in helping other bowlers. He coached Imran Khan, who was his team mate at Sussex, and remodelled his action so that he could bowl fast (a similar change to the one Snow had himself undergone). He also helped Dennis Lillee to bowl leg cutters.

==After cricket retirement==
Snow set up a successful travel agency with the money he made from World Series. He was briefly a director of the Sussex cricket club.

==Poetry==
Snow published two volumes of poetry: &quot;Contrasts&quot;, published in 1971 by Fuller d&#x27;Arch Smith Limited; and &quot;Moments and Thoughts&quot; published in 1973 by Kaye and Ward Limited. Snow said of one poem, &quot;Lord&#x27;s Test&quot;, that he had penned in verse his &quot;feelings and impressions about what it is like to play at the headquarters of world cricket&quot;. This was during the 1969 Lord&#x27;s Test against West Indies, when Snow took 5/114 in the first innings. A television company heard of the poem and arranged to film him at Lord&#x27;s during the first Test against New Zealand later that summer. They would then make a fifteen-minute programme about his poem with John Betjeman. However, this fell through after Snow was dropped from the England team.

==Personality==

Snow has agreed that he is an inward looking person but has said: &quot;I do not withdraw from other players off the field or regard myself as a loner&quot;. Asked if he was &#x27;a man of moods&#x27;, Snow said: &quot;Yes, I suppose to a certain extent I am... I get fed up and down in the mouth some days, but if I give the impression of being in a bad temper it is more often than not with myself&quot;.

Snow was active in reading, music, painting, and poetry. In July 1971, at the England team&#x27;s Harrogate hotel during the fourth Test at Headingley, Basil d&#x27;Oliveira in an animated dinner table conversation said to Snow: &quot;The ultimate thing in life is to play for England&quot;. Snow replied quietly: &quot;The ultimate thing in life is death&quot;.

==Personal life==
Snow married Jenny Matthews in 1976. He said in his autobiography that they had known each other for many years, but they had delayed marriage because &quot;the wife of a regular Test cricketer has a pretty rough time&quot; when her husband is away touring and playing.

==In popular culture==
John Snow is mentioned in a verse of the Roy Harper song &quot;When an Old Cricketer Leaves the Crease&quot; from the album &quot;HQ&quot; (1975) though the album was renamed after the song for its release in the United States. The song uses the sport of cricket as a metaphor for death and mentions Snow alongside another England cricketer from the time, Geoff Boycott, both by first name only in the line: &quot;And it could be Geoff and it could be John&quot;. The song is dedicated to them both.

==References==
==Bibliography==
===Biographical===

===Annual reviews===
* 

===Miscellaneous===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links ==
* David Steele, &quot;England Cricket Six of the Best: The Seventies&quot; (DVD), A Sharpe Focus Production for Green Umbrella, 2009. This includes footage of Snow&#x27;s 7/40 in the fourth Test at Sydney in 1970–71, his 48 in the fourth Test at Headingley in 1972 and his 3/22 in the second Test at Headingley in 1975.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3526167" start="0" end="19" title="John Snow (cricketer)" label="John Augustine Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="78" end="85" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505744" start="103" end="109" title="Sussex County Cricket Club" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321565" start="144" end="151" title="England cricket team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="158" end="170" title="Test cricket" label="Test matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795972" start="187" end="196" title="Peopleton" label="Peopleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="198" end="212" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45085" start="227" end="238" title="fast bowling" label="fast bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535440" start="314" end="326" title="Fred Trueman" label="Fred Trueman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907874" start="331" end="341" title="Bob Willis" label="Bob Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="462" end="473" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="498" end="507" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378475" start="511" end="518" title="English cricket team in Australia in 1970–71" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q810903" start="525" end="531" title="batting (cricket)" label="batted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869924" start="557" end="567" title="tail-ender" label="tail-ender"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="586" end="597" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026317" start="598" end="612" title="century (cricket)" label="half-centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q58390" start="639" end="649" title="fielding (cricket)" label="outfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304651" start="696" end="728" title="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569447" start="763" end="792" title="Wisden Cricketer of the Year" label="Wisden Cricketers of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="1236" end="1247" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349761" start="1363" end="1383" title="World Series Cricket" label="World Series Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795972" start="1450" end="1459" title="Peopleton" label="Peopleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="1461" end="1475" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="1531" end="1536" title="vicar" label="vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900066" start="1583" end="1596" title="Elmley Castle" label="Elmley Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796712" start="1610" end="1627" title="Anglican Diocese of Worcester" label="Worcester Diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="1658" end="1665" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="1796" end="1804" title="vicarage" label="vicarage"/>
<link wikidata="Q58390" start="1863" end="1871" title="fielding (cricket)" label="fielders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304651" start="1894" end="1926" title="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591429" start="1960" end="1972" title="Grace family" label="Grace family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339007" start="2044" end="2063" title="New Road, Worcester" label="New Road, Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q313591" start="2070" end="2081" title="Don Bradman" label="Don Bradman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535454" start="2102" end="2121" title="Australian cricket team in England in 1948" label="Australian tourists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725667" start="2130" end="2144" title="Worcestershire County Cricket Club" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="2259" end="2265" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q890621" start="2321" end="2333" title="Bognor Regis" label="Bognor Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q677579" start="2358" end="2380" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q177544" start="2387" end="2394" title="Horsham" label="Horsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725705" start="2450" end="2462" title="Warwickshire County Cricket Club" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525112" start="2470" end="2479" title="Leonard Bates" label="Len Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q45085" start="2512" end="2523" title="fast bowling" label="fast bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305269" start="2574" end="2585" title="all-rounder" label="all-rounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388580" start="2669" end="2679" title="Ken Suttle" label="Ken Suttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505744" start="2699" end="2725" title="Sussex County Cricket Club" label="Sussex County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533598" start="3056" end="3065" title="Peter May (cricketer)" label="Peter May"/>
<link wikidata="Q577347" start="3070" end="3084" title="David Sheppard" label="David Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q166131" start="3136" end="3144" title="Antilles" label="Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951082" start="3153" end="3159" title="bowled" label="bowled"/>
<link wikidata="Q954650" start="3167" end="3180" title="Frank Worrell" label="Frank Worrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="3309" end="3314" title="Rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3342" end="3351" title="Rugby union positions#Full-back" label="full-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096002" start="3479" end="3510" title="Chichester High School for Boys" label="Chichester High School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012411" start="3583" end="3589" title="Culham" label="Culham"/>
<link wikidata="Q321381" start="3596" end="3617" title="Abingdon, Oxfordshire" label="Abingdon, Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="3655" end="3664" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="3669" end="3687" title="physical education" label="physical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032784" start="3727" end="3738" title="Woodingdean" label="Woodingdean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="3776" end="3787" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q37226" start="3804" end="3811" title="teacher" label="teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440678" start="4018" end="4029" title="seam bowling" label="seam bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q45085" start="4033" end="4049" title="fast bowling" label="fast-medium pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506615" start="4105" end="4113" title="Swing bowling" label="in-swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535440" start="4328" end="4340" title="Fred Trueman" label="Fred Trueman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084952" start="4984" end="5000" title="Charlie Griffith" label="Charlie Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="5237" end="5254" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class debut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107254" start="5274" end="5283" title="Glamorgan County Cricket Club" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q432321" start="5287" end="5304" title="Cardiff Arms Park" label="Cardiff Arms Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137275" start="5310" end="5329" title="County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989225" start="5345" end="5354" title="captain (cricket)" label="captained"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089792" start="5358" end="5367" title="Donald Smith (cricketer, born 1923)" label="Don Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827859" start="5377" end="5381" title="toss (cricket)" label="toss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360926" start="5442" end="5446" title="run (cricket)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859863" start="5522" end="5529" title="innings" label="innings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196454" start="5543" end="5549" title="wicket" label="wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963686" start="5554" end="5565" title="Brian Evans (Glamorgan cricketer)" label="Brian Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q705379" start="5567" end="5573" title="caught" label="caught"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197377" start="5584" end="5593" title="Jim Parks (cricketer, born 1931)" label="Jim Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293514" start="5599" end="5611" title="Don Shepherd" label="Don Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327252" start="5623" end="5640" title="Richard Langridge" label="Richard Langridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210093" start="5674" end="5679" title="over (cricket)" label="overs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375862" start="5696" end="5703" title="All out (cricket)" label="all out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086633" start="5762" end="5770" title="declaration (cricket)" label="declared"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026317" start="5858" end="5865" title="century (cricket)" label="century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197601" start="5869" end="5881" title="Jim Pressdee" label="Jim Pressdee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104794" start="6020" end="6032" title="Robin Waters" label="Robin Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16095921" start="6043" end="6051" title="Don Ward (cricketer)" label="Don Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783829" start="6053" end="6056" title="leg before wicket" label="lbw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951082" start="6069" end="6075" title="bowled" label="bowled"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751383" start="6125" end="6144" title="Manor Sports Ground" label="Manor Sports Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q671348" start="6148" end="6156" title="Worthing" label="Worthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229147" start="6165" end="6179" title="Leicestershire County Cricket Club" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793171" start="6206" end="6220" title="Maurice Hallam" label="Maurice Hallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="6231" end="6232" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="6240" end="6241" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352409" start="6305" end="6318" title="Robin Gardner (cricketer)" label="Robin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="6391" end="6392" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="6399" end="6400" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443663" start="6480" end="6502" title="Second XI Championship" label="Second XI Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739855" start="6836" end="6862" title="five wickets in an innings" label="five wickets in an innings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788018" start="6928" end="6938" title="Derbyshire County Cricket Club" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061756" start="6946" end="6971" title="Central Recreation Ground" label="Central Recreation Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q29245" start="6975" end="6983" title="Hastings" label="Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="7150" end="7160" title="county cap" label="county cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q626625" start="7187" end="7199" title="Gillette Cup (England)" label="Gillette Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814174" start="7278" end="7291" title="limited overs cricket" label="limited overs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684170" start="7438" end="7450" title="spin bowling" label="spin bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177658" start="7606" end="7610" title="County Cricket Ground, Hove" label="Hove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137275" start="7707" end="7726" title="County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887454" start="7965" end="7979" title="benefit season" label="benefit season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725694" start="8142" end="8151" title="Middlesex County Cricket Club" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="8155" end="8166" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143797" start="8300" end="8311" title="New Zealand national cricket team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254752" start="8490" end="8499" title="John Richard Reid" label="John Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800982" start="8549" end="8559" title="Artie Dick" label="Artie Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="8677" end="8689" title="South Africa national cricket team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096399" start="8693" end="8705" title="Trent Bridge" label="Trent Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q984333" start="8722" end="8728" title="Graeme Pollock" label="Graeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525488" start="8739" end="8752" title="Peter Pollock" label="Peter Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q981485" start="8945" end="8956" title="Gary Sobers" label="Gary Sobers"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="8972" end="8983" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061609" start="9188" end="9198" title="Headingley Cricket Ground" label="Headingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334335" start="9281" end="9292" title="Brian Close" label="Brian Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155836" start="9332" end="9340" title="The Oval" label="The Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253386" start="9431" end="9441" title="John Price (England cricketer)" label="John Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047239" start="9526" end="9538" title="Tom Graveney" label="Tom Graveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249946" start="9549" end="9560" title="John Murray (cricketer, born 1935)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387786" start="9739" end="9748" title="Ken Higgs" label="Ken Higgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q654375" start="9938" end="9952" title="James Anderson (cricketer)" label="Jimmy Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="9969" end="9974" title="India national cricket team" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162543" start="10021" end="10033" title="Conrad Hunte" label="Conrad Hunte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330859" start="10038" end="10053" title="Easton McMorris" label="Easton McMorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279202" start="10140" end="10144" title="duck (cricket)" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022023" start="10517" end="10522" title="Indian cricket team in England in 1967" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125839" start="10527" end="10535" title="Pakistani cricket team in England in 1967" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783829" start="10915" end="10918" title="leg before wicket" label="lbw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867129" start="10952" end="10965" title="Basil Butcher" label="Basil Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="11123" end="11131" title="tear gas" label="tear gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086633" start="11412" end="11432" title="Declaration and forfeiture" label="sporting declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764119" start="11843" end="11855" title="Angus Fraser" label="Angus Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378533" start="11859" end="11866" title="English cricket team in West Indies in 1997–98" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="11951" end="11962" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q725151" start="11996" end="12005" title="The Ashes" label="The Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572215" start="12093" end="12105" title="Old Trafford Cricket Ground" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526364" start="12527" end="12542" title="Derek Underwood" label="Derek Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q746666" start="12678" end="12703" title="Ring a Ring o&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Ring a Ring o&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="12958" end="12964" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="12977" end="12981" title="East Pakistan" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342822" start="12986" end="12999" title="West Pakistan" label="West Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="13082" end="13087" title="Dacca" label="Dacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600600" start="13132" end="13155" title="British High Commission" label="British High Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="13343" end="13349" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526947" start="13460" end="13475" title="Ray Illingworth" label="Ray Illingworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982596" start="13499" end="13512" title="Colin Cowdrey" label="Colin Cowdrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229147" start="13617" end="13631" title="Leicestershire County Cricket Club" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="14408" end="14412" title="poetry" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985497" start="14947" end="14962" title="West Indian cricket team in England in 2000" label="the 2000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707986" start="15103" end="15112" title="Alan Ward (cricketer)" label="Alan Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859529" start="15277" end="15288" title="Alec Bedser" label="Alec Bedser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058749" start="15479" end="15484" title="Essex County Cricket Club" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126578" start="15673" end="15682" title="Hampshire County Cricket Club" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970469" start="16116" end="16144" title="International cricket in South Africa from 1971 to 1981" label="Basil d&amp;#x27;Oliveira Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316056" start="16261" end="16281" title="Rest of the World cricket team in England in 1970" label="Rest of the World XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="16528" end="16557" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284346" start="16792" end="16801" title="Edgbaston Cricket Ground" label="Edgbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q13119294" start="17214" end="17224" title="Bill Lawry" label="Bill Lawry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707083" start="17327" end="17337" title="Alan Knott" label="Alan Knott"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="17619" end="17640" title="One Day International" label="One Day International"/>
<link wikidata="Q856393" start="17717" end="17723" title="Sydney Cricket Ground" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q782393" start="17835" end="17847" title="Ian Chappell" label="Ian Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982687" start="17849" end="17860" title="Ian Redpath" label="Ian Redpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385053" start="17937" end="17952" title="Keith Stackpole" label="Keith Stackpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742290" start="17973" end="17982" title="Rod Marsh" label="Rod Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524368" start="17995" end="18010" title="Graham McKenzie" label="Graham McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235481" start="18083" end="18095" title="John Gleeson (cricketer)" label="John Gleeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706407" start="18100" end="18113" title="Alan Connolly (cricketer)" label="Alan Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378468" start="18339" end="18346" title="English cricket team in Australia in 1936–37" label="1936–37"/>
<link wikidata="Q9357513" start="18494" end="18506" title="Terry Jenner" label="Terry Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090108" start="18597" end="18606" title="Lou Rowan" label="Lou Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002584" start="18836" end="18860" title="Australian Cricket Board" label="Australian Cricket Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="19321" end="19346" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q583296" start="19492" end="19512" title="English cricket team in Australia in 1998–99" label="1998–99 Ashes series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232393" start="19728" end="19733" title="David Clark (cricketer)" label="Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107240" start="20594" end="20608" title="Harold Larwood" label="Harold Larwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378467" start="20638" end="20645" title="English cricket team in Australia in 1932–33" label="1932–33"/>
<link wikidata="Q512559" start="21475" end="21484" title="walkabout" label="walkabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912646" start="22207" end="22221" title="Billy Griffith" label="Billy Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795048" start="22514" end="22532" title="Max O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Max O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="22760" end="22767" title="not out" label="not out"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707907" start="23447" end="23459" title="Alan Thomson (cricketer)" label="Alan Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300985" start="23996" end="24008" title="Doug Walters" label="Doug Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q182538" start="24604" end="24612" title="Pakistan national cricket team" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766870" start="25023" end="25036" title="Bhagwat Chandrasekhar" label="Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174333" start="25037" end="25043" title="googly" label="googly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520510" start="25146" end="25158" title="Ashok Mankad" label="Ashok Mankad"/>
<link wikidata="Q558182" start="25206" end="25220" title="Sunil Gavaskar" label="Sunil Gavaskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101987" start="25631" end="25642" title="Clive Lloyd" label="Clive Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642085" start="26029" end="26046" title="Empire of Cricket" label="Empire of Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374135" start="27557" end="27567" title="Prudential plc" label="Prudential"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933283" start="27750" end="27760" title="Bob Massie" label="Bob Massie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369311" start="28047" end="28059" title="Ross Edwards (cricketer)" label="Ross Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528190" start="28905" end="28918" title="Geoff Boycott" label="Geoff Boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529344" start="28923" end="28934" title="John Edrich" label="John Edrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350202" start="29088" end="29098" title="Tony Lewis" label="Tony Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384093" start="29921" end="29932" title="Keith Boyce" label="Keith Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840251" start="30369" end="30381" title="Mike Denness" label="Mike Denness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429184" start="30959" end="30971" title="Jeff Thomson" label="Jeff Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263081" start="31192" end="31210" title="Derrick Robins" label="D. H. Robins&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535498" start="31498" end="31515" title="South African rebel tours" label="&amp;quot;Rebel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449898" start="31622" end="31627" title="KwaZulu-Natal cricket team" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330388" start="31632" end="31648" title="Eastern Province cricket team" label="Eastern Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139930" start="31714" end="31723" title="1975 Cricket World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302377" start="31935" end="31946" title="East Africa cricket team" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038289" start="32592" end="32602" title="Tony Greig" label="Tony Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305269" start="32650" end="32661" title="all-rounder" label="all-rounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="32992" end="33000" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q738016" start="33332" end="33344" title="Viv Richards" label="Viv Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372822" start="33706" end="33720" title="Roy Fredericks" label="Roy Fredericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893306" start="33742" end="33756" title="Bernard Julien" label="Bernard Julien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345554" start="33909" end="33920" title="Dickie Bird" label="Dickie Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349761" start="34728" end="34748" title="World Series Cricket" label="World Series Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412816" start="34784" end="34796" title="Kerry Packer" label="Kerry Packer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525559" start="35109" end="35121" title="Mike Procter" label="Mike Procter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705744" start="35131" end="35160" title="Test and County Cricket Board" label="Test and County Cricket Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036176" start="35295" end="35321" title="World Series Cricket Squads" label="World XI and WSC Cavaliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="35414" end="35422" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967413" start="35571" end="35584" title="Pro40" label="Sunday League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175437" start="35796" end="35807" title="Peter Lever" label="Peter Lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529051" start="35908" end="35919" title="David Brown (cricketer, born 1942)" label="David Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174186" start="35921" end="35931" title="Jeff Jones (cricketer, born 1941)" label="Jeff Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707986" start="35933" end="35942" title="Alan Ward (cricketer)" label="Alan Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567876" start="35944" end="35953" title="Chris Old" label="Chris Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527142" start="35955" end="35971" title="Ken Shuttleworth (cricketer)" label="Ken Shuttleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907874" start="35973" end="35983" title="Bob Willis" label="Bob Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534030" start="35985" end="35997" title="Geoff Arnold" label="Geoff Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543208" start="36295" end="36311" title="sacroiliac joint" label="sacroiliac joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385001" start="36377" end="36385" title="Traction (orthopedics)" label="traction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763857" start="36563" end="36575" title="Andy Roberts (cricketer)" label="Andy Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189313" start="36580" end="36593" title="Dennis Lillee" label="Dennis Lillee"/>
<link wikidata="Q926175" start="36877" end="36886" title="The Hindu" label="The Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350148" start="37333" end="37354" title="Elite Panel of ICC Umpires" label="international umpires"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37440" end="37450" title="Imran Khan#Cricket career" label="Imran Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217107" start="37701" end="37714" title="travel agency" label="travel agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q962308" start="38524" end="38537" title="John Betjeman" label="John Betjeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q215829" start="39136" end="39145" title="Harrogate" label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592322" start="39178" end="39188" title="Headingley" label="Headingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q810026" start="39190" end="39211" title="Basil d&amp;#x27;Oliveira" label="Basil d&amp;#x27;Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q365670" start="39755" end="39765" title="Roy Harper (singer)" label="Roy Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992933" start="39777" end="39816" title="When an Old Cricketer Leaves the Crease" label="When an Old Cricketer Leaves the Crease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116287" start="39844" end="39846" title="HQ (album)" label="HQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526339" start="40347" end="40359" title="David Steele (cricketer)" label="David Steele"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223250" wikidata="Q607329" url="?curid=223250" title="Miasma theory">
<text>The miasma theory (also called the miasmic theory) is an abandoned medical theory that held that diseases—such as cholera, chlamydia, or the Black Death—were caused by a &quot;miasma&quot; (, Ancient Greek for &#x27;pollution&#x27;), a noxious form of &quot;bad air&quot;, also known as night air. The theory held that epidemics were caused by miasma, emanating from rotting organic matter. Though miasma theory is typically associated with the spread of contagious diseases, some academics in the early nineteenth century suggested that the theory extended to other conditions as well, e.g. one could become obese by inhaling the odor of food.

The miasma theory was advanced by Hippocrates in the fourth century BC and accepted from ancient times in Europe and China. The theory was eventually abandoned by scientists and physicians after 1880, replaced by the germ theory of disease: specific germs, not miasma, caused specific diseases. However, cultural beliefs about getting rid of odor made the clean-up of waste a high priority for cities. It also encouraged the construction of well-ventilated hospital facilities, schools and other buildings.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;miasma &quot;comes from ancient Greek and though conceptually, there is no word in English that has the same exact meaning, it can be loosely translated as &#x27;stain&#x27; or &#x27;pollution&#x27;.

The idea later gave rise to the name malaria (literally &#x27;bad air&#x27; in Medieval Italian).

==Views worldwide==

Miasma was considered to be a poisonous vapor or mist filled with particles from decomposed matter (miasmata) that caused illnesses. The miasmatic position was that diseases were the product of environmental factors such as contaminated water, foul air, and poor hygienic conditions. Such infection was not passed between individuals but would affect individuals within the locale that gave rise to such vapors. It was identifiable by its foul smell. It was also initially believed that miasmas were propagated through worms from ulcers within those affected by a plague.

===Europe===

In the fifth or fourth century BC, Hippocrates wrote about the effects of the environs over the human diseases:

In the 1st century BC, the Roman architectural writer Vitruvius described the potential effects of miasma (Latin ) from fetid swamplands when visiting a city:

The miasmatic theory of disease remained popular in the Middle Ages and a sense of &quot;effluvia&quot; contributed to Robert Boyle&#x27;s &quot;Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air&quot;.

In the 1850s, miasma was used to explain the spread of cholera in London and in Paris, partly justifying Haussmann&#x27;s later renovation of the French capital. The disease was said to be preventable by cleansing and scouring of the body and items. Dr. William Farr, the assistant commissioner for the 1851 London census, was an important supporter of the miasma theory. He believed that cholera was transmitted by air, and that there was a deadly concentration of &quot;miasmata&quot; near the River Thames&#x27; banks. Such a belief was in part accepted because of the general lack of air quality in urbanized areas. The wide acceptance of miasma theory during the cholera outbreaks overshadowed the partially correct theory brought forth by John Snow that cholera was spread through water. This slowed the response to the major outbreaks in the Soho district of London and other areas. The Crimean War nurse Florence Nightingale (1820–1910) was a proponent of the theory and worked to make hospitals sanitary and fresh-smelling. It was stated in &#x27;Notes on Nursing for the Labouring Classes&#x27; (1860) that Nightingale would &quot;keep the air [the patient] breathes as pure as the external air.&quot;

Fear of miasma registered in many early nineteenth-century warnings concerning what was termed &quot;unhealthy fog&quot;. The presence of fog was thought to strongly indicate the presence of miasma. The miasmas were thought to behave like smoke or mist, blown with air currents, wafted by winds. It was thought that miasma did not simply travel on air but changed the air through which it propagated; the atmosphere was infected by miasma, as diseased people were.

===China===
In China, miasma (; alternative names , ) is an old concept of illness, used extensively by ancient Chinese local chronicles and works of literature. Miasma has different names in Chinese culture. Most of the explanations of miasma refer to it as a kind of sickness, or poison gas.

The ancient Chinese thought that miasma was related to the environment of parts of Southern China. The miasma was thought to be caused by the heat, moisture and the dead air in the Southern Chinese mountains. They thought that insects&#x27; waste polluted the air, the fog, and the water, and the virgin forest harbored a great environment for miasma to occur.

In descriptions by ancient travelers, soldiers, or local officials (most of them are men of letters) of the phenomenon of miasma, fog, haze, dust, gas, or poison geological gassing were always mentioned. The miasma was thought to have caused a lot of diseases such as the cold, influenza, heat strokes, malaria, or dysentery. In the medical history of China, malaria had been referred to by different names in different dynasty periods. Poisoning and psittacosis were also called miasma in ancient China because they did not accurately understand the cause of disease.

In the Sui dynasty (581–618 CE), doctor Chao Yuanfang mentioned miasma in his book &quot;On Pathogen and Syndromes&quot; (諸病源候論). He thought that miasma in Southern China was similar to typhoid fever in Northern China. However, in his opinion, miasma was different from malaria and dysentery. In his book, he discussed dysentery in another chapter, and malaria in a single chapter. He also claimed that miasma caused various diseases, so he suggested that one should find apt and specific ways to resolve problems.

The concept of miasma developed in several stages. First, before the Western Jin dynasty, the concept of miasma was gradually forming; at least, in the Eastern Han dynasty, there was no description of miasma. During the Eastern Jin, large numbers of northern people moved south, and miasma was then recognized by men of letters and nobility. After the Sui and the Tang dynasty, scholars-bureaucrats sent to be the local officials recorded and investigated miasma. As a result, the government became concerned about the severe cases and the causes of miasma by sending doctors to the areas of epidemic to research the disease and heal the patients. In the Ming dynasty and Qing dynasty, versions of local chronicles record different miasma in different places.

However, Southern China was highly developed in the Ming and Qing dynasties. The environment changed rapidly, and after the 19th century, western science and medical knowledge were introduced into China, and people knew how to distinguish and deal with the disease. The concept of miasma therefore faded out due to the progress of medicine in China.

====Influence in Southern China====
The terrifying miasma diseases in the southern regions of China made it the primary location for relegating officials and sending criminals to exile since the Qin-Han dynasty. Poet Han Yu () of the Tang dynasty, for example, wrote to his nephew who came to see him off after his banishment to the Chao Prefecture in his poem, &quot;En Route&quot; (左遷至藍關示姪孫湘):

The prevalent belief and predominant fear of the southern region with its &quot;poisonous air and gases&quot; is evident in historical documents.

Similar topics and feelings toward the miasma-infected south are often reflected in early Chinese poetry and records. Most scholars of the time agreed that the geological environments in the south had a direct impact on the population composition and growth. Many historical records reflect that females were less prone to miasma infection, and mortality rates were much higher in the south, especially for the men. This directly influenced agriculture cultivation and the southern economy, as men were the engine of agriculture production. Zhou Qufei (), a local magistrate from the Southern Song dynasty, described in his treatise &quot;Representative Answers from the South&quot;: &quot;... The men are short and tan, while the women were plump and seldom came down with illness,&quot; and exclaimed at the populous female population in the Guangxi region.

This inherent environmental threat also prevented immigration from other regions. Hence, development in the damp and sultry south was much slower than in the north, where the dynasties&#x27; political power resided for much of early Chinese history.

===India===
In India, there was also a miasma theory. Gambir was considered the first antimiasmatic application. This gambir tree is found in Southern India and Sri Lanka.

==Developments from 19th century onwards==
===Zymotic theory===
Based on zymotic theory, people believed vapors called &quot;miasmata&quot; (singular: &quot;miasma&quot;) rose from the soil and spread diseases. Miasmata were believed to come from rotting vegetation and foul water—especially in swamps and urban ghettos.

Many people, especially the weak or infirm, avoided breathing night air by going indoors and keeping windows and doors shut. In addition to ideas associated with zymotic theory, there was also a general fear that cold or cool air spread disease. The fear of night air gradually disappeared as understanding about disease increased as well as with improvements in home heating and ventilation. Particularly important was the understanding that the agent spreading malaria was the mosquito (active at night) rather than miasmata.

===Contagionism versus miasmatism===
Prior to the late 19th century, night air was considered dangerous in most Western cultures. Throughout the 19th century, the medical community was divided on the explanation for disease proliferation. On one side were the contagionists, believing disease was passed through physical contact, while others believed disease was present in the air in the form of miasma, and thus could proliferate without physical contact. Two members of the latter group were Dr. Thomas S. Smith and Florence Nightingale.

Thomas Southwood Smith spent many years comparing the miasmatic theory to contagionism.

Florence Nightingale:

The current germ theory accounts for disease proliferation by both direct and indirect physical contact.

===Influence on sanitary engineering reforms===

In the early 19th century, the living conditions in industrialized cities in Britain were increasingly unsanitary. The population was growing at a much faster rate than the infrastructure could support. For example, the population of Manchester doubled within a single decade, leading to overcrowding and a significant increase in waste accumulation. The miasma theory of disease made sense to the sanitary reformers of the mid-19th century. Miasmas explained why cholera and other diseases were epidemic in places where the water was stagnant and foul-smelling. A leading sanitary reformer, London&#x27;s Edwin Chadwick, asserted that &quot;all smell is disease&quot;, and maintained that a fundamental change in the structure of sanitation systems was needed to combat increasing urban mortality rates.

Chadwick saw the problem of cholera and typhoid epidemics as being directly related to urbanization, and he proposed that new, independent sewerage systems should be connected to homes. Chadwick supported his proposal with reports from the London Statistical Society which showed dramatic increases in both morbidity and mortality rates since the beginning of urbanization in the early 19th century. Though Chadwick proposed reform on the basis of the miasma theory, his proposals did contribute to improvements in sanitation, such as preventing the reflux of noxious air from sewers back into houses by using separate drainage systems in the design of sanitation. That led, incidentally, to decreased outbreaks of cholera and thus helped to support the theory.

The miasma theory was consistent with the observation that disease was associated with poor sanitation, and hence foul odours, and that sanitary improvements reduced disease. However, it was inconsistent with the findings arising from microbiology and bacteriology in the later 19th century, which eventually led to the adoption of the germ theory of disease, although consensus was not reached immediately. Concerns over sewer gas, which was a major component of the miasma theory developed by Galen, and brought to prominence by the &quot;Great Stink&quot; in London in the summer of 1858, led proponents of the theory to observe that sewers enclosed the refuse of the human bowel, which medical science had discovered could teem with typhoid, cholera, and other microbes.

In 1846, the Nuisances Removal and Diseases Prevention Act was passed to identify whether the transmission of cholera was by air or by water. The act was used to encourage owners to clean their dwellings and connect them to sewers.

Even though eventually disproved by the understanding of bacteria and the discovery of viruses, the miasma theory helped establish the connection between poor sanitation and disease. That encouraged cleanliness and spurred public health reforms which, in Britain, led to the Public Health Acts of 1848 and 1858, and the Local Government Act of 1858. The latter of those enabled the instituting of investigations into the health and sanitary regulations of any town or place, upon the petition of residents or as a result of death rates exceeding the norm. Early medical and sanitary engineering reformers included Henry Austin, Joseph Bazalgette, Edwin Chadwick, Frank Forster, Thomas Hawksley, William Haywood, Henry Letheby, Robert Rawlinson, John Simon, John Snow and Thomas Wicksteed. Their efforts, and associated British regulatory improvements, were reported in the United States as early as 1865.

Particularly notable in 19th century sanitation reform is the work of Joseph Bazalgette, chief engineer to London&#x27;s Metropolitan Board of Works. Encouraged by the Great Stink, Parliament sanctioned Bazalgette to design and construct a comprehensive system of sewers, which intercepted London&#x27;s sewage and diverted it away from its water supply. The system helped purify London&#x27;s water and saved the city from epidemics. In 1866, the last of the three great British cholera
epidemics took hold in a small area of Whitechapel. However, the area was not yet connected to Bazalgette&#x27;s system, and the confined area of the epidemic acted as testament to the efficiency of the system&#x27;s design.

Years later, the influence of those sanitary reforms on Britain was described by Richard Rogers:

The miasma theory did contribute to containing disease in urban settlements, but did not allow the adoption of a suitable approach to the reuse of excreta in agriculture. It was a major factor in the practice of collecting human excreta from urban settlements and reusing them in the surrounding farmland. That type of resource recovery scheme was common in major cities in the 19th century before the introduction of sewer-based sanitation systems. Nowadays, the reuse of excreta, when done in a hygienic manner, is known as ecological sanitation, and is promoted as a way of &quot;closing the loop&quot;.

Throughout the 19th century, concern about public health and sanitation, along with the influence of the miasma theory, were reasons for the advocacy of the then-controversial practice of cremation. If infectious diseases were spread by noxious gases emitted from decaying organic matter, that included decaying corpses. The public health argument for cremation faded with the eclipsing of the miasma theory of disease.

==Replacement by germ theory==
Although the connection between germ and disease was proposed quite early, it was not until the late 1800s that the germ theory was generally accepted. The miasmatic theory was challenged by John Snow, suggesting that there was some means by which the disease was spread via a poison or morbid material (orig: ) in the water. He suggested this before and in response to a cholera epidemic on Broad Street in central London in 1854. Because of the miasmatic theory&#x27;s predominance among Italian scientists, the discovery in the same year by Filippo Pacini of the bacillus that caused the disease was completely ignored. It was not until 1876 that Robert Koch proved that the bacterium &quot;Bacillus anthracis&quot; caused anthrax, which brought a definitive end to miasma theory.

=== 1854 Broad Street cholera outbreak ===

The work of John Snow is notable for helping to make the connection between cholera and typhoid epidemics and contaminated water sources, which contributed to the eventual demise of miasma theory. During the cholera epidemic of 1854, Snow traced high mortality rates among the citizens of Soho to a water pump in Broad Street. Snow convinced the local government to remove the pump handle, which resulted in a marked decrease in cases of cholera in the area. In 1857, Snow submitted a paper to the &quot;British Medical Journal&quot; which attributed high numbers of cholera cases to water sources that were contaminated with human waste. Snow used statistical data to show that citizens who received their water from upstream sources were considerably less likely to develop cholera than those who received their water from downstream sources. Though his research supported his hypothesis that contaminated water, not foul air, was the source of cholera
epidemics, a review committee concluded that Snow&#x27;s findings were not significant enough to warrant change, and they were summarily dismissed. Additionally, other interests intervened in the process of reform. Many water companies and civic authorities pumped water directly from contaminated sources such as the Thames to public wells, and the idea of changing sources or implementing filtration techniques was an unattractive economic prospect. In the face of such economic interests, reform was slow to be adopted.

In 1855, John Snow made a testimony against the Amendment to the &quot;Nuisances Removal and Diseases Prevention Act&quot; that regularized air pollution of some industries. He claimed that:

The same year, William Farr, who was then the major supporter of the miasma theory, issued a report to criticize the germ theory. Farr and the Committee wrote that:

=== Experiments by Louis Pasteur ===
The more formal experiments on the relationship between germ and disease were conducted by Louis Pasteur between 1860 and 1864. He discovered the pathology of the puerperal fever and the pyogenic vibrio in the blood, and suggested using boric acid to kill these microorganisms before and after confinement.

By 1866, eight years after the death of John Snow, William Farr publicly acknowledged that the miasma theory on the transmission of cholera was wrong, by his statistical justification on the death rate.

===Anthrax===
Robert Koch is widely known for his work with anthrax, discovering the causative agent of the fatal disease to be &quot;Bacillus anthracis&quot;. He published the discovery in a booklet as (&quot;The Etiology of Anthrax Disease, Based on the Developmental History of Bacillus Anthracis&quot;) in 1876 while working in Wöllstein. His publication in 1877 on the structure of anthrax bacterium marked the first photography of a bacterium. He discovered the formation of spores in anthrax bacteria, which could remain dormant under specific conditions. However, under optimal conditions, the spores were activated and caused disease. To determine this causative agent, he dry-fixed bacterial cultures onto glass slides, used dyes to stain the cultures, and observed them through a microscope. His work with anthrax is notable in that he was the first to link a specific microorganism with a specific disease, rejecting the idea of spontaneous generation and supporting the germ theory of disease.

==See also==
* Germ theory of disease
* Airborne disease
* Indoor air quality

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Prevailing theories before the germ theory
* Cholera theories
* Term definition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q607329" start="4" end="17" title="Miasma theory" label="miasma theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q607329" start="35" end="49" title="Miasma theory" label="miasmic theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57" end="81" title="Superseded scientific theories#Medicine" label="abandoned medical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="97" end="104" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="114" end="121" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="123" end="132" title="Chlamydia infection" label="chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="141" end="152" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="192" end="205" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q607329" start="287" end="296" title="Miasma theory" label="night air"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="319" end="328" title="epidemics" label="epidemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995419" start="455" end="474" title="contagious diseases" label="contagious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="680" end="691" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="752" end="758" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="763" end="768" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="809" end="818" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="824" end="833" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="863" end="885" title="germ theory of disease" label="germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="1002" end="1019" title="Waste management" label="clean-up of waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="1421" end="1428" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1463" end="1479" title="Medieval Italian" label="Medieval Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="2258" end="2267" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2311" end="2316" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2420" end="2431" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649269" start="2509" end="2557" title="Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air" label="Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="2621" end="2628" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2632" end="2638" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2646" end="2651" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117470" start="2671" end="2726" title="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s renovation of Paris" label="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s later renovation of the French capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043711" start="2816" end="2832" title="William Farr" label="Dr. William Farr"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="3062" end="3074" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="3154" end="3165" title="air quality" label="air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q356407" start="3311" end="3320" title="John Snow (physician)" label="John Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="3460" end="3471" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="3478" end="3498" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="5205" end="5212" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q164727" start="5353" end="5364" title="psittacosis" label="psittacosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="5479" end="5490" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q564519" start="5512" end="5525" title="Chao Yuanfang" label="Chao Yuanfang"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5594" end="5599" title=":zh:諸病源候論" label="諸病源候論"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="5658" end="5671" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="5754" end="5763" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="6065" end="6076" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="6148" end="6159" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="6352" end="6364" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="6643" end="6655" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="6660" end="6672" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q318998" start="7317" end="7323" title="Han Yu" label="Han Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="7334" end="7346" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="8228" end="8249" title="Southern Song dynasty" label="Southern Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11050189" start="8283" end="8320" title="Lingwai Daida" label="Representative Answers from the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="8488" end="8495" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8771" end="8776" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q910384" start="8874" end="8885" title="Uncaria gambir" label="gambir tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075930" start="9002" end="9009" title="Zymotic disease" label="zymotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="9224" end="9229" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="9241" end="9247" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="9631" end="9642" title="Ventilation (architecture)" label="ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="9714" end="9721" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="9730" end="9738" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794109" start="10323" end="10345" title="Thomas Southwood Smith" label="Thomas Southwood Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="10412" end="10432" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="10447" end="10458" title="germ theory of disease" label="germ theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="11054" end="11061" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294480" start="11196" end="11210" title="Edwin Chadwick" label="Edwin Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692699" start="11636" end="11662" title="Royal Statistical Society" label="London Statistical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="11911" end="11921" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="12111" end="12118" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="12394" end="12406" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q243748" start="12411" end="12423" title="bacteriology" label="bacteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="12495" end="12517" title="germ theory of disease" label="germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863977" start="12581" end="12590" title="sewer gas" label="sewer gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="12654" end="12659" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q546233" start="12700" end="12711" title="Great Stink" label="Great Stink"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="12896" end="12903" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="12924" end="12932" title="microorganism" label="microbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="13225" end="13233" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="13255" end="13260" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q981915" start="13796" end="13813" title="Joseph Bazalgette" label="Joseph Bazalgette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294480" start="13815" end="13829" title="Edwin Chadwick" label="Edwin Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424595" start="13846" end="13861" title="Thomas Hawksley" label="Thomas Hawksley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011794" start="13863" end="13878" title="William Haywood (engineer)" label="William Haywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724871" start="13880" end="13893" title="Henry Letheby" label="Henry Letheby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349175" start="13895" end="13911" title="Robert Rawlinson" label="Robert Rawlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809618" start="13913" end="13923" title="John Simon (pathologist)" label="John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q356407" start="13925" end="13934" title="John Snow" label="John Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667745" start="13939" end="13955" title="Thomas Wicksteed" label="Thomas Wicksteed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546743" start="14195" end="14222" title="Metropolitan Board of Works" label="Metropolitan Board of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q124539" start="14601" end="14612" title="Whitechapel" label="Whitechapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q237412" start="14869" end="14883" title="Richard Rogers" label="Richard Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315837" start="15205" end="15222" title="resource recovery" label="resource recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q626738" start="15412" end="15433" title="ecological sanitation" label="ecological sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="15682" end="15691" title="cremation" label="cremation"/>
<link wikidata="Q356407" start="16137" end="16146" title="John Snow (physician)" label="John Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q631304" start="16490" end="16504" title="Filippo Pacini" label="Filippo Pacini"/>
<link wikidata="Q212032" start="16512" end="16520" title="bacillus" label="bacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="16596" end="16607" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="16672" end="16679" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q356407" start="16787" end="16796" title="John Snow" label="John Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035019" start="16983" end="17007" title="1854 Broad Street cholera outbreak" label="cholera epidemic of 1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010" start="17064" end="17068" title="Soho" label="Soho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972570" start="17088" end="17100" title="Broadwick Street" label="Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q546003" start="17279" end="17302" title="British Medical Journal" label="British Medical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043711" start="18461" end="18473" title="William Farr" label="William Farr"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="18740" end="18753" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419347" start="18812" end="18827" title="Postpartum infections" label="puerperal fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q187045" start="18886" end="18896" title="boric acid" label="boric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="19175" end="19186" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="19221" end="19228" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q614156" start="19295" end="19313" title="Bacillus anthracis" label="Bacillus anthracis"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="19642" end="19648" title="bacterial spore" label="spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q178263" start="20102" end="20124" title="spontaneous generation" label="spontaneous generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="20184" end="20206" title="Germ theory of disease" label="Germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q381481" start="20209" end="20225" title="Airborne disease" label="Airborne disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q905504" start="20228" end="20246" title="Indoor air quality" label="Indoor air quality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223251" wikidata="Q278980" url="?curid=223251" title="Akkineni Nageswara Rao">
<text>Akkineni Nageswara Rao (20 September 1923 – 22 January 2014), known as ANR, was an Indian actor and film producer in Telugu cinema. Over his seven decade career, he became a prominent figures in the industry. Nageswara Rao received seven state Nandi Awards, five Filmfare Awards South and a Tamil Nadu State Film Award. He was honoured with the Dadasaheb Phalke Award, the highest recognition in Indian cinema, in 1990. Additionally, he was awarded the Padma Vibhushan (2011), Padma Bhushan (1988) and Padma Shri (1968), by the Government of India for his contributions to art and cinema.

Nageswara Rao&#x27;s potrayals in biographical films include the Tamil saint Vipra Narayana in &quot;Vipra Narayana&quot; (1954), the Telugu poet Tenali Ramakrishna in &quot;Tenali Ramakrishna&quot; (1956), which received the All India Certificate of Merit for Best Feature Film, the Sanskrit poet Kalidasa in &quot;Mahakavi Kalidasu&quot; (1960), the 12th-century poet Jayadeva in &quot;Bhakta Jayadeva&quot; (1961), the legendary sculptor Jakanachari in &quot;Amarasilpi Jakkanna&quot; (1964), the Marathi saint Tukaram in &quot;Bhakta Tukaram&quot; (1971), the 15th-century mystic poet Kabir in &quot;Sri Ramadasu&quot; (2006), and the Sanskrit poet Valmiki in &quot;Sri Rama Rajyam&quot; (2009). He also portrayed mythological figures such as Lord Vishnu in &quot;Chenchu Lakshmi&quot; (1958), Narada in &quot;Bhookailas&quot; (1958), and Arjuna in &quot;Sri Krishnarjuna Yuddhamu&quot; (1963).

His performances in romantic dramas include &quot;Laila Majnu&quot; (1949), &quot;Devadasu&quot; (1953), &quot;Anarkali&quot; (1955), &quot;Batasari&quot; (1961), &quot;Mooga Manasulu&quot; (1964), &quot;Prema Nagar&quot; (1971), (1981), and &quot;Meghasandesam&quot; (1982). He also starred in &quot;Balaraju&quot; (1948), &quot;Keelu Gurram&quot; (1949), &quot;Ardhangi&quot; (1955), &quot;Donga Ramudu&quot; (1955), &quot;Mangalya Balam&quot; (1958), &quot;Gundamma Katha&quot; (1962), &quot;Doctor Chakravarty&quot; (1964), &quot;Dharma Daata&quot; (1970), and &quot;Dasara Bullodu&quot; (1971).

He played a pivotal role in the relocation of the Telugu film industry from Madras to Hyderabad in the 1970s. To support the growing industry in Hyderabad, he established Annapurna Studios in 1976. Later, in 2011, he founded the Annapurna College of Film and Media within Annapurna Studios. His last film, &quot;Manam&quot; (2014), was released posthumously and was featured at the 45th International Film Festival of India in the Homage to ANR section. Nageswara Rao died on 22 January 2014, during the production of &quot;Manam&quot;.

==Early life and background==
Akkineni Nageswara Rao was born into a lower-middle-class Kamma family on 20 September 1923 in Ramapuram, Krishna District, of present-day Andhra Pradesh. He was the youngest of five brothers. His parents Akkineni Venkataratnam and Akkineni Punnamma, were from the farming community. His formal education was limited to primary schooling due to his parents&#x27; poor economic condition.

He began working in theatre at the age of 10. He became a stage actor, specialising in playing female characters, since women at that time were mostly prohibited from acting. His most famous roles were in notable dramas &quot;Harishchandra&quot;, &quot;Kanakatara&quot;, &quot;Vipranarayana&quot;, &quot;Telugu Talli&quot;, &quot;Aasajyoti&quot; and &quot;Satyanveshanam&quot;. The turning point of his career was when Ghantasala Balaramayya, a prominent film producer at that time, discovered him at the Vijayawada railway station. He was cast in the lead role of Rama in &quot;Sri Seeta Rama Jananam&quot; (1944). This was after his debut in a supporting role in the film &quot;Dharmapatni&quot; (1941).

==Career==
He starred in over 255 films, spanning the Telugu, Tamil and Hindi languages. A majority of his films were both commercial and critical successes.
Though he is known for playing mythological figures such as Rama and Krishna, he was notably an atheist.

He is fondly called &quot;Natasamrat&quot; by his fans. In 1953, Akkineni played the titular role in &quot;Devadasu&quot; (1953), which is based on the novel of the same name. &quot;Deccan Herald&quot; reported that several critics had considered Rao&#x27;s portrayal to be the best among all language versions. &quot;Navaratri&quot; (1966) made Akkineni the second actor after Sivaji Ganesan to play nine different roles in a film.

Akkineni is known for his romantic roles in films such as &quot;Laila Majnu&quot; (1949), &quot;Anarkali&quot; (1955), and &quot;Prema Nagar&quot; (1971). He also played several mythological characters in &quot;Mayabazar&quot; (1957), &quot;Mahakavi Kalidasu&quot; (1965), &quot;Bhakta Tukaram&quot; (1973), and &quot;Sri Ramadasu&quot; (2006).

Some of his many commercially successful films are &quot;Maya Bazaar, Samsaram, Bratuku Theruvu, Aradhana, Donga Ramudu, Dr. Chakravarthi, Ardhaangi, Mangalya Balam, Illarikam, Shantinivasam, Velugu Needalu, Dasara Bullodu, Bharya Bhartalu, Dharmadata, Batasari&quot; and &quot;College Bullodu&quot;. &quot;Sitaramayyagari Manavaralu&quot; was released in 1991, almost 50 years after his debut, and was a success at the box office.

Akkineni played an instrumental role in shifting the base of Telugu cinema from Madras to Hyderabad. During the late 1970s, he made a point to work only in the films that were produced in Andhra Pradesh (except for Vijaya Vauhini Studios and Venus Studios films). In 1976, he established Annapurna Studios in Hyderabad as part of his efforts to provide the necessary infrastructure to produce films there.

==Charity==
Akkineni was very active in social service. Regarding the existence of God, he once said, &quot;If there&#x27;s a presence there, I&#x27;m sure he&#x27;ll want us to perform our earthly duties well and be a good human being rather than blindly worship him&quot;.

Akkineni set up the Akkineni Janmabhoomi trust under the Janmabhoomi programme to foster development in his home town, Ramapuram. He was instrumental in the construction of the Akkineni Varadhi (a bridge named after him), which improved his village&#x27;s economy by facilitating easy connectivity. In Ramapuram, Akkineni contributed towards the construction of a water filtration plant.

He instituted the Akkineni International Foundation in 2005 to honour those who contributed to the Film Industry. The Annapurna College of Film and Media, founded by his family in 2011, was set up as a non-profit entity. Rao donated to educational institutions since the beginning of his career and created scholarships at GITAM University (Vizag). He was the Chief Donor and President of Akkineni Nageswara Rao College, which was named after him. Rao was a Life member of the board and an adviser to the Department of Dramatics and Theatre Arts of Andhra University. He instituted gold medals for students who excelled in Acting and Direction. In 2012, he instituted the Akkineni Annapurna Educational Trust in memory of his wife Annapurna.

==Personal life==

Akkineni married Annapurna on 18 February 1949. Annapurna Studios (established 1975) is named after her, and she was also credited as a presenter for several of the studio&#x27;s productions. Annapurna died in 2011 after a prolonged illness. The couple had 5 children: Nagarjuna, Venkat Rathnam, Saroja, Sathyavathi, and Naga Susheela.

==Death==
On 19 October 2013, Akkineni was diagnosed with stomach cancer. He continued shooting for his final film &quot;Manam&quot; two weeks after a major laparoscopic surgery, which some doctors feared he wouldn&#x27;t survive. His last public appearance was at the foundation day celebrations of Annapurna Studios on 14 January 2014. Akkineni died a week later, on 22 January 2014. He was cremated on 23 January 2014, at Annapurna Studios with full state honours amid a 21-gun salute. Thousands were present to pay their last respects.

==Awards and honours==
;Civilian Honors

;National Film Awards
* Dadasaheb Phalke Award (1991)
;Filmfare Awards South
* Filmfare Best Film Award (Telugu) – &quot;Sudigundalu&quot; (1968) (shared with Adurthi Subba Rao)
* Best Actor – Telugu – &quot;Marapurani Manishi&quot; (1973)
* Best Actor – Telugu – &quot;Aatma Bandhuvulu&quot; (1987)
* Filmfare Lifetime Achievement Award – South (1988)
* Best Actor – Telugu – &quot;Seetharamayya gari Manavaralu&quot; (1991)

;Nandi Awards
* Raghupathi Venkaiah Award (1989)
* NTR National Award (1996)

;Nandi Award for Best Actor
* &quot;Dr. Chakravarthy&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Antastulu&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Sudigundalu&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Meghasandesam&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Bangaru Kutumbam&quot; (1994)

;Other state honours
* Kalidasu Kaustubh from Madhya Pradesh State
* Appointed as an adviser to the State Film Development Corporation.
* Tamil Nadu State Film Honorary Award – Arignar Anna Award in 1992

* Department of India Post released a commemorative postal stamp on his 100th birth anniversary at Dak Sadan in Hyderabad.

==Filmography==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q278980" start="0" end="22" title="Akkineni Nageswara Rao" label="Akkineni Nageswara Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q278980" start="71" end="74" title="Akkineni Nageswara Rao" label="ANR"/>
<link wikidata="Q779935" start="117" end="130" title="Telugu cinema" label="Telugu cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q382780" start="244" end="256" title="Nandi Awards" label="Nandi Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775029" start="263" end="284" title="Filmfare Awards South" label="Filmfare Awards South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681353" start="291" end="318" title="Tamil Nadu State Film Award" label="Tamil Nadu State Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167384" start="345" end="367" title="Dadasaheb Phalke Award" label="Dadasaheb Phalke Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q672392" start="453" end="468" title="Padma Vibhushan" label="Padma Vibhushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q932650" start="477" end="490" title="Padma Bhushan" label="Padma Bhushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="502" end="512" title="Padma Shri" label="Padma Shri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="528" end="547" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="624" end="641" title="biographical film" label="biographical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460484" start="667" end="681" title="Thondaradippodi Alvar" label="Vipra Narayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933505" start="691" end="705" title="Vipra Narayana" label="Vipra Narayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521359" start="736" end="747" title="Tenali Rama" label="Tenali Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699464" start="764" end="782" title="Tenali Ramakrishna (film)" label="Tenali Ramakrishna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="816" end="868" title="Discontinued and Intermittent National Film Awards#All India Certificate of Merit" label="All India Certificate of Merit for Best Feature Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011" start="888" end="896" title="Kalidasa" label="Kalidasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732875" start="906" end="923" title="Mahakavi Kalidasu" label="Mahakavi Kalidasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q335015" start="960" end="968" title="Jayadeva" label="Jayadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900853" start="978" end="993" title="Bhakta Jayadeva" label="Bhakta Jayadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630861" start="1031" end="1042" title="Amarashilpi Jakanachari" label="Jakanachari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246585" start="1052" end="1071" title="Amarasilpi Jakkanna" label="Amarasilpi Jakkanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q468361" start="1104" end="1111" title="Tukaram" label="Tukaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900867" start="1121" end="1135" title="Bhakta Tukaram" label="Bhakta Tukaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q312551" start="1179" end="1184" title="Kabir" label="Kabir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586215" start="1194" end="1206" title="Sri Ramadasu" label="Sri Ramadasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q715607" start="1243" end="1250" title="Valmiki" label="Valmiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133230" start="1260" end="1275" title="Sri Rama Rajyam" label="Sri Rama Rajyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="1342" end="1348" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10961745" start="1358" end="1373" title="Chenchu Lakshmi (1958 film)" label="Chenchu Lakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844066" start="1388" end="1394" title="Narada" label="Narada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901967" start="1404" end="1414" title="Bhookailas (1958 film)" label="Bhookailas"/>
<link wikidata="Q185790" start="1433" end="1439" title="Arjuna" label="Arjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585872" start="1449" end="1474" title="Sri Krishnarjuna Yuddhamu" label="Sri Krishnarjuna Yuddhamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473874" start="1540" end="1551" title="Laila Majnu (1949 film)" label="Laila Majnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025390" start="1572" end="1580" title="Devadasu (1953 film)" label="Devadasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751719" start="1601" end="1609" title="Anarkali (1955 film)" label="Anarkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868643" start="1630" end="1638" title="Batasari" label="Batasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971118" start="1659" end="1673" title="Mooga Manasulu" label="Mooga Manasulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240156" start="1694" end="1705" title="Prema Nagar" label="Prema Nagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809057" start="1738" end="1751" title="Meghasandesam" label="Meghasandesam"/>
<link wikidata="Q367076" start="1791" end="1799" title="Balaraju" label="Balaraju"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382821" start="1820" end="1832" title="Keelu Gurram" label="Keelu Gurram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788033" start="1853" end="1861" title="Ardhangi" label="Ardhangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295803" start="1882" end="1894" title="Donga Ramudu (1955 film)" label="Donga Ramudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251323" start="1915" end="1929" title="Mangalya Balam" label="Mangalya Balam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635548" start="1950" end="1964" title="Gundamma Katha" label="Gundamma Katha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287300" start="1985" end="2003" title="Doctor Chakravarty" label="Doctor Chakravarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269226" start="2024" end="2036" title="Dharma Daata" label="Dharma Daata"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905433" start="2061" end="2075" title="Dasara Bullodu" label="Dasara Bullodu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="2167" end="2173" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="2177" end="2186" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768004" start="2262" end="2279" title="Annapurna Studios" label="Annapurna Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767997" start="2320" end="2355" title="Annapurna College of Film and Media" label="Annapurna College of Film and Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251228" start="2403" end="2408" title="Manam (film)" label="Manam"/>
<link wikidata="Q48732211" start="2473" end="2514" title="45th International Film Festival of India" label="45th International Film Festival of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575630" start="2717" end="2722" title="Kamma (caste)" label="Kamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289033" start="2754" end="2763" title="Ramapuram (Venkata Raghava Puram)" label="Ramapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15382" start="2765" end="2781" title="Krishna District" label="Krishna District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="2798" end="2812" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555636" start="3467" end="3489" title="Ghantasala Balaramayya" label="Ghantasala Balaramayya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445962" start="3627" end="3649" title="Sri Seeta Rama Jananam" label="Sri Seeta Rama Jananam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269239" start="3728" end="3739" title="Dharma Patni" label="Dharmapatni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025390" start="4120" end="4140" title="Devadasu (1953 film)" label="&amp;quot;Devadasu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11169650" start="4171" end="4193" title="Devdas" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181753" start="4201" end="4214" title="Deccan Herald" label="Deccan Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q13000764" start="4331" end="4352" title="Navaratri (1966 film)" label="&amp;quot;Navaratri&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395425" start="4397" end="4411" title="Sivaji Ganesan" label="Sivaji Ganesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473874" start="4511" end="4534" title="Laila Majnu (1949 film)" label="&amp;quot;Laila Majnu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751719" start="4543" end="4563" title="Anarkali (1955 film)" label="&amp;quot;Anarkali&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240156" start="4582" end="4593" title="Prema Nagar" label="Prema Nagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418150" start="4664" end="4673" title="Mayabazar" label="Mayabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732875" start="4694" end="4711" title="Mahakavi Kalidasu" label="Mahakavi Kalidasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900867" start="4732" end="4746" title="Bhakta Tukaram" label="Bhakta Tukaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586215" start="4771" end="4783" title="Sri Ramadasu" label="Sri Ramadasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418150" start="4856" end="4867" title="Maya Bazaar" label="Maya Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958162" start="4879" end="4894" title="Bratuku Theruvu" label="Bratuku Theruvu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783627" start="4896" end="4904" title="Aradhana (1962 film)" label="Aradhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295803" start="4906" end="4918" title="Donga Ramudu (1955 film)" label="Donga Ramudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287300" start="4920" end="4936" title="Dr. Chakravarthi" label="Dr. Chakravarthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788033" start="4938" end="4947" title="Ardhaangi" label="Ardhaangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251323" start="4949" end="4963" title="Mangalya Balam" label="Mangalya Balam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998785" start="4965" end="4974" title="Illarikam" label="Illarikam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420157" start="4976" end="4989" title="Santhi Nivasam (1960 film)" label="Shantinivasam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919340" start="4991" end="5005" title="Velugu Needalu" label="Velugu Needalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905433" start="5007" end="5021" title="Dasara Bullodu" label="Dasara Bullodu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901336" start="5023" end="5038" title="Bharya Bhartalu" label="Bharya Bhartalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269226" start="5040" end="5050" title="Dharmadata" label="Dharmadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868643" start="5052" end="5060" title="Batasari" label="Batasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026398" start="5077" end="5092" title="College Bullodu" label="College Bullodu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445982" start="5106" end="5132" title="Sitaramayyagari Manavaralu" label="Sitaramayyagari Manavaralu"/>
<link wikidata="Q779935" start="5293" end="5306" title="Telugu cinema" label="Telugu cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="5312" end="5318" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="5322" end="5331" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="5420" end="5434" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929249" start="5447" end="5469" title="Vijaya Vauhini Studios" label="Vijaya Vauhini Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768004" start="5520" end="5537" title="Annapurna Studios" label="Annapurna Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289033" start="6034" end="6043" title="Ramapuram (Venkata Raghava Puram)" label="Ramapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767997" start="6422" end="6457" title="Annapurna College of Film and Media" label="Annapurna College of Film and Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520696" start="6627" end="6643" title="Gandhi Institute of Technology and Management" label="GITAM University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653022" start="6693" end="6723" title="ANR College" label="Akkineni Nageswara Rao College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768004" start="7114" end="7131" title="Annapurna Studios" label="Annapurna Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345031" start="7335" end="7344" title="Nagarjuna (actor)" label="Nagarjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="7461" end="7475" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251228" start="7524" end="7529" title="Manam (film)" label="Manam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768004" start="7703" end="7720" title="Annapurna Studios" label="Annapurna Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768004" start="7828" end="7845" title="Annapurna Studios" label="Annapurna Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350697" start="7986" end="8006" title="National Film Awards" label="National Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167384" start="8009" end="8031" title="Dadasaheb Phalke Award" label="Dadasaheb Phalke Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775029" start="8040" end="8061" title="Filmfare Awards South" label="Filmfare Awards South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449087" start="8064" end="8097" title="Filmfare Best Film Award (Telugu)" label="Filmfare Best Film Award (Telugu)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971759" start="8106" end="8117" title="Sudigundalu" label="Sudigundalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686000" start="8144" end="8161" title="Adurthi Subba Rao" label="Adurthi Subba Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449062" start="8165" end="8184" title="Filmfare Award for Best Actor – Telugu" label="Best Actor – Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449062" start="8227" end="8246" title="Filmfare Award for Best Actor – Telugu" label="Best Actor – Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026073" start="8255" end="8271" title="Aatma Bandhuvulu" label="Aatma Bandhuvulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449114" start="8287" end="8330" title="Filmfare Lifetime Achievement Award – South" label="Filmfare Lifetime Achievement Award – South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449062" start="8340" end="8359" title="Filmfare Award for Best Actor – Telugu" label="Best Actor – Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445982" start="8368" end="8397" title="Seetharamayya Gari Manavaralu" label="Seetharamayya gari Manavaralu"/>
<link wikidata="Q382780" start="8413" end="8425" title="Nandi Awards" label="Nandi Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283050" start="8428" end="8453" title="Raghupathi Venkaiah Award" label="Raghupathi Venkaiah Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955497" start="8463" end="8481" title="NTR National Award" label="NTR National Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q13651847" start="8491" end="8517" title="Nandi Award for Best Actor" label="Nandi Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287300" start="8526" end="8542" title="Dr. Chakravarthy" label="Dr. Chakravarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809057" start="8628" end="8641" title="Meghasandesam" label="Meghasandesam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="8740" end="8754" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681354" start="8832" end="8868" title="Tamil Nadu State Film Honorary Award" label="Tamil Nadu State Film Honorary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519720" start="8915" end="8925" title="India Post" label="India Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223252" wikidata="Q295756" url="?curid=223252" title="ANR">
<text>ANR may refer to:
==People==
* Akkineni Nageswara Rao, Indian actor and producer in Telugu cinema

==Places==
* Akkineni Nageswara Rao College, sometimes called ANR College, in Gudivada, Andhra Pradesh, India
* Antwerp International Airport (IATA code)

==Entities==
* Agence nationale de la recherche, a French funding agency for research
* Agence nationale des renseignements, a Togolese intelligence agency
* Agence nationale de renseignement, a Democratic Republic of the Congo intelligence agency
* Alleanza Nazzjonali Repubblikana, a Maltese pressure group
* &quot;Alliance Nationale Républicaine&quot; (National Republican Alliance), an Algerian political party
* Americans for Nonsmokers&#x27; Rights, an American organization that lobbies in support of smoking bans
* &quot;Asociación Nacional Republicana&quot; (National Republican Association), a Paraguayan political party
* Australian National Railways Commission - Australian rail operator from 1975 until 1987
* Agencja Nieruchomości Rolnych - Polish estate agency

==Land use and planning==
* &quot;Approval Not Required (Under the Subdivision Control Law)&quot;, a process for subdividing land in Massachusetts, USA, under MGL Chapter 41

==Mathematics==
* Absolute neighborhood retract, a type of topological space (mathematics)

==Military==
* Alaska NORAD Region, an alternate phrase for the Eleventh Air Force
* Agence Nationale de Renseignements, a government intelligence agency of the Zaire
* Aeronautica Nazionale Repubblicana, the air force of the Italian Social Republic during World War II

==Music==
* Anew Revolution, a heavy metal band from Austin, Texas
* Awesome New Republic, a two-piece indie band from Miami, Florida

==Society==
* Adult Nursing Relationship, a type of erotic relationship (see Erotic lactation)

==Technology==
* Active Noise Reduction, more commonly Active noise control
* Ambiguous name resolution, a search algorithm for LDAP implemented in Microsoft&#x27;s Active Directory
* &quot;Application not Responding&quot;, a message in Android operating system
* &quot;Atmosphere Normale de Reference&quot;, a standard used with air compressors
* Automatic Number-plate Recognition, more commonly ANPR (automatic number-plate recognition)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295756" start="0" end="3" title="ANR" label="ANR"/>
<link wikidata="Q278980" start="31" end="53" title="Akkineni Nageswara Rao" label="Akkineni Nageswara Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653022" start="161" end="172" title="ANR College" label="ANR College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17480" start="211" end="240" title="Antwerp International Airport" label="Antwerp International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q392500" start="269" end="301" title="Agence nationale de la recherche" label="Agence nationale de la recherche"/>
<link wikidata="Q392509" start="342" end="377" title="Agence nationale de renseignements (Democratic Republic of the Congo)" label="Agence nationale des renseignements"/>
<link wikidata="Q392509" start="412" end="445" title="Agence nationale de renseignements (Democratic Republic of the Congo)" label="Agence nationale de renseignement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731215" start="504" end="536" title="Alleanza Nazzjonali Repubblikana" label="Alleanza Nazzjonali Repubblikana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838210" start="610" end="638" title="National Republican Alliance" label="National Republican Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595870" start="671" end="708" title="Americans for Nonsmokers&amp;#x27; Rights" label="Americans for Nonsmokers&amp;#x27; Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q928949" start="822" end="853" title="National Republican Association" label="National Republican Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q781593" start="887" end="926" title="Australian National Railways Commission" label="Australian National Railways Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="977" end="1006" title="Agencja Nieruchomości Rolnych" label="Agencja Nieruchomości Rolnych"/>
<link wikidata="Q449111" start="1144" end="1155" title="Subdivision (land)" label="subdividing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141963" start="1224" end="1253" title="Absolute neighborhood retract" label="Absolute neighborhood retract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387066" start="1362" end="1380" title="Eleventh Air Force" label="Eleventh Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q392509" start="1383" end="1417" title="Agence Nationale de Renseignements" label="Agence Nationale de Renseignements"/>
<link wikidata="Q381573" start="1467" end="1501" title="Aeronautica Nazionale Repubblicana" label="Aeronautica Nazionale Repubblicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034022" start="1581" end="1596" title="Anew Revolution" label="Anew Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830032" start="1638" end="1658" title="Awesome New Republic" label="Awesome New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269174" start="1781" end="1797" title="Erotic lactation" label="Erotic lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q583234" start="1855" end="1875" title="Active noise control" label="Active noise control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741452" start="1878" end="1903" title="Ambiguous name resolution" label="Ambiguous name resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="2037" end="2044" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q978234" start="2130" end="2144" title="air compressor" label="air compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q518031" start="2204" end="2238" title="automatic number-plate recognition" label="automatic number-plate recognition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223253" wikidata="Q106175" url="?curid=223253" title="John Cusack">
<text>John Paul Cusack (; born June 28, 1966) is an American actor. He began acting in films during the 1980s, starring in coming-of-age dramedies such as &quot;Sixteen Candles&quot; (1984), &quot;Better Off Dead&quot; (1985), &quot;The Sure Thing&quot; (1985), &quot;Stand by Me&quot; (1986), and &quot;Say Anything...&quot; (1989). In the 1990s, Cusack starred in leading roles in each films, including &quot;Bullets Over Broadway&quot; (1994), &quot;Con Air&quot; (1997), &quot;Grosse Pointe Blank&quot; (1997), &quot;The Thin Red Line&quot; (1998), &quot;Being John Malkovich&quot; (1999), &quot;High Fidelity&quot; (2000), &quot;America&#x27;s Sweethearts&quot; (2001), &quot;Max&quot; (2002), and &quot;Runaway Jury&quot; (2003).

Cusack has been nominated for several awards, including a Golden Globe for his role starring in &quot;High Fidelity&quot;. In 2012, he was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Cusack won the 2014 Canadian Screen Awards for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role for his performance in &quot;Maps to the Stars&quot;. He is a son of filmmaker Dick Cusack, and the younger brother of actresses Joan and Ann Cusack.

== Early life ==
Cusack was born in Evanston, Illinois into an Irish Catholic family. His parents are writer-actor-producer and documentary filmmaker Richard J. &quot;Dick&quot; Cusack (1925–2003), originally from New York City, and Ann Paula &quot;Nancy&quot; Cusack (&quot;née&quot; Carolan; 1929–2022), originally from Massachusetts, a former mathematics teacher and political activist. John&#x27;s older sisters, Ann and Joan, are also actors. Cusack has two other siblings, Bill and Susie. The family moved from Manhattan, New York, to Illinois and were friends of activist Philip Berrigan. Cusack graduated from Evanston Township High School in 1984, where he met Jeremy Piven. Cusack spent a year at New York University before dropping out, saying that he had &quot;too much fire in his belly&quot;.

== Career ==

=== 1980s ===
Cusack began acting in films in the early 1980s. His first on screen appearances were in minor roles, &quot;Class&quot; (1983) and John Hughes directorial debut film &quot;Sixteen Candles&quot; (1984). On the set of &quot;Grandview, U.S.A.&quot; (1984), his co-star Jamie Lee Curtis gifted Cusack with his first car, a 1974 Chevrolet Impala, which she had named &#x27;La Bamba&#x27;. 16-year-old Cusack made his breakthrough performance in Rob Reiner&#x27;s teen comedy &quot;The Sure Thing&quot; (1985). It was a critical success, but has since become an underrated film.

He then took on the small-town teen dark comedy film &quot;Better Off Dead&quot; (1985). Cusack was initially embarrassed and disappointed by the film, describing it as the &quot;worst thing he had ever seen&quot; on his first watch. The film had a budget of $3 million and grossed $10.3 million at the box office, but the studio still considered it a failure. Cusack also worked with the director Savage Steve Holland on &quot;One Crazy Summer&quot; (1986).

Cusack then had a brief appearance in Rob Reiner&#x27;s &quot;Stand by Me&quot; (1986) as the older brother of Gordie, a film based on Stephen King&#x27;s &quot;The Body.&quot; On the film, co-star Kiefer Sutherland recalled, &quot;John Cusack was on the film for at least a week. I admired what he was doing and thought he was an actor I wanted to emulate.&quot; In 1988, Cusack went on and starred in the Independent film &quot;Eight Men Out&quot; (1988), about Major League Baseball&#x27;s Black Sox Scandal during the 1919 World Series. He also appeared in the cult comedy &quot;Tapeheads&quot; (1988), a film by executive producer Michael Nesmith.

In the late 1980s, Cusack starred in Cameron Crowe&#x27;s directorial debut film, &quot;Say Anything...&quot; (1989). He starred opposite actress Ione Skye, playing the title character Lloyd Dobler who experiences a romance with Diane Court (Skye). Cusack was reluctant to do the film at first, but he gave his character dimension through referencing the English punk band The Clash, and The Replacements. In the film, Cusack became known for the infamous boombox scene, in which his character Lloyd stands near Diane&#x27;s bedroom window, and wordlessly holds up a cassette player above his head, blasting Peter Gabriel&#x27;s 1986 song &quot;In Your Eyes&quot;. His character Lloyd Dobler has since inspired popular culture, such as the band Lloyd Dobler Effect, and Frank Iero&#x27;s band Pencey Prep with their misspelled song &quot;Lloyd Dobbler&quot;.

=== 1990s ===
In the 1990s, Cusack played a con artist in Stephen Frears&#x27; 1990 neo-noir film &quot;The Grifters&quot;. He then appeared in a series of independent films such as &quot;True Colors&quot; (1991), and &quot;Money for Nothing&quot; (1993). For Quentin Tarantino&#x27;s second film, &quot;Pulp Fiction&quot; (1994), Cusack declined the role of Lance, which went to Eric Stoltz. After establishing New Crime Productions, Cusack co-wrote the screenplay for and starred in George Armitage&#x27;s crime film &quot;Grosse Pointe Blank&quot; (1997), in which he played an assassin who goes to his 10-year high school reunion to win back his high school sweetheart. Released in the same year, Cusack also starred in the Nicolas Cage film &quot;Con Air&quot; (1997) as the FBI agent Vince Larkin, and in Clint Eastwood&#x27;s &quot;Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil&quot; (1997). He also voiced Dimitri in the animated film &quot;Anastasia&quot; (1997).

In the critically acclaimed Spike Jonze&#x27;s fantasy film &quot;Being John Malkovich&quot; (1999), with the script written by Charlie Kaufman, Cusack played a puppeteer who finds a portal leading into the mind of the eponymous actor, John Malkovich. The film was nominated for three Academy Awards, including Best Director (Jonze), Best Original Screenplay (Charlie Kaufman) and Best Supporting Actress (Catherine Keener).

=== 2000s ===
Cusack was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for his performance in &quot;High Fidelity&quot; (2000), based on Nick Hornby&#x27;s novel about Rob, a record store owner, and the history of his failed relationships. In the early 2000s, Cusack appeared in a few romantic comedies such as &quot;America&#x27;s Sweethearts&quot; (2001), &quot;Serendipity&quot; (2001), &quot;Must Love Dogs&quot; (2005), playing opposite lead actresses Julia Roberts, Kate Beckinsale, and Diane Lane.

Cusack starred in a series of thriller films such as &quot;Identity&quot; (2003), &quot;Runaway Jury&quot; (2003), &quot;The Contract&quot; (2006), and &quot;1408&quot; (2007), based on Stephen King&#x27;s &quot;1408&quot;. The film largely went unnoticed at the time of release, but is now considered an underrated horror film. He also appeared in the action comedies &quot;The Ice Harvest&quot; (2005), and &quot;War, Inc.&quot; (2008), as well as James C. Strouse directorial debut film &quot;Grace Is Gone&quot; (2007).

In Roland Emmerich&#x27;s epic disaster film &quot;2012&quot; (2009), Cusack starred as Jackson Curtis, a struggling novelist who attempts to save his family during a global cataclysm. Throughout his career, Cusack tends to be typecast in the roles of writers, such as &quot;Martian Child&quot; (2007) and &quot;1408&quot; (2007).

=== 2010s ===
In the 2010s, Cusack starred in and produced the comedy film &quot;Hot Tub Time Machine&quot; (2010); he did not feature in the sequel, &quot;Hot Tub Time Machine 2&quot; (2015), however. Both films were directed by Steve Pink.

In 2012, Cusack played Edgar Allan Poe in James McTeigue&#x27;s biopic film &quot;The Raven&quot; (2012). On acting in a real life role, Cusack said, &quot;You have to get yourself as close to insanity as you can, but yet, be able to not go insane.&quot; He referred to the source of Poe&#x27;s letters and writing, and used it as material for his role. Cusack then starred in another real life role as Richard Nixon in Lee Daniels&#x27; &quot;The Butler&quot; (2013). Lee: &quot;I love working with John Cusack. He’s terrifying, he’s electrifying, and he inspires me to be a better director. He’s a fiery, intense presence on set. We never, ever rub up against each other but he fuels me.&quot;

In 2014, Cusack appeared in another biopic film &quot;Love &amp; Mercy&quot; (2014), on Brian Wilson of The Beach Boys. He was cast in the role of older Brian Wilson, and worked closely with Wilson himself, during the making of the film. In the same year, Cusack also starred in David Cronenberg&#x27;s &quot;Maps to the Stars&quot; (2014). He won a Canadian Screen Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role in &quot;Maps to the Stars&quot; (2014). This era was a new peak in his career, however, in 2014, Cusack infamously criticized Hollywood saying the mega-corporations have stepped in with 50-producer movies, franchises are king, and stars are used as leverage. He noted Hollywood is &quot;a whorehouse and people go mad.&quot;

Later, Cusack starred in video on demand films, including &quot;The Factory&quot; (2012), &quot;The Numbers Station&quot; (2013), &quot;The Frozen Ground&quot; (2013), &quot;Grand Piano&quot; (2013), &quot;Drive Hard&quot; (2014), &quot;The Prince&quot; (2014), &quot;Reclaim&quot; (2014), &quot;Cell&quot; (2016), &quot;Arsenal&quot; (2017), &quot;Blood Money&quot; (2017), and &quot;Singularity&quot; (2017).

=== 2020s–present ===
Cusack starred in his first TV series &quot;Utopia&quot; in 2020. In a 2020 interview with &quot;The Guardian&quot;, Cusack admitted to the decline of his acting career. &quot;In the last few years, I haven’t been able to get projects financed. That could be a function of getting older. Or it could be a function of being cold.&quot;

In 2025, Cusack took on a significant role in the Chinese film &quot;Detective Chinatown 1900&quot;, portraying Congressman Grant, a character central to the film&#x27;s exploration of anti-Chinese sentiment in early 20th-century San Francisco. The movie, a prequel to the successful &quot;Detective Chinatown&quot; franchise, was released on January 29, 2025.

Critics have noted Cusack&#x27;s performance in the film. Phil Hoad of &quot;The Guardian&quot; highlighted the movie&#x27;s engaging narrative and cultural commentary, mentioning Cusack&#x27;s role as part of the ensemble cast.

This role marks a notable entry in Cusack&#x27;s filmography, reflecting his continued involvement in international cinema.

== Political views==

Cusack is anti-war, having tweeted, &quot;Being anti-war — is pro-troops — pro-human&quot;. Between 2005 and 2009, Cusack wrote blogs for &quot;The Huffington Post&quot;, which included an interview with Naomi Klein. He voiced his opposition to the war in Iraq and Bush&#x27;s administration, calling the government&#x27;s worldview &quot;depressing, corrupt, unlawful, and tragically absurd&quot;. He also appeared in a June 2008 MoveOn.org advertisement, where he said that George W. Bush and John McCain had the same governing priorities.

Cusack criticized the Obama administration for its drone policy in the Middle East and its support of the National Defense Authorization Act, and became one of the initial supporters of the Freedom of the Press Foundation in 2012. In June 2015, he stated in an interview with &quot;The Daily Beast&quot; that &quot;when you talk about drones, the American Empire, the NSA, civil liberties, attacks on journalism and whistleblowers, [Obama] is as bad or worse than Bush&quot;. He later criticized the publication for misquoting him in order to make an interesting headline.

At a Moscow hotel room in 2015, Cusack, Daniel Ellsberg, and Arundhati Roy met Edward Snowden, who had fled the US because of his leaks of classified information surrounding illegal population surveillance. This meeting was converted into a book co-authored with Roy titled &quot;Things That Can and Cannot Be Said&quot;.

Cusack endorsed Senator Bernie Sanders in his 2016 and 2020 presidential bids. He is a member of the Democratic Socialists of America.

During May 2020, Cusack was recording a George Floyd protest in Chicago on social media when he was attacked by police with batons and later pepper-sprayed.

=== Israel–Palestine ===

Cusack has been fiercely critical of Israel&#x27;s military actions against Palestinians. He criticized Israel&#x27;s killing of Palestinians in the 2014 Gaza War, retweeting for weeks articles supporting Gaza. Cusack signed an open letter in support of Lorde cancelling performances in Israel, which was in response to a request from the BDS movement. Following the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel and the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip, Cusack signed another open letter (Artists4Ceasefire) urging Joe Biden to &quot;call for and facilitate a ceasefire without delay...&quot; He also blocked and direct messaged pro-Israel and Zionist Twitter users insults, and asserted that Israel is conducting a genocide in Gaza.

In June 2019, Cusack tweeted out an image of a large fist with a blue Star of David crushing a small crowd of people next to a quote by neo-Nazi Kevin Alfred Strom often misattributed to Voltaire: &quot;To learn who rules over you, simply find out who you are not allowed to criticize&quot;. In the tweet, Cusack added the words &quot;Follow the money.&quot; He said that the tweet was meant to criticize Israel&#x27;s policies against Palestinians but later apologized saying that &quot;antisemitism has no place in any rational political dialogue&quot; and deleted the tweet.

Since the Israel–Hamas war broke out in Gaza in October 2023, Cusack has been vocal in defense of Palestinians.

== Personal life ==
Cusack trained in kickboxing under former world kickboxing champion Benny Urquidez for over 20 years. He began training under Urquidez in preparation for his role in &quot;Say Anything...&quot; and holds the rank of a level six black belt in Urquidez&#x27;s Ukidokan Kickboxing system.

In March 2008, police arrested Emily Leatherman outside Cusack&#x27;s Malibu, California, home for stalking him. On October 10, 2008, Leatherman pleaded no contest and received five years&#x27; probation and mandatory psychiatric counseling, and was ordered to stay away from Cusack, his home, and business for the next 10 years.

== Filmography ==
=== Film ===

=== Television ===
== Awards and nominations ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Barnes, Henry (September 26, 2014). &quot;John Cusack: &#x27;Hollywood is a whorehouse and people go mad. &quot;The Guardian&quot;. Accessed February 27, 2015.
* Robinson, Tasha (November 27, 2007). &quot;John Cusack&quot; (interview). &quot;The A.V. Club&quot;.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q106175" start="0" end="16" title="John Cusack" label="John Paul Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="117" end="130" title="coming-of-age" label="coming-of-age"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="131" end="140" title="Comedy drama" label="dramedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q572616" start="155" end="170" title="Sixteen Candles" label="Sixteen Candles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041839" start="191" end="206" title="Better Off Dead (film)" label="Better Off Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q939142" start="227" end="241" title="The Sure Thing" label="The Sure Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q494722" start="262" end="273" title="Stand by Me (film)" label="Stand by Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q963713" start="298" end="313" title="Say Anything..." label="Say Anything..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1004531" start="405" end="426" title="Bullets Over Broadway" label="Bullets Over Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q607910" start="447" end="454" title="Con Air" label="Con Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q288355" start="475" end="494" title="Grosse Pointe Blank" label="Grosse Pointe Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q221491" start="515" end="532" title="The Thin Red Line (1998 film)" label="The Thin Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q649165" start="553" end="573" title="Being John Malkovich" label="Being John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473804" start="594" end="607" title="High Fidelity (film)" label="High Fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q467631" start="628" end="654" title="America&amp;#x27;s Sweethearts" label="America&amp;#x27;s Sweethearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475581" start="675" end="678" title="Max (2002 film)" label="Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q151870" start="703" end="715" title="Runaway Jury" label="Runaway Jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706943" start="1092" end="1103" title="Dick Cusack" label="Dick Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q272946" start="1142" end="1146" title="Joan Cusack" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q432686" start="1151" end="1161" title="Ann Cusack" label="Ann Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q462799" start="1200" end="1218" title="Evanston, Illinois" label="Evanston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="1227" end="1241" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706943" start="1314" end="1348" title="Dick Cusack" label="Richard J. &amp;quot;Dick&amp;quot; Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1510" end="1521" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q432686" start="1581" end="1584" title="Ann Cusack" label="Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q272946" start="1589" end="1593" title="Joan Cusack" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="1681" end="1700" title="Manhattan, New York" label="Manhattan, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="1705" end="1713" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934260" start="1743" end="1758" title="Philip Berrigan" label="Philip Berrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416009" start="1782" end="1811" title="Evanston Township High School" label="Evanston Township High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q315083" start="1834" end="1846" title="Jeremy Piven" label="Jeremy Piven"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="1871" end="1890" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095987" start="2108" end="2113" title="Class (film)" label="Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q311263" start="2131" end="2142" title="John Hughes (filmmaker)" label="John Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q572616" start="2172" end="2187" title="Sixteen Candles" label="Sixteen Candles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749459" start="2222" end="2239" title="Grandview, U.S.A." label="Grandview, U.S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q106997" start="2266" end="2282" title="Jamie Lee Curtis" label="Jamie Lee Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q226062" start="2324" end="2340" title="Chevrolet Impala" label="Chevrolet Impala"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="2440" end="2450" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q939142" start="2476" end="2490" title="The Sure Thing" label="The Sure Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041839" start="2633" end="2648" title="Better Off Dead (film)" label="Better Off Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474451" start="2972" end="2992" title="Savage Steve Holland" label="Savage Steve Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305495" start="3002" end="3018" title="One Crazy Summer" label="One Crazy Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q494722" start="3096" end="3107" title="Stand by Me (film)" label="Stand by Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="3169" end="3181" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q103946" start="3232" end="3249" title="Kiefer Sutherland" label="Kiefer Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q340814" start="3464" end="3477" title="Eight Men Out" label="Eight Men Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="3498" end="3519" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349597" start="3527" end="3544" title="Black Sox Scandal" label="Black Sox Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q846529" start="3556" end="3573" title="1919 World Series" label="1919 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468993" start="3617" end="3626" title="Tapeheads" label="Tapeheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q954997" start="3670" end="3685" title="Michael Nesmith" label="Michael Nesmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q318287" start="3725" end="3738" title="Cameron Crowe" label="Cameron Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q963713" start="3776" end="3791" title="Say Anything..." label="Say Anything..."/>
<link wikidata="Q271590" start="3834" end="3843" title="Ione Skye" label="Ione Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="4061" end="4070" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066024" start="4076" end="4092" title="The Replacements (band)" label="The Replacements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358666" start="4144" end="4151" title="boombox" label="boombox"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="4296" end="4309" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122307" start="4333" end="4345" title="In Your Eyes (Peter Gabriel song)" label="In Your Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662385" start="4433" end="4452" title="Lloyd Dobler Effect" label="Lloyd Dobler Effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q723430" start="4458" end="4468" title="Frank Iero" label="Frank Iero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723141" start="4481" end="4492" title="Pencey Prep" label="Pencey Prep"/>
<link wikidata="Q55258" start="4606" end="4620" title="Stephen Frears" label="Stephen Frears"/>
<link wikidata="Q304488" start="4652" end="4664" title="The Grifters (film)" label="The Grifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q946597" start="4736" end="4747" title="True Colors (film)" label="True Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899239" start="4766" end="4795" title="Money for Nothing (1993 film)" label="&amp;quot;Money for Nothing&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="4808" end="4825" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q104123" start="4852" end="4864" title="Pulp Fiction" label="Pulp Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q318267" start="4928" end="4939" title="Eric Stoltz" label="Eric Stoltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059610" start="5033" end="5048" title="George Armitage" label="George Armitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q288355" start="5073" end="5092" title="Grosse Pointe Blank" label="Grosse Pointe Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="5276" end="5288" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q607910" start="5300" end="5307" title="Con Air" label="Con Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="5359" end="5373" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470767" start="5387" end="5426" title="Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (film)" label="Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q486609" start="5491" end="5500" title="Anastasia (1997 film)" label="Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q259913" start="5544" end="5555" title="Spike Jonze" label="Spike Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q649165" start="5582" end="5602" title="Being John Malkovich" label="Being John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q312751" start="5644" end="5659" title="Charlie Kaufman" label="Charlie Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172261" start="5752" end="5766" title="John Malkovich" label="John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="5801" end="5815" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q312751" start="5876" end="5891" title="Charlie Kaufman" label="Charlie Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q230378" start="5922" end="5938" title="Catherine Keener" label="Catherine Keener"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="5983" end="6051" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473804" start="6081" end="6094" title="High Fidelity (film)" label="High Fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q313007" start="6118" end="6129" title="Nick Hornby" label="Nick Hornby"/>
<link wikidata="Q748075" start="6137" end="6142" title="High Fidelity (novel)" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="6266" end="6283" title="Romantic comedy" label="romantic comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q467631" start="6298" end="6324" title="America&amp;#x27;s Sweethearts" label="America&amp;#x27;s Sweethearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q971468" start="6345" end="6356" title="Serendipity (film)" label="Serendipity"/>
<link wikidata="Q151811" start="6377" end="6391" title="Must Love Dogs" label="Must Love Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="6438" end="6451" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q179414" start="6453" end="6468" title="Kate Beckinsale" label="Kate Beckinsale"/>
<link wikidata="Q255070" start="6474" end="6484" title="Diane Lane" label="Diane Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="6517" end="6530" title="thriller film" label="thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q604449" start="6546" end="6554" title="Identity (2003 film)" label="Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q151870" start="6575" end="6587" title="Runaway Jury" label="Runaway Jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q700875" start="6608" end="6620" title="The Contract (2006 film)" label="The Contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q203560" start="6645" end="6649" title="1408 (film)" label="1408"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028807" start="6693" end="6709" title="1408 (short story)" label="&amp;quot;1408&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q784116" start="6862" end="6877" title="The Ice Harvest" label="The Ice Harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417683" start="6902" end="6911" title="War, Inc." label="War, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3806481" start="6937" end="6953" title="James C. Strouse" label="James C. Strouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217752" start="6983" end="6996" title="Grace Is Gone" label="Grace Is Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q60100" start="7015" end="7030" title="Roland Emmerich" label="Roland Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q184605" start="7063" end="7067" title="2012 (film)" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="7239" end="7247" title="Typecasting" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q786559" start="7287" end="7300" title="Martian Child" label="Martian Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q925072" start="7425" end="7445" title="Hot Tub Time Machine" label="Hot Tub Time Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028220" start="7500" end="7522" title="Hot Tub Time Machine 2" label="Hot Tub Time Machine 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613624" start="7574" end="7584" title="Steve Pink" label="Steve Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="7610" end="7625" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q456008" start="7629" end="7643" title="James McTeigue" label="James McTeigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q235742" start="7669" end="7678" title="The Raven (2012 film)" label="The Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058876" start="7708" end="7717" title="real life" label="real life"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="7990" end="8003" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q555460" start="8007" end="8018" title="Lee Daniels" label="Lee Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520173" start="8031" end="8041" title="The Butler" label="The Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q14878580" start="8338" end="8354" title="Love &amp;amp; Mercy (film)" label="Love &amp;amp; Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313013" start="8372" end="8384" title="Brian Wilson" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="8388" end="8402" title="The Beach Boys" label="The Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q55422" start="8563" end="8579" title="David Cronenberg" label="David Cronenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14369911" start="8593" end="8610" title="Maps to the Stars" label="Maps to the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671430" start="8634" end="8681" title="Canadian Screen Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Canadian Screen Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="8822" end="8831" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="9047" end="9062" title="video on demand" label="video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520827" start="9086" end="9097" title="The Factory (2012 film)" label="The Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481182" start="9118" end="9137" title="The Numbers Station" label="The Numbers Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613129" start="9158" end="9175" title="The Frozen Ground" label="The Frozen Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113698" start="9196" end="9207" title="Grand Piano (film)" label="Grand Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039740" start="9228" end="9238" title="Drive Hard" label="Drive Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254293" start="9259" end="9269" title="The Prince (2014 film)" label="The Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393731" start="9290" end="9297" title="Reclaim (film)" label="Reclaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050502" start="9318" end="9322" title="Cell (film)" label="Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28173334" start="9343" end="9350" title="Arsenal (2017 film)" label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48672700" start="9371" end="9382" title="Blood Money (2017 film)" label="Blood Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q45125510" start="9407" end="9418" title="Singularity (2017 film)" label="Singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636827" start="9500" end="9506" title="Utopia (2020 TV series)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="9553" end="9565" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="10541" end="10549" title="Anti-war movement" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="10675" end="10694" title="The Huffington Post" label="The Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q236606" start="10735" end="10746" title="Naomi Klein" label="Naomi Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="10780" end="10791" title="Iraq War" label="war in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="10796" end="10822" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush&amp;#x27;s administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633547" start="10962" end="10972" title="MoveOn.org" label="MoveOn.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="11007" end="11021" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="11026" end="11037" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="11096" end="11116" title="Presidency of Barack Obama" label="Obama administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195578" start="11125" end="11130" title="Unmanned combat air vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612881" start="11180" end="11214" title="National Defense Authorization Act" label="National Defense Authorization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500827" start="11264" end="11295" title="Freedom of the Press Foundation" label="Freedom of the Press Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="11356" end="11371" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="11421" end="11436" title="American imperialism" label="American Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="11442" end="11445" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="11447" end="11462" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="11490" end="11503" title="whistleblower" label="whistleblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="11653" end="11659" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q431085" start="11688" end="11703" title="Daniel Ellsberg" label="Daniel Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212801" start="11709" end="11722" title="Arundhati Roy" label="Arundhati Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="11727" end="11741" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="11995" end="12009" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881575" start="12017" end="12021" title="Bernie Sanders 2016 presidential campaign" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q61764221" start="12026" end="12048" title="Bernie Sanders 2020 presidential campaign" label="2020 presidential bids"/>
<link wikidata="Q164182" start="12072" end="12104" title="Democratic Socialists of America" label="Democratic Socialists of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="12147" end="12167" title="George Floyd protests" label="George Floyd protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q622653" start="12248" end="12262" title="Pepper spray" label="pepper-sprayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="12328" end="12334" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="12367" end="12379" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17324420" start="12440" end="12453" title="2014 Gaza War" label="2014 Gaza War"/>
<link wikidata="Q646754" start="12519" end="12530" title="open letter" label="open letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476175" start="12545" end="12550" title="Lorde" label="Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q895904" start="12630" end="12642" title="Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions" label="BDS movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q122976243" start="12658" end="12689" title="2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel" label="2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123036458" start="12698" end="12732" title="Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip (2023–present)" label="Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q124822494" start="12769" end="12786" title="Artists4Ceasefire" label="Artists4Ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="12795" end="12804" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="12840" end="12849" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844938" start="12893" end="12907" title="direct message" label="direct message"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="12924" end="12931" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q109678397" start="12973" end="13012" title="Palestinian genocide accusation" label="Israel is conducting a genocide in Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="13085" end="13098" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064078" start="13160" end="13178" title="Kevin Alfred Strom" label="Kevin Alfred Strom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="13202" end="13210" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464773" start="13350" end="13366" title="Follow the money" label="Follow the money"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="13604" end="13620" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q178678" start="13745" end="13755" title="kickboxing" label="kickboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q730348" start="13795" end="13809" title="Benny Urquidez" label="Benny Urquidez"/>
<link wikidata="Q730348" start="13985" end="14004" title="Ukidokan Karate" label="Ukidokan Kickboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="14084" end="14102" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="14113" end="14121" title="stalking" label="stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="14167" end="14177" title="Nolo contendere" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="14578" end="14590" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="14708" end="14721" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223259" wikidata="Q133566" url="?curid=223259" title="San Siro">
<text>San Siro is a football stadium in the San Siro district of Milan, Italy. It has a seating capacity of 80,018, making it the largest stadium in Italy and one of the largest stadiums in Europe. It is the home stadium of the city&#x27;s principal professional football clubs, AC Milan and Inter Milan, who contest the Derby della Madonnina.

On 3 March 1980 the stadium was named in honour of Giuseppe Meazza, the two-time World Cup winner (1934, 1938) who played for Inter and briefly for Milan in the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s, and served two stints as Inter&#x27;s manager.

The San Siro is a UEFA category four stadium. It hosted three games at the 1934 FIFA World Cup, the opening ceremony and six games at the 1990 FIFA World Cup, three games at the UEFA Euro 1980 and four European Cup finals, in 1965, 1970, 2001 and 2016. The stadium will also host the opening ceremony of the 2026 Winter Olympics in Milan and Cortina. It is one of the potential venues for the UEFA Euro 2032.

==History==


Construction of the stadium commenced in 1925 in the district of Milan named San Siro, with the new stadium originally named Nuovo Stadio Calcistico San Siro (San Siro New Football Stadium). The idea to build a stadium in the same district as the horse racing track belonged to the president of AC Milan at the time, Piero Pirelli. The architects designed a private stadium only for football, without athletics tracks which characterized Italian stadiums built with public funds. The inauguration was on 19 September 1926, when 35,000 spectators saw Inter defeat Milan 6–3. Originally, the ground was home and property of Milan. Finally, in 1947, Inter, who used to play in the Arena Civica downtown, became tenants and the two have shared the ground ever since.

From 1948 to 1955 engineers Armando Ronca and Ferruccio Calzolari developed the project for the second extension of the stadium, which was meant to increase the capacity from 50,000 to 150,000 visitors. Calzolari and Ronca proposed three additional, vertically arranged, rings of spectator rows. Nineteen spiralling ramps – each 200 metres long – gave access to the upper tiers. During construction, the realisation of the highest of the three rings was abandoned and the number of visitors limited to 100,000. Then for security reasons, the capacity was reduced to 60,000 seats and 25,000 standing.

On 2 March 1980 the stadium was named for Giuseppe Meazza (1910–1979), one of the most famous Milanese footballers. For a time, Inter fans called the stadium &quot;Stadio Meazza&quot; due to Meazza&#x27;s stronger connections with Inter (14 years as a player, three stints as manager). However, in recent years both Inter and Milan fans have called the stadium simply &quot;San Siro&quot;.

The last major renovation for the San Siro, which cost $60 million, was in of 1987–1990, for the 1990 FIFA World Cup. It was decided to modernize the stadium by increasing its capacity to 85,000 spectators and building a cover. The Municipality of Milan entrusted the work to the architects Giancarlo Ragazzi and Enrico Hoffer, and to the engineer Leo Finzi. To increase capacity, a third ring was built (only in the two curves and in the west grandstand) which rests on eleven support towers surrounded by helical ramps that allow access to the public. Four of these eleven concrete towers were located at the corners to support a new roof, which has distinctive protruding red girders.

In 1996, a museum was opened inside the stadium charting Milan and Internazionale&#x27;s history, with historical shirts, cups and trophies, shoes, art objects and souvenirs of all kinds on display to visitors.

Three Milan derby Champions League knockout ties have taken place at the San Siro, in 2003, 2005 and 2023 with Milan winning the first of two ties with the latter being won by Inter Milan. The reaction of Inter&#x27;s fans to impending defeat in the 2005 match (throwing flares and other objects at Milan players and forcing the match to be abandoned) earned the club a large fine and a four-game ban on spectators attending European fixtures there the following season.

Apart from being used by Milan and Inter, the Italy national team occasionally plays matches there. It has also been used for the European Cup finals of 1965 (won by Inter), 1970 (won by Feyenoord), and the UEFA Champions League finals of 2001 (won by Bayern Munich) and 2016 (won by Real Madrid).

The stadium was also used for the home leg of three UEFA Cup finals in which Inter was competing (1991, 1994, 1997) when these were played over two legs. It was also used by Juventus for their &#x27;home&#x27; leg in 1995 as they decided against playing their biggest matches at their own Stadio delle Alpi at the time. On each occasion, apart from 1991, the second leg was played at the San Siro and the winners lifted the trophy there. However, the stadium has not yet been selected as the host stadium since the competition changed to a single-match final format in 1997–98.

The San Siro has never hosted a final of the UEFA Cup Winners&#x27; Cup, but was the host stadium for the 1951 Latin Cup, a four-team event won by Milan. The city was also the venue for the 1956 edition of the Latin Cup (also won by Milan), but those matches were played at Arena Civica.

Amid the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy on 25 March, the Associated Press dubbed the UEFA Champions League match between Bergamo club Atalanta and Spanish club Valencia at the San Siro on 19 February as &quot;Game Zero&quot;. The match was the first time Atalanta has progressed to a Champions League round of 16 match, and had an attendance of over 40,000 people – about one third of Bergamo&#x27;s population. By 24 March, almost 7,000 people in the province of Bergamo had tested positive for COVID-19, and more than 1,000 people had died from the virus—making Bergamo the most hard-hit province in all of Italy during the pandemic.

===Potential replacement===
Milan and Internazionale announced their intention in June 2019 to build a new stadium to replace the San Siro. The new 60,000 capacity stadium, which would be constructed next to the San Siro, was initially anticipated to cost US$800 million and be ready for the 2022–23 season, although this did not come to pass.

Giuseppe Sala, the current Mayor of Milan, and the &quot;comune&quot; of Milan asked for time and stressed that the San Siro would be kept until at least the 2026 Winter Olympics and Winter Paralympics to be held in Milan and Cortina d&#x27;Ampezzo. The proposed project was also met with some skepticism and opposition by several fans of both teams.

On 26 September 2019, Milan and Internazionale released two potential designs for the new stadium next to the original ground, tentatively named the &quot;Nuovo Stadio Milano&quot;, designed by Populous and MANICA, respectively. On 22 May 2020, Italy&#x27;s heritage authority raised no objections to demolishing the San Siro. On 21 December 2021, the Populous project was chosen.

On 27 September 2023, Milan chairman Paolo Scaroni announced the club had filed a proposal to build a new 70,000-seater stadium, alongside the club headquarters and museum in the comune of San Donato Milanese, a suburb south of Milan.

==International football matches==
===Italy national team===
===1934 FIFA World Cup===
The stadium was one of the biggest venues of the 1934 FIFA World Cup and held three matches.
===UEFA Euro 1980===
The stadium was one of the four selected to host the matches during the UEFA Euro 1980.
===1990 FIFA World Cup===
The stadium was one of the venues of the 1990 FIFA World Cup and held six matches. 
===2021 UEFA Nations League Finals===
The stadium was one of two selected to host the 2021 UEFA Nations League Finals matches.
==Other sports==
=== 2026 Winter Olympics ===
San Siro is scheduled to host the opening ceremony of the 2026 Winter Olympics co-hosted by Milan.

=== Boxing ===
San Siro was the venue for the boxing match between Duilio Loi vs. Carlos Ortiz for the Junior Welterweight title in 1960.

=== Rugby union ===
The first rugby union international game at Meazza Stadium was a 1987-89 FIRA European Championship match between Italy and Romania (which won the match 12-3), attended by a crowd of approx. .
21 years later, in November 2009, the venue hosted a test match between Italy and New Zealand.
Without the limitation to approx. imposed for security reasons by the Home Office to association football events, tickets were sold, which was one of the highest attendances for the venue and more generally the highest at all for a rugby union event in Italy.
The All Blacks won 20-6.

==Concerts==
Since the 1980s, the stadium has hosted concerts by several major international artists. The first ever to perform there was Bob Marley on 27 June 1980, during the Uprising Tour. Afterwards it had the opportunity to host Bob Dylan and Santana in 1984, Bruce Springsteen in 1985, Genesis, Duran Duran and David Bowie in 1987, Michael Jackson in 1997, and in more recent times, the Red Hot Chili Peppers in 2004, U2 in 2005 and 2009, The Rolling Stones in 2006 and 2022, Madonna in 2009, Depeche Mode in 2009, 2013, 2017 and 2023, Muse in 2010, 2019, and 2023, Bon Jovi in 2013, Pearl Jam in 2014, Beyoncé in 2016, Coldplay in 2017 and 2023, Ed Sheeran in 2019, and Elton John in 2022 and Taylor Swift in 2024.

Edoardo Bennato was the first Italian artist to perform and sell out the stadium in July 1980. In 2007, Laura Pausini became the first female artist to perform at the stadium and also held two consecutive concerts on 4 and 5 June 2016.

Vasco Rossi, is the artist who holds the record for largest number of performances on the stadium, with 29 concerts between 1990 and 2019, followed by Luciano Ligabue with 13 concerts. Vasco Rossi also holds the record for consecutive concerts with six shows between 1 and 12 June 2019.

The international artist with the most performances at San Siro is Bruce Springsteen, with seven concerts as of 2024.


== Transport connections ==
The stadium is located in the northwestern part of Milan and can be reached by underground via the dedicated San Siro subway station (at the end of line M5), located just in front of the stadium, or by tram, with line 16 ending right in front of the building. The Lotto subway station (line M1 and line M5) is about 15 minutes walk away from San Siro.

Stations nearby:

==Average attendances==

==See also==
* Lists of stadiums

==References==
== External links ==
* AC Milan website
* FC Internazionale Milano website
* San Siro on Facebook
* San Siro on Facebook (AC Milan)
* San Siro on Facebook (FC Internazionale Milano)
* San Siro at Google Maps
* Stadium Guide Article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133566" start="0" end="8" title="San Siro" label="San Siro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="14" end="22" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149910" start="38" end="55" title="San Siro (district)" label="San Siro district"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="59" end="64" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q922541" start="124" end="148" title="List of football stadiums in Italy" label="largest stadium in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574571" start="164" end="190" title="List of European stadiums by capacity" label="largest stadiums in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="273" end="281" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="286" end="297" title="Inter Milan" label="Inter Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q862108" start="315" end="336" title="Derby della Madonnina" label="Derby della Madonnina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192131" start="390" end="405" title="Giuseppe Meazza" label="Giuseppe Meazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="420" end="429" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="438" end="442" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q131591" start="444" end="448" title="1938 FIFA World Cup" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q192484" start="590" end="608" title="UEFA stadium categories" label="UEFA category four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="647" end="666" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="710" end="729" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182196" start="750" end="764" title="UEFA Euro 1980" label="UEFA Euro 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265387" start="774" end="793" title="List of European Cup and UEFA Champions League winners" label="European Cup finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068904" start="798" end="802" title="1965 European Cup Final" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068946" start="804" end="808" title="1970 European Cup Final" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q772884" start="810" end="814" title="2001 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q18084793" start="819" end="823" title="2016 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630399" start="880" end="900" title="2026 Winter Olympics" label="2026 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41158" start="914" end="921" title="Cortina d&amp;#x27;Ampezzo" label="Cortina"/>
<link wikidata="Q105387376" start="965" end="979" title="UEFA Euro 2032" label="UEFA Euro 2032"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="1291" end="1299" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903338" start="1313" end="1326" title="Piero Pirelli" label="Piero Pirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="1546" end="1551" title="Inter Milan" label="Inter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="1559" end="1564" title="AC Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088761" start="1674" end="1686" title="Arena Civica" label="Arena Civica"/>
<link wikidata="Q44008854" start="1788" end="1801" title="Armando Ronca" label="Armando Ronca"/>
<link wikidata="Q192131" start="2403" end="2418" title="Giuseppe Meazza" label="Giuseppe Meazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="2849" end="2868" title="FIFA World Cup 1990" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="3000" end="3005" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="3498" end="3503" title="AC Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q862108" start="3659" end="3670" title="Derby della Madonnina" label="Milan derby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3739" end="3743" title="2002–03 UEFA Champions League#Semi-finals" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3745" end="3749" title="2004–05 UEFA Champions League#Quarter-finals" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3754" end="3758" title="2022–23 UEFA Champions League#Semi-finals" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="3764" end="3769" title="AC Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="3829" end="3840" title="Inter Milan" label="Inter Milan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4106" end="4122" title="2005–06 UEFA Champions League group stage#Group H" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068904" start="4278" end="4282" title="1965 European Cup Final" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068946" start="4299" end="4303" title="1970 European Cup Final" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q134241" start="4312" end="4321" title="Feyenoord" label="Feyenoord"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="4332" end="4353" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q772884" start="4364" end="4368" title="2001 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="4377" end="4390" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q18084793" start="4396" end="4400" title="2016 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="4409" end="4420" title="Real Madrid" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="4476" end="4484" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q845341" start="4522" end="4526" title="1991 UEFA Cup Final" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q290009" start="4528" end="4532" title="1994 UEFA Cup Final" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q291028" start="4534" end="4538" title="1997 UEFA Cup Final" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="4598" end="4606" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q607424" start="4641" end="4645" title="1995 UEFA Cup Final" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q215493" start="4713" end="4730" title="Stadio delle Alpi" label="Stadio delle Alpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q756140" start="4993" end="5000" title="1997–98 UEFA Cup" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="5048" end="5074" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216" start="5114" end="5123" title="Latin Cup" label="Latin Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="5150" end="5155" title="AC Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84104992" start="5301" end="5327" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Italy" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="5345" end="5361" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="5373" end="5394" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886" start="5422" end="5430" title="Atalanta B.C." label="Atalanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="5448" end="5456" title="CF Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q73798270" start="5572" end="5606" title="2019–20 UEFA Champions League knockout phase" label="Champions League round of 16 match"/>
<link wikidata="Q16137" start="5740" end="5759" title="province of Bergamo" label="province of Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146774" start="6270" end="6283" title="Giuseppe Sala (politician)" label="Giuseppe Sala"/>
<link wikidata="Q23936548" start="6297" end="6311" title="Mayor of Milan" label="Mayor of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630399" start="6428" end="6448" title="2026 Winter Olympics" label="2026 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q64823101" start="6453" end="6471" title="2026 Winter Paralympics" label="Winter Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41158" start="6496" end="6518" title="Cortina d&amp;#x27;Ampezzo" label="Cortina d&amp;#x27;Ampezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082849" start="6816" end="6824" title="Populous (company)" label="Populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450925" start="6829" end="6835" title="MANICA Architecture" label="MANICA"/>
<link wikidata="Q529638" start="7041" end="7054" title="Paolo Scaroni" label="Paolo Scaroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q42192" start="7193" end="7212" title="San Donato Milanese" label="San Donato Milanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="7376" end="7395" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182196" start="7513" end="7527" title="UEFA Euro 1980" label="UEFA Euro 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="7596" end="7615" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q85967332" start="7725" end="7756" title="2021 UEFA Nations League Finals" label="2021 UEFA Nations League Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630399" start="7870" end="7890" title="2026 Winter Olympics" label="2026 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="7958" end="7964" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q328126" start="7979" end="7989" title="Duilio Loi" label="Duilio Loi"/>
<link wikidata="Q719933" start="7994" end="8006" title="Carlos Ortiz (boxer)" label="Carlos Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112498" start="8015" end="8034" title="Light welterweight" label="Junior Welterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q956706" start="8136" end="8170" title="1987–1989 FIRA Trophy" label="1987-89 FIRA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="8185" end="8190" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q967505" start="8195" end="8202" title="Romania national rugby union team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="8346" end="8357" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575872" start="8429" end="8440" title="Ministry of the Interior (Italy)" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="8444" end="8464" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="8783" end="8793" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899215" start="8822" end="8835" title="Uprising Tour" label="Uprising Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="8879" end="8888" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q873384" start="8893" end="8900" title="Santana (band)" label="Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="8910" end="8927" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="8937" end="8944" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="8946" end="8957" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="8962" end="8973" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="8983" end="8998" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="9038" end="9059" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="9069" end="9071" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="9090" end="9108" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="9127" end="9134" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="9144" end="9156" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="9187" end="9191" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q259254" start="9217" end="9225" title="Bon Jovi" label="Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="9235" end="9244" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="9254" end="9261" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="9271" end="9279" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="9298" end="9308" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="9322" end="9332" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="9345" end="9357" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q774617" start="9368" end="9383" title="Edoardo Bennato" label="Edoardo Bennato"/>
<link wikidata="Q170697" start="9472" end="9485" title="Laura Pausini" label="Laura Pausini"/>
<link wikidata="Q563699" start="9756" end="9771" title="Luciano Ligabue" label="Luciano Ligabue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947983" start="10150" end="10173" title="San Siro Stadio (Milan Metro)" label="San Siro subway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238963" start="10189" end="10196" title="Milan Metro Line 5" label="line M5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783414" start="10243" end="10247" title="Trams in Milan" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085126" start="10305" end="10325" title="Lotto (Milan Metro)" label="Lotto subway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400801" start="10327" end="10334" title="Milan Metro Line 1" label="line M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196333" start="10452" end="10469" title="Lists of stadiums" label="Lists of stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="10682" end="10693" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223260" wikidata="Q7685399" url="?curid=223260" title="Taranaki wars">
<text>The Taranaki Wars were a series of conflicts in New Zealand&#x27;s Taranaki Province in the 1860s which form a major part of the New Zealand Wars:

*The First Taranaki War (1860–1861), also known as the North Taranaki War
*The Second Taranaki War (1864–1866)
*Tītokowaru&#x27;s War (1868–1869), which also took place in Taranaki

==See also==

* New Zealand Wars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7685399" start="4" end="17" title="Taranaki wars" label="Taranaki Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685396" start="67" end="84" title="Taranaki Province" label="Taranaki Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545405" start="129" end="145" title="New Zealand Wars" label="New Zealand Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453870" start="153" end="171" title="First Taranaki War" label="First Taranaki War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443579" start="227" end="246" title="Second Taranaki War" label="Second Taranaki War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810218" start="260" end="281" title="Tītokowaru&amp;#x27;s War" label="Tītokowaru&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545405" start="346" end="362" title="New Zealand Wars" label="New Zealand Wars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223261" wikidata="Q1203896" url="?curid=223261" title="Miasma">
<text>Miasma may refer to:

* Miasma (Ancient Greek religion), a contagious power that has an independent life of its own

==Medicine==
* Miasma theory, an obsolete medical theory that held that diseases were caused by a noxious form of &quot;bad air&quot;
* Miasm, an &quot;infectious principle&quot; underlying chronic disease and &quot;peculiar morbid derangement of vital force&quot;

==Music==
* &quot;Miasma&quot; (album), a 2005 album by the Black Dahlia Murder
* &quot;Miasma&quot; (EP), a 2001 EP by Hecate Enthroned
* &quot;Miasma&quot;, a 1987 album by the Bevis Frond
* &quot;Miasma&quot; (Ghost song), 2018</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1203896" start="0" end="6" title="Miasma" label="Miasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176637" start="24" end="55" title="Miasma (Ancient Greek religion)" label="Miasma (Ancient Greek religion)"/>
<link wikidata="Q607329" start="132" end="145" title="Miasma theory" label="Miasma theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="253" end="258" title="Miasm" label="Miasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174165" start="395" end="421" title="Miasma (album)" label="&amp;quot;Miasma&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827751" start="465" end="488" title="Miasma (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Miasma&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409730" start="558" end="573" title="the Bevis Frond" label="the Bevis Frond"/>
<link wikidata="Q51845051" start="576" end="607" title="Miasma (Ghost song)" label="&amp;quot;Miasma&amp;quot; (Ghost song)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223265" wikidata="Q1164348" url="?curid=223265" title="Threesome">
<text>In human sexuality, a threesome is &quot;a sexual interaction between three people whereby at least one engages in physical sexual behaviour with both the other individuals&quot;. While the term &quot;threesome&quot; typically refers to sexual activity involving three participants, it has at times been used to refer to a long-term domestic relationship, such as polyamory or a ménage à trois.

A threesome is a form of group sex that typically occurs in private settings, such as spontaneous sexual activity among three friends or in the context of casual sex or a hook up. A threesome may occur in specific contexts or environments that allow for sex, such as swingers events, orgies, or sex parties. Threesomes are a common element of sexual fantasy, and are widely depicted in pornography.

== Types ==
The people in a threesome may be of any gender and sexual orientation. Each participant may engage in any type of sex act with one or both of the others, such as vaginal, anal, oral, or manual sex. One or more of the participants may engage in autoerotic sexual activity, such as masturbation, possibly without physical contact with the other participants. It is a matter of subjective definition whether participation of a third person without physical contact constitutes a threesome and this sort of sexual activity might instead be interpreted as voyeurism or cuckolding or cuckqueaning. Troilism is a term that encompasses both threesomes and cuckoldry, although its usage across literature is inconsistent.

Threesomes are sometimes described using shorthand to refer to who was involved in the threesome e.g. MMF (male, male, female); FFM (female, female, male); MMM (male, male, male); FFF (female, female, female).

&quot;Sandwich&quot; is slang for a person performing both receptive and insertive anal and/or vaginal sex simultaneously during a threesome, being positioned between the two partners.

== Academic research ==
The first major academic work to address threesomes specifically was published in 1988, called: &quot;Threesomes: Studies in Sex, Power, and Intimacy&quot; by Arno Karlen. In the work, drawing mainly from interview data, Karlen outlined how threesomes were often viewed as qualitatively different to other forms of group sex. Other notable findings include that threesomes were often viewed by women as a safe way to explore their sexuality; they often consisted of a couple joined by a third person; and that the third person was not necessarily viewed or treated equally. Karlen also suggested that the societal view of threesomes cast those who engaged in them as radically different to other members of society:&quot;There is a common tendency to think of people who have been in threesomes as alien beings. Like swingers, homosexuals and others who deviate from basic sexual norms, they seem to many to have entered another social, psychological, and moral sphere.&quot;Research exploring rates of threesome engagement suggest that men have both higher levels of interest and participation in threesomes. One study soliciting responses to a sex survey via a British newspaper in 1987 found that 34% of 1,862 men, and 15% of 2,905 women had experience of a threesome. From a nationally representative sample in the US in 2017, 34.1% of men and 11.1% of women found a threesome to be at least somewhat appealing and 18% of men and 10% of women had engaged in one.

== Sex positions ==
A threesome may involve various sex positions, for example:

==In popular culture==
Threesome scenes are featured in various films and TV series, including &quot;Summer Lovers&quot; (1982), &quot;Threesome&quot; (1994), &quot;Wild Things&quot; (1998), &quot;American Psycho&quot; (2000), &quot;Zoolander&quot; (2001), &quot;Y Tu Mamá También&quot; (2001), &quot;Ken Park&quot; (2002), &quot;The Dreamers&quot; (2003), &quot;Kiss Me Again&quot; (2006), &quot;Shortbus&quot; (2006), &quot;Vicky Cristina Barcelona&quot; (2008), &quot;Shame&quot; (2011), &quot;21 Jump Street&quot; (2012), &quot;On the Road&quot; (2012), &quot;Savages&quot; (2012), &quot;Spring Breakers&quot; (2012), &quot;Knock Knock&quot; (2015), &quot;Love&quot; (2015).

==See also==
*Adultery
*Bigamy
*Bisexuality
*Compersion 
*Foursome 
*Open marriage
*Orgy
*Polygamy

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="3" end="18" title="human sexuality" label="human sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164348" start="22" end="31" title="Threesome" label="threesome"/>
<link wikidata="Q272026" start="364" end="373" title="polyamory" label="polyamory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159593" start="379" end="393" title="ménage à trois" label="ménage à trois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675376" start="421" end="430" title="group sex" label="group sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q442358" start="551" end="561" title="casual sex" label="casual sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003349" start="567" end="574" title="Hookup culture" label="hook up"/>
<link wikidata="Q626503" start="663" end="671" title="Swinging (sexual practice)" label="swingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q912179" start="680" end="686" title="orgy" label="orgies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675376" start="691" end="702" title="sex party (group sex)" label="sex parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969374" start="739" end="753" title="sexual fantasy" label="sexual fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="782" end="793" title="pornography" label="pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="848" end="854" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="859" end="877" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="970" end="977" title="Sexual intercourse" label="vaginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="979" end="983" title="Anal sex" label="anal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122" start="985" end="989" title="Oral sex" label="oral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="994" end="1004" title="Non-penetrative sex#Manual sex" label="manual sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q782623" start="1052" end="1062" title="Autoeroticism" label="autoerotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="1088" end="1100" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183548" start="1359" end="1368" title="voyeurism" label="voyeurism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1372" end="1382" title="cuckolding#Cuckoldry as a fetish" label="cuckolding"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001487" start="1386" end="1395" title="cuckquean" label="cuckquean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654782" start="1400" end="1408" title="Troilism" label="Troilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018803" start="2102" end="2113" title="Arno Karlen" label="Arno Karlen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3463" end="3476" title="Sex position#Threesomes" label="sex positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302544" start="3593" end="3606" title="Summer Lovers" label="Summer Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308638" start="3627" end="3636" title="Threesome (1994 film)" label="Threesome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133610" start="3657" end="3668" title="Wild Things (film)" label="Wild Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405126" start="3689" end="3704" title="American Psycho (film)" label="American Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q220192" start="3725" end="3734" title="Zoolander" label="Zoolander"/>
<link wikidata="Q128848" start="3755" end="3772" title="Y Tu Mamá También" label="Y Tu Mamá También"/>
<link wikidata="Q80318" start="3793" end="3801" title="Ken Park" label="Ken Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q822946" start="3822" end="3834" title="The Dreamers (2003 film)" label="The Dreamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375172" start="3855" end="3868" title="Kiss Me Again (2006 film)" label="Kiss Me Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q930746" start="3889" end="3897" title="Shortbus" label="Shortbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212123" start="3918" end="3942" title="Vicky Cristina Barcelona" label="Vicky Cristina Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q909445" start="3963" end="3968" title="Shame (2011 film)" label="Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q214014" start="3989" end="4003" title="21 Jump Street (film)" label="21 Jump Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q938858" start="4024" end="4035" title="On the Road (2012 film)" label="On the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143802" start="4056" end="4063" title="Savages (2012 film)" label="Savages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781285" start="4084" end="4099" title="Spring Breakers" label="Spring Breakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151446" start="4120" end="4131" title="Knock Knock (2015 film)" label="Knock Knock"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829024" start="4152" end="4156" title="Love (2015 film)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="4186" end="4194" title="Adultery" label="Adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q720243" start="4196" end="4202" title="Bigamy" label="Bigamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="4204" end="4215" title="Bisexuality" label="Bisexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q272026" start="4217" end="4227" title="Compersion" label="Compersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565134" start="4230" end="4238" title="Foursome (group sex)" label="Foursome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383348" start="4241" end="4254" title="Open marriage" label="Open marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q912179" start="4256" end="4260" title="Orgy" label="Orgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="4262" end="4270" title="Polygamy" label="Polygamy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223268" wikidata="Q935105" url="?curid=223268" title="The Royal Tenenbaums">
<text>The Royal Tenenbaums is a 2001 American comedy-drama film directed by Wes Anderson and co-written with Owen Wilson. It stars Danny Glover, Gene Hackman, Anjelica Huston, Bill Murray, Gwyneth Paltrow, Ben Stiller, Luke Wilson, and Owen Wilson. Ostensibly based on a nonexistent novel, and told with a narrative influenced by the writing of J. D. Salinger, it follows the lives of three gifted siblings who experience great success in youth, and even greater disappointment and failure in adulthood. The children&#x27;s eccentric father, Royal Tenenbaum (Hackman), leaves them in their adolescent years and returns to them after they have grown, falsely claiming he has a terminal illness. He works on reconciling with his children and ex-wife (Huston).

With a variety of influences, including Louis Malle&#x27;s 1963 film &quot;The Fire Within&quot; and Orson Welles&#x27; 1942 film &quot;The Magnificent Ambersons&quot;, the story involves themes of the dysfunctional family, lost greatness, and redemption. An absurdist and ironic sense of humor pervades the film, which features a soundtrack subsequently released in two albums. &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; was shot in and around New York City, including a house in Harlem used for the Tenenbaum residence. The filmmakers went to efforts to distinguish the film&#x27;s backgrounds from a recognizable New York, with fashions and sets combining the appearances of different time periods.

After debuting at the New York Film Festival, &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; received positive reviews from critics and was Anderson&#x27;s most financially successful film until 2014&#x27;s &quot;The Grand Budapest Hotel&quot;. Hackman won a Golden Globe for Best Actor - Musical or Comedy for his performance at the 59th Golden Globe Awards, and Anderson and Wilson were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay at the 74th Academy Awards. In 2016, it was included in BBC&#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century.

== Plot ==
Royal Tenenbaum explains to his three adolescent children, Chas, Margot, and Richie, that he and his wife, Etheline, are separating. Each of the children achieved great success at a young age. Chas is a math and business genius, from whom Royal steals money. Margot, who was adopted, was awarded a grant for a play that she wrote in the ninth grade. Richie is a tennis prodigy and artist who expresses his love for Margot. Eli Cash is the Tenenbaums&#x27; neighbor and Richie&#x27;s best friend. Also part of the Tenenbaum household is Pagoda, the trusted valet.

Twenty-two years later, Royal is kicked out of the hotel where he has been living. The children are in a post-success slump, with Richie traveling the world on a cruise ship, following a breakdown. He writes to Eli revealing his romantic love for Margot. Chas has become overprotective of his sons, Ari and Uzi, following his wife Rachael&#x27;s death in a plane crash. Margot is married to neurologist Raleigh St. Clair, from whom she hides her smoking and her checkered past. Raleigh is conducting research on a subject named Dudley Heinsbergen, and diagnoses Dudley with Heinsbergen Syndrome.

Etheline&#x27;s longtime accountant, Henry Sherman, proposes to her. Learning of Henry&#x27;s proposal via Pagoda, Royal claims that he has stomach cancer to win back his wife&#x27;s and children&#x27;s affections. Etheline calls her children home, and Royal moves back in and sets up medical equipment in Richie&#x27;s room. Royal learns of Chas&#x27; overprotective nature and takes his grandsons on an adventure involving shoplifting and dog fighting. On their return, Chas berates him for endangering his boys while Royal accuses Chas of having a nervous breakdown.

Eli, with whom Margot has been having an affair, tells her that Richie told him he loves her. Royal discovers the affair and objects to Margot&#x27;s treatment of Raleigh, who confides to Richie his suspicions of Margot having an affair. He and Richie hire a private investigator to surveil her. Meanwhile, Henry investigates Royal&#x27;s cancer claim and discovers his hospital had closed, his doctor does not exist, and that his cancer medication is only Tic Tacs. He confronts Pagoda, Royal&#x27;s partner in the scheme, and gathers the family to tell them that Royal has been lying about his illness. Afterwards, Royal and Pagoda are kicked out from the family home and into a gypsy cab.

Richie and Raleigh get the private eye&#x27;s report on Margot, which reveals her history of smoking and sexual promiscuity, including a previous marriage to a Jamaican recording artist. Both men take the news hard, with Richie going into a bathroom, shaving off his hair and beard, and slashing his wrists in an attempt at suicide. Dudley finds Richie and Raleigh rushes him to hospital. As the Tenenbaums sit in the waiting room, Raleigh confronts Margot about her past, reveals that he knows she smokes, and then leaves. Richie checks himself out of the hospital and meets with Margot in his childhood tent to confess his love. They quietly cherish their mutual, secret love and they kiss.

Royal decides that he wants Etheline to be happy, and finally files for a divorce. Before Henry and Etheline&#x27;s wedding, Eli, high on mescaline, crashes his car into the side of the house. Royal rescues Ari and Uzi just in time, but the boys&#x27; dog, Buckley, is killed in the collision. Enraged, Chas chases Eli through the house and tosses him into the neighbor&#x27;s yard. Eli and Chas agree that they both need help. Chas thanks Royal for saving his sons and for buying them a Dalmatian named Sparkplug from the responding firemen as a replacement for Buckley. Forty-eight hours later, Etheline and Henry are married in a judge&#x27;s chambers.

Some time later, Margot releases a new play inspired by her family and past events, Raleigh publishes a book about Dudley&#x27;s condition, Eli checks himself into a drug rehabilitation facility in North Dakota, and Richie begins teaching a junior tennis program. Chas becomes less overprotective of his sons, and Royal seems to have improved his relationship with all his children, and looks to be on better terms with Etheline. Sometime later, Royal suffers a heart attack and dies at the age of 68. Chas accompanies him in the ambulance on the way to the hospital, and is the only witness to his death. The family attends his funeral, where the epitaph (which he wrote beforehand) reads that he &quot;Died tragically rescuing his family from the wreckage of a destroyed sinking battleship.&quot;

== Cast ==

&quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; has an ensemble cast, led by Hackman. Alec Baldwin also serves as the narrator. The fictional family and performers are:


== Production ==
=== Development ===
A starting point for the story&#x27;s concept was the divorce of director Wes Anderson&#x27;s mother and father, though the evolved story bears little resemblance to it. French director Louis Malle&#x27;s works, such as his 1971 &quot;Murmur of the Heart&quot;, were an influence on Anderson, with &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; particularly drawing from &quot;The Fire Within&quot; (1963), where a suicidal man tries to meet his friends. A line from &quot;The Fire Within&quot; is translated into English and appears as &quot;I&#x27;m going to kill myself tomorrow.&quot; Orson Welles&#x27; 1942 film &quot;The Magnificent Ambersons&quot; was also an influence, with Anderson acknowledging he may have subconsciously selected the main set for its reflection of Welles&#x27; production. E. L. Konigsburg&#x27;s book &quot;From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler&quot;, where the characters Claudia and Jamie Kincaid run away to live in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, inspired the story of Margot and Richie hiding out in a museum. Having read the book, Anderson said it long stuck with him.

J. D. Salinger&#x27;s characters in the 1961 book &quot;Franny and Zooey&quot; inspired much of the child prodigy material. The children of the Glass family in Salinger&#x27;s work are precocious with an abundance of exceptional talents. &quot;Franny and Zooey&quot; also features characters wearing distinctive fashions and a character with the name Tannenbaum. &quot;Tenenbaum&quot; is the name of a family of Anderson&#x27;s acquaintance.

The film &quot;Les Enfants Terribles&quot; (1950) by Jean-Pierre Melville partly inspired Richie and Margot&#x27;s relationship. Other inspirations were one of Anderson&#x27;s childhood friends who loved his sister, and Anderson&#x27;s interest in the incest taboo; he acknowledged the relationship became more believable when the story was revised to make Margot adopted. In inventing the characters, Owen Wilson and Anderson also used neurologist Oliver Sacks as a model for Raleigh, while the notion of Eli writing &quot;Old Custer&quot; was based on Cormac McCarthy&#x27;s style of storytelling. Wilson and Anderson completed the screenplay in two years, needing the extended time because of its complexity.

=== Casting ===
Gene Hackman was Anderson&#x27;s choice for Royal, with Anderson saying, &quot;It was written for him against his wishes&quot;. Etheline Tenenbaum was written with Anjelica Huston in mind. Hackman was hesitant about accepting the role, citing his lack of understanding of, or commonalities with Royal. Hackman&#x27;s agent persuaded him to take the role, though his reluctance led to Michael Caine being considered for the part. Gene Wilder was also rumored to be a possible choice.

Hackman&#x27;s decision to star made it easier to assemble a cast of high-profile actors to appear with him. However, Ben Stiller and Gwyneth Paltrow were available only for a limited time, requiring the shooting schedule to work around them. Following a nadir in his career with &quot;Larger Than Life&quot; and &quot;The Man Who Knew Too Little&quot; in the 1990s, Bill Murray had opted to focus on supporting parts in offbeat comedies, starting with Anderson&#x27;s &quot;Rushmore&quot; and then &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot;. Anderson discovered Stephen Lea Sheppard, who played Dudley, through his friend Judd Apatow, as he was acting in Apatow&#x27;s television series, &quot;Freaks and Geeks&quot;.

Alec Baldwin was approached by Anderson to narrate the film, though Anderson reportedly told him at first that he actually didn&#x27;t want the film to be narrated and wasn&#x27;t going to use his voiceover for the finished film, as the producers were insisting he have one. When Baldwin shared this story during the Tribeca Film Festival in 2021 while celebrating the film&#x27;s 20th anniversary, Anderson replied that he never said that. Despite Baldwin&#x27;s claims, &quot;The Wes Anderson Collection&quot; author Matt Zoller Seitz pointed out in his book that the narration was always present on the screenplay.

=== Filming ===
Around 250 sets were employed during photography, with art director Carl Sprague saying the crew avoided sites that would identify New York City, even altering street signs. The house used in the film is located near the famous Sugar Hill in the Hamilton Heights section of Harlem in Manhattan at 339 Convent Avenue. For the &quot;quintessential New York story&quot;, Anderson went location scouting in May 2000, spotted the house and admired what he described as its &quot;storybook quality&quot;. The owner, Willie Woods, was planning to remodel it, but agreed to delay the project for six months for principal photography. Anderson said the dalmatian mice that populate the house had their spots applied using a Sharpie.

The Waldorf-Astoria was used for the hotel scenes, while Central Park Zoo depicted a rain forest. A United States Navy training ship represented Richie&#x27;s ship. The crew also added 10,000 square feet of AstroTurf at Forest Hills Stadium, to depict Richie&#x27;s tennis match.
During production, Anderson gave Huston photographs of his mother who, like Etheline, was an archaeologist. Huston said, &quot;Wes would send pictures of his mother in aviator jackets or on archaeological digs, and he very specifically wanted me to wear a certain locket. Finally, I asked him, &#x27;Wes, am I playing your mother?&#x27;&quot; Anderson replied this was not the case.

Anderson and Huston had a tense relationship with Hackman, who was not always amiable on set. On the first day Hackman and Huston appeared in a scene together, Huston had to slap him, and later said the slap was real and &quot;I hit him a really good one. I saw the imprint of my hand on his cheek and I thought, he&#x27;s going to kill me.&quot; During young Margot&#x27;s birthday scene in the opening scenes, Huston&#x27;s hair caught fire from a birthday candle. Anderson credited Kumar Pallana with extinguishing the blaze before Huston was seriously injured.

As shooting continued, the bird used for Mordecai was caught by a citizen of New Jersey, who demanded a price for its return. It was replaced instead by one more white in color.

== Themes ==
Journalist Jesse Fox Mayshark wrote that, like the similarly titled &quot;The Magnificent Ambersons&quot;, Anderson&#x27;s story follows an older mother considering remarriage, creating a stir in the family. Professor Claire Perkins added that in &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot;, this tension regarding a possible remarriage has minor class and racial elements, with Chas refusing to call Henry by his first name and Royal calling Henry an &quot;old black buck&quot;. Royal also calls Henry &quot;Coltrane&quot; and speaks jive, drawing on racial stereotypes found in media. To &quot;The Magnificent Ambersons&quot;″ family-drama template, Mayshark wrote that Anderson added his &quot;naturally redemptive instincts&quot;, stressing &quot;forgiveness&quot; over villainizing the guilty. Royal&#x27;s &quot;redemption&quot; is a central theme. Professor Carl Plantinga assessed Royal&#x27;s motives as shifting from &quot;purely selfish&quot; considerations to genuine hopes for reconciliation when he is removed from the home after his false illness is exposed. Perkins observed that before Royal&#x27;s death, he had endeared himself to each Tenenbaum in some way. To do this, he had to force his way back into the family&#x27;s lives as an intruder professing an intent to &quot;make up for lost time&quot;. The prospect of Royal and Etheline rekindling their marriage is largely regarded as impossible, though she weeps at Royal&#x27;s false terminal illness, and Royal inquires about her &quot;love life&quot;. In the end, the &quot;ritual community celebration signalling successful social integration&quot; that is a staple of comedy endings comes in the form of Etheline&#x27;s marriage to Henry rather than a remarriage to Royal, Plantinga wrote.

Academic Donna Kornhaber theorized that through adultery and pronouncements that &quot;There are no teams&quot;, Royal had separated himself from the Tenenbaums; Royal&#x27;s belief that he is not a Tenenbaum is signaled when he seconds Eli&#x27;s sentiment that he &quot;always wanted to be a Tenenbaum&quot;. However, Kornhaber added that Royal may also view his family members as &quot;external expressions of himself&quot;, and this explains why the title refers to them as Royal Tenenbaums.
Author Mark Browning also identified the dysfunctional family and family happiness as a key theme. Mayshark commented on the depiction of decline after genius, with all the characters being past the peak of their greatness and now being left &quot;sad, individually and collectively&quot;. Browning assessed the Tenenbaum sons and daughter as child prodigies, with &quot;clear-cut genius status&quot;. Ethel is not negligent as a mother, fostering her children&#x27;s talents, though in dispensing money without question she may have spoiled them.

The children grow up hailed as a &quot;family of geniuses&quot;, and when they face failure in adulthood, they turn to nostalgia, with academic Daniel Cross Turner remarking that the word &quot;nostalgia&quot; literally means returning home in pain. The fact that the Tenenbaums dress alike as children and adults also reveals their nostalgia, and Turner connected Royal&#x27;s nostalgia with Dudley&#x27;s fictional Heinsbergen syndrome symptom, an inability to &quot;tell time&quot;. Professor Whitney Crothers Dilley considered that confrontation between past reputation and the private reality is what moves Margot not to take the word &quot;genius&quot; lightly, and to deny she was ever a genius, despite Royal insisting people called her one. Although the film ends without any of the characters regaining their lost glory, they form new bonds, particularly between Royal and Chas, or realize secret desires, in the case of Richie and Margot.

Film Professor Christopher Robe commented on the loss of loved ones, particularly Royal&#x27;s parents and Chas&#x27; wife Rachael, having an impact on the characters&#x27; depression. Royal&#x27;s mother Helen O&#x27;Reilly Tenenbaum is rarely named, but her role in shaping Royal and guiding his behavior is profound, with Robe arguing this is signified by a shot of Royal under a painting of Helen in a World War II Red Cross outfit. Royal&#x27;s father is never named, but Royal also misses him; Robe further hypothesized that Chas alienating his sons after Rachael&#x27;s death shows that family history is repeating itself.

== Style ==

The storytelling has been described as &quot;absurdist&quot;, ironic, and &quot;whimsical&quot;. Mayshark wrote that literature shapes the narrative, which is presented as a book with chapters, a prologue and an epilogue. To the chapter-format of the story, Plantinga added that Baldwin&#x27;s narration gives &quot;exposition&quot; that &quot;should arouse courtesy&quot; in the viewers for the characters. Commenting on the literary framework, Browning detailed how the first scene has the camera looking down on the book being checked out at the library, followed by the tone of J. D. Salinger&#x27;s study of &quot;disillusionment&quot;. Archaic dialogue with the feel of literature (&quot;You&#x27;ve made a cuckold of me&quot;) is combined with crass, casual dialogue (&quot;We can swing by her grave, too&quot;). Film scholar Kim Wilkins also characterized lines such as &quot;I&#x27;m very sorry for your loss. Your mother was a terribly attractive woman&quot; as &quot;deadpan&quot;, &quot;Andersonian&quot;, and &quot;unexpected expressions&quot;. Ethel also reveals her fondness for Royal&#x27;s &quot;little expressions&quot;, such as &quot;true blue&quot;.

Mayshark added the style is &quot;imaginatively visual&quot;, with detailed sets and an ambiguous time setting, featuring fashions from the 1960s to the present. Critic Amy Wallace placed it in Anderson&#x27;s cinematic universe, where &quot;the colors are brighter, the bookshelves are meticulously ordered, the bunk beds aren&#x27;t just made – they look like you could bounce a silver dollar off them&quot;. Professor Dilley identified the setting with the New York City of the 1970s, matching the backdrop style to depictions of the city in the films &quot;The French Connection&quot; and &quot;Midnight Cowboy&quot;; this feel is heightened by music popular in the 1970s, by The Rolling Stones and Paul Simon. Dilley argued this depiction of a lost New York is connected to &quot;literary history&quot;. Plantinga commented an &quot;illustrative, intentionally artificial tableaux&quot; begins immediately with Baldwin&#x27;s narration.

Wes Anderson&#x27;s brother Eric Chase Anderson sketched proposed appearances for the characters before shooting. The character Richie is presented as a tennis star with headbands and armbands, and sunglasses that virtually hide his face, until his &quot;ritualistic&quot; shaving scene reveals him. The appearance of Margot, played by Paltrow, was modeled after singer Nico. Chas, played by Stiller, appears in a red tracksuit, matching him with Ari and Uzi and suggesting &quot;running away from sadness&quot;. The young performers playing Royal and Ethel&#x27;s sons and daughter wear the same costumes as their adult counterparts, evoking &quot;arrested development&quot;.

With the cinematography, Wes Anderson enjoyed keeping the camera mobile, providing new perspectives in a single take with no actual cut. Analyst Thomas Caldwell judged the cinematography as unusual, comprising &quot;steady symmetrical medium shots&quot; that help the viewer see the characters&#x27; emotional anguish more clearly, particularly in their eyes. Author Gustavo Mercado considered the medium shots a tool to give character and surroundings comparable levels of attention, and to communicate the character&#x27;s eccentricities and activities. Mercado assessed the scene with Margot smoking in the bathroom to display &quot;carefully chosen lighting, depth of field, wardrobe, body language, and ... composition&quot;. The opening credits use &quot;medium close-up&quot; shots with each character looking towards the direction of the camera, contributing to the literary narrative as a &quot;Cast of Characters&quot;.

The paintings in Eli&#x27;s apartment are by Mexican artist Miguel Calderón. Font designer Mark Simonson noted Anderson makes extensive use of typography, in particular Futura and its variation Futura Bold. For characters who are not biologically Tenenbaums, such as Raleigh, other typefaces are used, such as Helvetica on the covers of the character&#x27;s books.

== Soundtrack ==
Anderson declared &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; to be &quot;the most complex, ambitious musical piece I&#x27;ve ever worked on&quot;. The soundtrack features rock songs from the 1960s through the 1990s. There have been two soundtrack album releases for the film, though not all of the songs used in the film appear on the albums. Songs used include: Paul Simon&#x27;s &quot;Me and Julio Down by the Schoolyard&quot;, Van Morrison&#x27;s &quot;Everyone&quot;, John Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Look at Me&quot;, Nick Drake&#x27;s &quot;Fly&quot;, the Mutato Muzika Orchestra version of the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Hey Jude&quot;, &quot;These Days&quot; by Nico, and two songs by the Rolling Stones. Erik Satie&#x27;s &quot;Gymnopédie No. 1&quot; is also used in the film, as is &quot;Christmas Time is Here&quot;, the iconic song from &quot;A Charlie Brown Christmas&quot; (1965) by Vince Guaraldi. According to the marketing of the film, particular musical instruments are matched with each character, with the association established in the introductory narration and continuing to the conclusion.

In 2002, the soundtrack was re-released containing the score, composed by Mark Mothersbaugh, along with more of the songs. The Rolling Stones&#x27; songs &quot;She Smiled Sweetly&quot; and &quot;Ruby Tuesday&quot; were omitted for lack of rights.

== Release ==
The film premiered at the New York Film Festival on October 5, 2001, which had previously screened Anderson&#x27;s &quot;Rushmore&quot; in 1998. Distributed by Touchstone Pictures, it opened in New York City and Los Angeles in December 2001. In February 2002, it was screened at the 52nd Berlin International Film Festival.

To mark a decade since its debut, Anderson and his stars returned to the New York Film Festival for a screening of &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; in fall 2011. After previously publishing a DVD edition, The Criterion Collection released a Blu-ray in Region A in 2012.

== Reception ==
=== Box office ===
On its opening weekend, &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; made $276,891 in five theaters, or around $55,396 at each venue. By February 2002, it doubled &quot;Rushmore&quot;″s total gross at the U.S. box office.

The film finished its run on June 20, 2002, with a gross of $52,364,010 in North America. It made $19,077,240 in other territories, for a worldwide total of $71,441,250. With the final $70 million gross, it remained Anderson&#x27;s most financially successful film when it returned to the New York Film Festival in 2011. &quot;The Grand Budapest Hotel&quot; surpassed it in 2014.

=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 81% based on 210 reviews, and an average rating of 7.50/10. The site&#x27;s critics consensus reads: &quot;&quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; is a delightful adult comedy with many quirks and a sense of poignancy. Many critics especially praised Hackman&#x27;s performance.” On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 76 out of 100, based on 34 critics, indicating &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;C−&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

At its premiere at the New York Film Festival, A.O. Scott wrote in &quot;The New York Times&quot; that it eventually won him over as charming, and that Hackman brought &quot;quick precision and deep seriousness [that] nearly rescue[d] this movie from its own whimsy&quot;. &quot;Variety&quot;″s Todd McCarthy described the film, &quot;As richly conceived as the novel it pretends to be.&quot;
Richard Schickel of &quot;Time&quot; wrote, &quot;As with Anderson&#x27;s &quot;Rushmore&quot;, there&#x27;s a certain annoying preciousness to this film—it&#x27;s not so consistently wise or amusing as he thinks it is—but it has its moments&quot;. Roger Ebert awarded it three-and-a-half stars, admiring how viewers can be ambivalent toward the events in the story. The &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;″s Mick LaSalle was enthusiastic, praising the film as &quot;like no other, an epic, depressive comedy, with lots of ironic laughs and a humane and rather sad feeling at its core&quot;. Anthony Lane commented in &quot;The New Yorker&quot; on the setting, which did not truly feel like New York, but &quot;a step-city, or a city-in-law&quot;, and said that &quot;the communal oddity&quot; gradually won him over. Peter Travers in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; found all the cast great in different ways, while singling out Hackman. &quot;L.A. Weekly&quot;″s Manohla Dargis wrote it had enough laughs to be classified as a comedy, but it contained &quot;a deep vein of melancholia to its drollery&quot;. &quot;The Guardian&quot;″s Joe Queenan embraced it as a &quot;bizarre redemption tale&quot;.
Some critics disagreed about the success of the film and its style. &quot;New York&quot;″s Peter Rainer wrote, &quot;Anderson is something of a prodigy himself, and he&#x27;s riddled with talent, but he hasn&#x27;t figured out how to be askew and heartfelt at the same time.&quot; In the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, Kenneth Turan assessed the film as indulging too far in Anderson&#x27;s vision, creating an unknown world. In his &quot;2015 Movie Guide&quot;, Leonard Maltin gave it two-and-a-half stars out of four, complimenting the eccentricity, but finding no storyline.

&quot;Time&quot; listed &quot;Royal Tenenbaums&quot; in its Top 10 Troubled Genius Films list in 2009, comparing Anderson&#x27;s characters to Salinger&#x27;s, in an &quot;ultimately touching package&quot;. In 2013, &quot;Time&quot; also named Henry Sherman as one of 10 memorable accountant characters in film history, citing his decency, success as an author and lack of confidence in his pursuit of Etheline. In 2014, &quot;The Huffington Post&quot; journalist Lisa Thomson evaluated it as one of Anderson&#x27;s best films, and that finding laughs in divorce was a highlight. In 2017, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; cited Richie&#x27;s tennis meltdown scene as one of the best tennis scenes in cinema history, making an analogy to Björn Borg.

In 2008, a poll taken by &quot;Empire&quot; ranked &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; as the 159th greatest film ever made. A 2016 poll of international critics assembling BBC&#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century also voted it one of the 100 greatest motion pictures since 2000. Hackman has received kudos for his performance. In 2015, &quot;IndieWire&quot; named Royal as Anderson&#x27;s most memorable character, crediting Hackman for bringing the character beyond the director&#x27;s norm; the same list also named Margot &quot;the ur-Anderson female&quot; character.

=== Accolades ===
The film received a nomination at the 74th Academy Awards for Best Original Screenplay. CNN reported that it had been considered as a possibility for nominations for Best Cinematography, Best Art Direction and Best Actor for Hackman. Hackman did win the Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy at the 59th Golden Globe Awards, but was unable to accept the award in person.

== Legacy ==

The narration and the way the film follows each family member was reprised in Fox&#x27;s critically acclaimed television sitcom &quot;Arrested Development&quot;. Jason Bateman, who stars on the series as Michael Bluth, describes the show as &quot;&quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot; shot like &quot;COPS&quot;&quot;. &quot;Arrested Development&quot; creator and head writer Mitchell Hurwitz said that when he saw &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot;, he already had the idea for &quot;Arrested Development&quot; in mind and thought, &quot;Well, that&#x27;s it, I can&#x27;t do &quot;that&quot; anymore&quot;, but subsequently changed his mind.

Alec Baldwin, the narrator, has effusively praised the film, including it in his Top 10 Criterion Collection and calling it &quot;arguably one of the most original movies, in tone and style, since Robert Altman&#x27;s &quot;M*A*S*H&quot;&quot;. He also modeled his performance of the character Jack Donaghy on the television series &quot;30 Rock&quot; after Hackman&#x27;s speech and movements as Royal Tenenbaum.

The Tenenbaums&#x27; style has been cited as an influence in fashion design, and Margot Tenenbaum was described by &quot;Vogue&quot; as the &quot;muse of the season&quot; for Spring/Summer 2015 collections.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="40" end="52" title="comedy-drama" label="comedy-drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q223687" start="70" end="82" title="Wes Anderson" label="Wes Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161916" start="103" end="114" title="Owen Wilson" label="Owen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192165" start="125" end="137" title="Danny Glover" label="Danny Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q150943" start="139" end="151" title="Gene Hackman" label="Gene Hackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190998" start="153" end="168" title="Anjelica Huston" label="Anjelica Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q29250" start="170" end="181" title="Bill Murray" label="Bill Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="183" end="198" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q47100" start="200" end="211" title="Ben Stiller" label="Ben Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q107769" start="213" end="224" title="Luke Wilson" label="Luke Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="339" end="353" title="J. D. Salinger" label="J. D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q50013" start="518" end="527" title="Eccentricity (behavior)" label="eccentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364787" start="670" end="686" title="terminal illness" label="terminal illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q55392" start="793" end="804" title="Louis Malle" label="Louis Malle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053405" start="828" end="843" title="The Fire Within" label="The Fire Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="854" end="866" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q628664" start="889" end="914" title="The Magnificent Ambersons (film)" label="The Magnificent Ambersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q906343" start="955" end="975" title="dysfunctional family" label="dysfunctional family"/>
<link wikidata="Q333625" start="1012" end="1021" title="Absurdism" label="absurdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761731" start="1084" end="1094" title="The Royal Tenenbaums (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1188" end="1201" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="1224" end="1230" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q25648" start="1468" end="1490" title="New York Film Festival" label="New York Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521099" start="1645" end="1669" title="The Grand Budapest Hotel" label="The Grand Budapest Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="1691" end="1738" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe for Best Actor - Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q730491" start="1766" end="1790" title="59th Golden Globe Awards" label="59th Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="1839" end="1881" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q753167" start="1889" end="1908" title="74th Academy Awards" label="74th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q26705935" start="1938" end="1987" title="BBC&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century" label="BBC&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="2363" end="2369" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="2370" end="2377" title="child prodigy" label="prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="2727" end="2738" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="2956" end="2967" title="neurologist" label="neurologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="3302" end="3316" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q383906" start="3587" end="3598" title="shoplifting" label="shoplifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066914" start="3603" end="3615" title="dog fighting" label="dog fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="3713" end="3730" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="3992" end="4012" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050530" start="4190" end="4198" title="Tic Tac" label="Tic Tacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127469" start="4586" end="4594" title="Jamaican people" label="Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="5258" end="5267" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q17504" start="5608" end="5617" title="Dalmatian (dog)" label="Dalmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q109925059" start="5753" end="5774" title="judge&amp;#x27;s chambers" label="judge&amp;#x27;s chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="5975" end="5987" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="6239" end="6251" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="6425" end="6432" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="6629" end="6642" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q170572" start="6660" end="6672" title="Alec Baldwin" label="Alec Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223687" start="6856" end="6868" title="Wes Anderson" label="Wes Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55392" start="6968" end="6979" title="Louis Malle" label="Louis Malle"/>
<link wikidata="Q686059" start="7017" end="7036" title="Murmur of the Heart" label="Murmur of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053405" start="7145" end="7160" title="The Fire Within" label="The Fire Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="7357" end="7369" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q628664" start="7392" end="7417" title="The Magnificent Ambersons (film)" label="The Magnificent Ambersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356114" start="7571" end="7587" title="E. L. Konigsburg" label="E. L. Konigsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234467" start="7606" end="7658" title="From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler" label="From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="7737" end="7763" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="7902" end="7916" title="J. D. Salinger" label="J. D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445395" start="7958" end="7974" title="Franny and Zooey" label="Franny and Zooey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713325" start="8360" end="8381" title="Les Enfants Terribles (film)" label="Les Enfants Terribles"/>
<link wikidata="Q168693" start="8398" end="8418" title="Jean-Pierre Melville" label="Jean-Pierre Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576342" start="8597" end="8609" title="incest taboo" label="incest taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161916" start="8747" end="8758" title="Owen Wilson" label="Owen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q258662" start="8794" end="8806" title="Oliver Sacks" label="Oliver Sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q272610" start="8899" end="8914" title="Cormac McCarthy" label="Cormac McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150943" start="9074" end="9086" title="Gene Hackman" label="Gene Hackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190998" start="9238" end="9253" title="Anjelica Huston" label="Anjelica Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="9458" end="9471" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191966" start="9503" end="9514" title="Gene Wilder" label="Gene Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47100" start="9676" end="9687" title="Ben Stiller" label="Ben Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="9692" end="9707" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218039" start="9844" end="9860" title="Larger than Life (film)" label="Larger Than Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q392697" start="9877" end="9904" title="The Man Who Knew Too Little" label="The Man Who Knew Too Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q29250" start="9925" end="9936" title="Bill Murray" label="Bill Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347393" start="10033" end="10041" title="Rushmore (film)" label="Rushmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222464" start="10111" end="10131" title="Stephen Lea Sheppard" label="Stephen Lea Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q325396" start="10171" end="10182" title="Judd Apatow" label="Judd Apatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q500769" start="10243" end="10259" title="Freaks and Geeks" label="Freaks and Geeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q170572" start="10268" end="10280" title="Alec Baldwin" label="Alec Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q853325" start="10585" end="10606" title="Tribeca Film Festival" label="Tribeca Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226322" start="10746" end="10773" title="The Wes Anderson Collection" label="The Wes Anderson Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226322" start="10787" end="10804" title="Matt Zoller Seitz" label="Matt Zoller Seitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="11034" end="11047" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857393" start="11131" end="11141" title="Sugar Hill, Manhattan" label="Sugar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="11149" end="11165" title="Hamilton Heights" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="11177" end="11183" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="11187" end="11196" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759122" start="11285" end="11302" title="location scouting" label="location scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="11506" end="11527" title="principal photography" label="principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q724530" start="11618" end="11625" title="Sharpie (marker)" label="Sharpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123997" start="11632" end="11647" title="Waldorf-Astoria" label="Waldorf-Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q954207" start="11685" end="11701" title="Central Park Zoo" label="Central Park Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="11728" end="11746" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593385" start="11835" end="11844" title="AstroTurf" label="AstroTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387742" start="11848" end="11868" title="Forest Hills Stadium" label="Forest Hills Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633253" start="12777" end="12790" title="Kumar Pallana" label="Kumar Pallana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920442" start="13501" end="13511" title="Black Buck" label="black buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="13548" end="13556" title="John Coltrane" label="Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002" start="13574" end="13578" title="African American Vernacular English" label="jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698964" start="13591" end="13609" title="racial stereotypes" label="racial stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q906343" start="15344" end="15364" title="dysfunctional family" label="dysfunctional family"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="15646" end="15661" title="child prodigy" label="child prodigies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="16046" end="16055" title="nostalgia" label="nostalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996681" start="16348" end="16371" title="Whitney Crothers Dilley" label="Whitney Crothers Dilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113146" start="16818" end="16834" title="Christopher Robe" label="Christopher Robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="16976" end="16986" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17209" end="17221" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="17222" end="17231" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770859" start="17492" end="17501" title="Absurdist fiction" label="absurdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="17586" end="17595" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642214" start="17763" end="17773" title="Exposition (narrative)" label="exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q220735" start="19179" end="19200" title="The French Connection (film)" label="The French Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q61696" start="19217" end="19232" title="Midnight Cowboy" label="Midnight Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="19298" end="19316" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="19321" end="19331" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056245" start="19589" end="19608" title="Eric Chase Anderson" label="Eric Chase Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44634" start="19931" end="19935" title="Nico" label="Nico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795924" start="20210" end="20230" title="arrested development" label="arrested development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124733" start="20351" end="20355" title="take" label="take"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247918" start="20371" end="20374" title="Cut (transition)" label="cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117826" start="20474" end="20485" title="medium shot" label="medium shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q635115" start="20974" end="20989" title="opening credits" label="opening credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q296001" start="21007" end="21015" title="close-up" label="close-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844472" start="21230" end="21245" title="Miguel Calderón" label="Miguel Calderón"/>
<link wikidata="Q26465570" start="21261" end="21274" title="Mark Simonson" label="Mark Simonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="21313" end="21323" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q247686" start="21339" end="21345" title="Futura (typeface)" label="Futura"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="21480" end="21489" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803037" start="21930" end="21965" title="Me and Julio Down by the Schoolyard" label="Me and Julio Down by the Schoolyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="21973" end="21985" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417883" start="21999" end="22007" title="Everyone (Van Morrison song)" label="Everyone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="22015" end="22026" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384865" start="22040" end="22050" title="Look at Me (John Lennon song)" label="Look at Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q211588" start="22058" end="22068" title="Nick Drake" label="Nick Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q600038" start="22082" end="22085" title="Bryter Layter" label="Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943741" start="22097" end="22110" title="Mutato Muzika" label="Mutato Muzika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="22132" end="22143" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="22156" end="22164" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783367" start="22178" end="22188" title="These Days (Jackson Browne song)" label="These Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q44634" start="22198" end="22202" title="Nico" label="Nico"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="22241" end="22251" title="Erik Satie" label="Erik Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190965" start="22265" end="22281" title="Gymnopédie No. 1" label="Gymnopédie No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111445" start="22326" end="22348" title="Christmas Time Is Here" label="Christmas Time is Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393337" start="22383" end="22408" title="A Charlie Brown Christmas" label="A Charlie Brown Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q706953" start="22425" end="22439" title="Vince Guaraldi" label="Vince Guaraldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="22698" end="22703" title="Film score" label="score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351259" start="22717" end="22734" title="Mark Mothersbaugh" label="Mark Mothersbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q753502" start="22803" end="22821" title="She Smiled Sweetly" label="She Smiled Sweetly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953769" start="22838" end="22850" title="Ruby Tuesday (song)" label="Ruby Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q25648" start="22931" end="22953" title="New York Film Festival" label="New York Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q497155" start="23065" end="23084" title="Touchstone Pictures" label="Touchstone Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="23117" end="23128" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82106" start="23188" end="23227" title="52nd Berlin International Film Festival" label="52nd Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q25648" start="23303" end="23325" title="New York Film Festival" label="New York Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="23422" end="23425" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="23435" end="23459" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="23471" end="23478" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23482" end="23490" title="Blu-ray#A" label="Region A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521099" start="24074" end="24098" title="The Grand Budapest Hotel" label="The Grand Budapest Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="24157" end="24172" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="24487" end="24497" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="24514" end="24536" title="weighted arithmetic mean" label="weighted average score"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="24648" end="24659" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q38351" start="24778" end="24788" title="A.O. Scott" label="A.O. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24804" end="24822" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="25010" end="25017" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894636" start="25026" end="25039" title="Todd McCarthy" label="Todd McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454098" start="25124" end="25140" title="Richard Schickel" label="Richard Schickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="25150" end="25154" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="25373" end="25384" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="25501" end="25524" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11882399" start="25533" end="25545" title="Mick LaSalle" label="Mick LaSalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138789" start="25716" end="25728" title="Anthony Lane" label="Anthony Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="25748" end="25762" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="25942" end="25955" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="25965" end="25978" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q952554" start="26063" end="26074" title="L.A. Weekly" label="L.A. Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q441327" start="26083" end="26097" title="Manohla Dargis" label="Manohla Dargis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="26234" end="26246" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211906" start="26255" end="26266" title="Joe Queenan (author)" label="Joe Queenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="26395" end="26403" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="26615" end="26632" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353410" start="26640" end="26653" title="Kenneth Turan" label="Kenneth Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222211" start="26765" end="26776" title="Leonard Maltin&amp;#x27;s Movie Guide" label="Movie Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="26784" end="26798" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="26906" end="26910" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="27327" end="27346" title="The Huffington Post" label="The Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="27495" end="27506" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="27628" end="27638" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="27672" end="27678" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26705935" start="27811" end="27860" title="BBC&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century" label="BBC&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024460" start="27990" end="27999" title="IndieWire" label="IndieWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q753167" start="28276" end="28295" title="74th Academy Awards" label="74th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="28300" end="28324" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="28326" end="28329" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q131520" start="28404" end="28423" title="Academy Award for Best Cinematography" label="Best Cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q277751" start="28425" end="28443" title="Academy Award for Best Production Design" label="Best Art Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="28448" end="28458" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="28492" end="28542" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q730491" start="28550" end="28574" title="59th Golden Globe Awards" label="59th Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="28715" end="28718" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="28771" end="28791" title="Arrested Development (TV series)" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q284636" start="28799" end="28812" title="Jason Bateman" label="Jason Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828705" start="28841" end="28854" title="Michael Bluth" label="Michael Bluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q797907" start="28933" end="28937" title="Cops (TV series)" label="COPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992236" start="29008" end="29024" title="Mitchell Hurwitz" label="Mitchell Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="29472" end="29485" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q494085" start="29499" end="29506" title="MASH (film)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805571" start="29569" end="29581" title="Jack Donaghy" label="Jack Donaghy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189350" start="29613" end="29620" title="30 Rock" label="30 Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="29811" end="29816" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223270" wikidata="Q835943" url="?curid=223270" title="Royal Society of Arts and Sciences in Gothenburg">
<text>The Royal Society of Arts and Sciences in Gothenburg (, abbreviated KVVS and often known simply as &quot;Samhället&quot;) is a Swedish Royal Academy. Its predecessor was founded in Gothenburg in 1773 and the academy took its present name in 1778. The same year, Gustav III of Sweden gave it Royal Charter.

==See also==
*Vega expedition

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q835943" start="4" end="52" title="Royal Society of Arts and Sciences in Gothenburg" label="Royal Society of Arts and Sciences in Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310653" start="127" end="148" title="Swedish Royal Academies" label="Swedish Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="181" end="191" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="262" end="282" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="Gustav III of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062336" start="321" end="336" title="Vega expedition" label="Vega expedition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223271" wikidata="Q920266" url="?curid=223271" title="Royal Physiographic Society in Lund">
<text>The Royal Physiographic Society in Lund (), is one of the Royal Academies in Sweden. It was founded in Lund, on December 2, 1772, and received a Royal Charter by Gustav III, on March 6, 1778.

==See also==
*Lund University

==References==
== External links ==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q920266" start="4" end="39" title="Royal Physiographic Society in Lund" label="Royal Physiographic Society in Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310653" start="58" end="73" title="Swedish Royal Academies" label="Royal Academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="77" end="83" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="103" end="107" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="162" end="172" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="207" end="222" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223272" wikidata="Q537736" url="?curid=223272" title="Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala">
<text>The Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala (), is the oldest of the royal academies in Sweden, having been founded in 1710. The society has, by royal decree of 1906, 50 Swedish fellows and 100 foreign.

Early members included Emanuel Swedenborg and Anders Celsius.

The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences was founded in Stockholm 1739. Its founders, some of whom were members of the Uppsala academy, specifically wanted a different academy.

==Historical sketch==
The academy was founded 1710 in Uppsala on the initiative of the university librarian Erik Benzelius (jr) (later archbishop) under the name of &quot;Collegium curiosorum&quot;. The name was changed to &quot;Societas Literaria Sueciae&quot; in 1719, when it received a royal charter in 1728 to &quot;Societas regia literaria et scientarium&quot;, and it was known from the mid 18th century as the &quot;Societas regia scientarum upsaliensis&quot;. All the academy&#x27;s publications were in the Latin language until 1863.

==Structure==
The academy has 130 national members and 100 foreign members, belonging to one of the four &quot;classes&quot;: the &quot;Mathematical-Physical&quot; class, the &quot;Natural history-Medical&quot; class, the &quot;Historical-Archeological&quot; class and the &quot;Technical-Economical&quot;&quot; class. All the sections are ruled by a single Presidium, which is formed by a president, a vice-president, a secretary, a vice-secretary and a treasurer: the king of Sweden is the Honorary President of the academy.

==Prizes==
The prizes awarded by the academy are as follows:

*Linnaeus prize: the oldest prize awarded by the academy, named after Carl Linnaeus: the prize was instituted upon a donation by Linnaeus widow, Sara E. Linnaeus, on 8 September 1803.
* Celsius Gold Medal is the most prestigious prize awarded by the academy, named after Anders Celsius. It was first awarded in 1961, and it is reserved to scientists working in mathematical and physical sciences, and as such, it is awarded upon decision by the &quot;Mathematical-Physical class&quot; of the academy.
*Bergstedt prize is the second oldest prize awarded by the academy, instituted on 12 May 1827, upon a donation by the Secretary of State Erik Bergstedt.
* Thalen prize was instituted in 1902 and is named after the physics professor Robert Thalén.
* (Lilly and Sven) Thureus prize was instituted upon a donation from Lilly and Sven Thureus in 1971: originally it was a single prize, but at present it is awarded yearly upon decision by each one of the four classes of the academy.
* Benzeliusbelöningarna (Benzelius grants) is awarded yearly, named after Erik Benzelius the younger, instituted in 1980 and entirely founded by the academy: it is meant as a grant to young researchers.

==Notes==
==References==
*.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q537736" start="4" end="40" title="Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala" label="Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310653" start="66" end="81" title="Swedish Royal Academies" label="royal academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="142" end="154" title="royal decree" label="royal decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q185832" start="224" end="242" title="Emanuel Swedenborg" label="Emanuel Swedenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q81130" start="247" end="261" title="Anders Celsius" label="Anders Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="268" end="301" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="317" end="326" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="380" end="387" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="388" end="395" title="academy" label="academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="493" end="500" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340404" start="547" end="566" title="Erik Benzelius the younger" label="Erik Benzelius (jr)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162994" start="574" end="584" title="Archbishop of Uppsala" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="956" end="961" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1120" end="1132" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1133" end="1141" title="Physics" label="Physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="1165" end="1180" title="Natural history" label="Natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1223" end="1236" title="Archeology" label="Archeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1263" end="1272" title="Technology" label="Technical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115302" start="1342" end="1351" title="Presidium" label="Presidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="1454" end="1468" title="king of Sweden" label="king of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q216353" start="1476" end="1494" title="Honorary President" label="Honorary President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1644" end="1657" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81130" start="1845" end="1859" title="Anders Celsius" label="Anders Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1935" end="1947" title="Mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q14632398" start="1952" end="1968" title="physical science" label="physical science"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="2025" end="2037" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2038" end="2046" title="Physics" label="Physical"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2212" end="2226" title="Erik Bergstedt" label="Erik Bergstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2289" end="2296" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q455257" start="2307" end="2320" title="Robert Thalén" label="Robert Thalén"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340404" start="2629" end="2655" title="Erik Benzelius the younger" label="Erik Benzelius the younger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223276" wikidata="Q380443" url="?curid=223276" title="Alain Finkielkraut">
<text>Alain Luc Finkielkraut (; ; born 30 June 1949) is a French essayist, radio producer, and public intellectual. Since 1986, he has been the host of &quot;Répliques&quot;, a talk show broadcast weekly on France Culture. He was elected a Fellow of the Académie Française in 2014.

==Life and career==
Finkielkraut is the son of a Polish Jewish manufacturer of fine leather goods who survived the Auschwitz concentration camp. Finkielkraut studied modern literature at the École normale supérieure de Saint-Cloud. He joined the Department of French Literature in the University of California, Berkeley as an assistant professor in 1976 and the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences in the École Polytechnique as a professor in 1989. 

At the end of the 1990s, Finkielkraut founded with Benny Lévy and Bernard-Henri Lévy an at Jerusalem. In 2010, he was involved in founding JCall, a left-wing advocacy group based in Europe to lobby the European Parliament on foreign policy issues concerning the Middle East and Israel in particular.

==Works==
Finkielkraut first came to public attention when he and Pascal Bruckner co-authored a number of short but controversial essays intended to question the idea that a new emancipation was underway; these included &quot;The New Love Disorder&quot; (&quot;Le Nouveau Désordre amoureux&quot;, 1977) and &quot;At the Corner of the Street&quot; (&quot;Au Coin de la rue&quot;, 1978), as well as &quot;The Adventure&quot; (&quot;L&#x27;aventure&quot;, 1979). 

Finkielkraut then began publishing singly authored works on the public&#x27;s betrayal of memory and our intransigence in the presence of events that, he argued, should move the public. This reflection led Finkielkraut to address post-Holocaust Jewish identity in Europe, such as in &quot;The Imaginary Jew&quot; (&quot;Le Juif imaginaire&quot;, 1983). Seeking to promote what he calls a , Finkielkraut also published &quot;The Future of a Negation: Reflexion on the Genocide Issue&quot; (&quot;Avenir d&#x27;une négation : réflexion sur la question du génocide&quot;, 1982) and later his comments on the Klaus Barbie trial, &quot;Remembering in Vain&quot; (&quot;La Mémoire vaine&quot;, 1989).

Finkielkraut feels particularly indebted to Emmanuel Levinas. In &quot;The Wisdom of Love&quot; (&quot;La Sagesse de l&#x27;amour&quot;), Finkielkraut discusses this debt in terms of modernity and its mirages. Finkielkraut continues his reflection on the matter in &quot;The Defeat of the Mind&quot; (&quot;La Défaite de la pensée&quot;, 1987) and &quot;The Ingratitude: Talks About Our Times&quot; (&quot;Ingratitude : conversation sur notre temps&quot;, 1999). Since the 2000s, Finkielkraut has given his opinion on a variety of topics in society, such as the Internet in &quot;The Internet, The Troubling Ecstasy&quot; (&quot;Internet, l&#x27;inquiétante extase&quot;, 2001). In the book &quot;Present Imperfect&quot; (&quot;L&#x27;Imparfait du présent&quot;, 2002), akin to a personal diary, he expresses his thoughts about various events in the world, especially the events of 11 September 2001.

==Controversies==
In 1995, Finkielkraut denounced the Cannes Film Festival&#x27;s jury award, saying: &quot;In recognizing &quot;Underground&quot;, the Cannes jury thought it was honouring a creator with a thriving imagination. In fact, it has honoured a servile and flashy illustrator of criminal clichés. The Cannes jury ... praised a version of the most hackneyed and deceitful Serb propaganda. The devil himself could not have conceived so cruel an outrage against Bosnia, nor such a grotesque epilogue to Western incompetence and frivolity.&quot; It was later revealed that Finkielkraut had not seen the film before writing his criticism.

His interview published in the &quot;Haaretz&quot; magazine in November 2005 in which he gave his opinion about the 2005 French riots stirred up much controversy. Finkielkraut&#x27;s remarked that the France national football team was &quot;black, black, black, which causes sneers all over Europe&quot; (as opposed to the expression &quot;black-blanc-beur&quot;—meaning &quot;Black, White, Arab&quot;—coined after France&#x27;s win in the 1998 FIFA World Cup final to honour the African and Afro Caribbean, European, and North African origins of the players), adding that &quot;if you point this out in France, you are thrown in jail&quot;. He also denounced African-American Muslims, claiming that there is an &quot;Islamization of the blacks&quot; happening in both America and France. Strong polemics followed the article: MRAP and &quot;L&#x27;Humanité&quot; accused Finkielkraut of racism and many of his colleagues at the École polytechnique published a petition led by Gilles Dowek against what they described as a &quot;colonial project in his article. Emmanuel Todd wrote in 2008 that &quot;never in France would rioters have been characterized by the color of their skin, if this anti-republican blasphemy had not been the work of an intellectual of Jewish origin, to whom the sacralization of the Shoah guarantees a surer protection than the colonial past to the young people of the suburbs&quot;. Finkielkraut later apologized, claiming bad translation of his article by &quot;Haaretz&quot;.

Anti-Zionist filmmaker Eyal Sivan took legal action against Finkielkraut after the Frenchman said Sivan &quot;is, if you will, one of the actors in this particularly painful, particularly alarming reality, the Jewish anti-Semitism that rages today.&quot; In 2009, Finkielkraut was criticized for his comment on the Roman Polanski sexual abuse case. Finkielkraut claimed that the 13-years-old victim was a &quot;teenager&quot;, &quot;not a child&quot;. He was criticized for his close friendship with Croatian president Franjo Tuđman, and was accused by David Bruce MacDonald of supporting &quot;a nation whose leader was a Holocaust revisionist, at the helm of an authoritarian government&quot;. In August 2018, Finkielkraut expressed in an interview with &quot;The Times of Israel&quot; his worries for French Jews and the future of France. He stated: &quot;The anti-Semitism we&#x27;re now experiencing in France is the worst I&#x27;ve ever seen in my lifetime, and I&#x27;m convinced it&#x27;s going to get worse&quot;.

On 16 February 2019, Finkielkraut was accosted on the street by a group of yellow vest protesters in Paris when they chanced on him in Boulevard du Montparnasse. A 36-year-old French convert to Islam was indicted after saying that Finkelkraut was &quot;going to die&quot;. Finkelkraut had previously expressed his sympathy for the yellow vest movement. In April 2019, Finkelkraut stated that he had been repeatedly accosted by street protestors and told reporters: &quot;I can no longer show my face on the street.&quot; In April 2019, Sciences Po announced the cancellation of a forum where Finkielkraut was to be a speaker due to threats by &quot;antifa&quot; protesters. Eugénie Bastié of &quot;Le Figaro&quot; denounced the cancellation as a &quot;gangrenous&quot; symptom of the Americanisation of French university life. The announcement was intended to mislead the protesters, and the lecture went on in a different location. In 2022, while appearing on the French TV channel La Chaîne Info, he commented on the Duhamel scandal involving incest committed by Olivier Duhamel on his 14-year old stepson. Finkielkraut speculated that there may have been &quot;consent&quot; between the two parties and claimed that a 14-year-old is &quot;not the same thing&quot; as a &quot;child&quot;. Within days, he was summarily fired from the French TV news network for which he was working as a commentator.

Finkielkraut is a Zionist. In 2024, he called &quot;wokeism&quot; a &quot;death cult&quot;, claiming that they are driven by a hatred for Israel and the west.

==Bibliography==
* The Religion of Humanity and the Sin of the Jews, essay in Azure magazine.
* Reflections on the Coming Anti-Semitism, essay in Azure magazine.
* &quot;Ralentir, mots-valises !&quot;, Seuil (1979)
* &quot;Le nouveau désordre amoureux&quot;, Seuil (1977)
* &quot;Au coin de la rue, l&#x27;aventure&quot;, Seuil (1979)
* &quot;Petit fictionnaire illustré : les mots qui manquent au dico&quot;, Seuil (1981)
* &quot;Le Juif imaginaire&quot;, Seuil (1981)
* &quot;L&#x27;avenir d&#x27;une négation&quot;, Seuil (1982)
* &quot;La Réprobation d&#x27;Israël&quot;, Gonthier/Denoël, (1983)
* &quot;La sagesse de l&#x27;amour&quot;, Gallimard (1984)
* &quot;La défaite de la pensée&quot;, Gallimard (1987)
* &quot;La mémoire vaine, du Crime contre l&#x27;humanité&quot;, Gallimard (1989)
* &quot;Comment peut-on être Croate ?&quot;, Gallimard (1992)
* &quot;L&#x27;humanité perdue&quot;, Seuil (1996)
* &quot;Le mécontemporain. Charles Péguy, lecteur du monde moderne&quot;, Gallimard (1992)
* &quot;L&#x27;ingratitude. Conversation sur notre temps avec Antoine Robitaille&quot;, Gallimard (1999)
* &quot;Une voix vient de l&#x27;autre rive&quot;, Gallimard (2000)
* &quot;Internet, l&#x27;inquiétante extase&quot;, Mille et une nuits (2001)
* &quot;Penser le XXe siècle&quot;, École Polytechnique (2000)
* &quot;Des hommes et des bêtes&quot;, Tricorne (2000)
* &quot;L&#x27;imparfait du présent. Pièces brèves&quot;, Gallimard (2002)
* &quot;Enseigner les lettres aujourd&#x27;hui&quot;, Tricorne (2003)
* &quot;Les battements du monde&quot;, Pauvert (2003)
* &quot;Au nom de l&#x27;Autre. Réflexions sur l&#x27;antisémitisme qui vient&quot;, Gallimard (2003)
* &quot;Nous autres, modernes : quatre leçons&quot;, Ellipses (2005)
* &quot;Ce que peut la littérature,&quot; Stock (2006)
* &quot;Entretiens sur la laïcité&quot;, Verdier (2006)
* &quot;Qu&#x27;est-ce que la France,&quot; Stock (2007)
* &quot;La querelle de l&#x27;école&quot;, Stock (2007)
* &quot;Philosophie et modernité&quot;, École Polytechnique (2008)
* &quot;Un cœur intelligent&quot;, Stock/Flammarion (2009)
* « Pour une décence commune » in &quot;Regards sur la crise. Réflexions pour comprendre la crise… et en sortir&quot;, essay contributed to a collective work edited by Antoine Mercier, Paris, Éditions Hermann, 2010.
* &quot;L&#x27;explication, conversation avec Aude Lancelin&quot;, with Alain Badiou, Nouvelles Éditions Lignes, 2010.
* &quot;L&#x27;interminable écriture de l&#x27;Extermination&quot;, with Finkielkraut&#x27;s direction, transcriptions of TV appearances on Répliques de France Culture, Stock, 2010.
* &quot;Et si l&#x27;amour durait&quot;, Stock, 2011
* &quot;L&#x27;identité malheureuse&quot;, Stock, 2013
* &quot;La Seule Exactitude&quot;, Stock, 2015
* &quot;En terrain miné&quot;, with Élisabeth de Fontenay, Stock, 2017
* &quot;À la première personne&quot;, Gallimard, 2019
* &quot;L&#x27;après littérature&quot;, Stock, 2021

==References==
==External links==

* Official website of the Institute for Levinassian Studies, co-founded by Alain Finkielkraut, Bernard-Henri Lévy and Benny Lévy
* “Voices on Antisemitism” Interview with Alain Finkielkraut from the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380443" start="0" end="22" title="Alain Finkielkraut" label="Alain Luc Finkielkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q19908" start="201" end="215" title="France Culture" label="France Culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="234" end="266" title="List of members of the Académie française#Seat 21" label="Fellow of the Académie Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="326" end="339" title="Polish Jewish" label="Polish Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="392" end="420" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q110876741" start="468" end="507" title="École normale supérieure de Saint-Cloud" label="École normale supérieure de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="562" end="596" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="691" end="710" title="École Polytechnique" label="École Polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q631466" start="788" end="798" title="Benny Lévy" label="Benny Lévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313509" start="803" end="821" title="Bernard-Henri Lévy" label="Bernard-Henri Lévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="939" end="958" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348334" start="1104" end="1119" title="Pascal Bruckner" label="Pascal Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690760" start="1730" end="1744" title="post-Holocaust" label="post-Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q77088" start="2105" end="2117" title="Klaus Barbie" label="Klaus Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q153034" start="2240" end="2256" title="Emmanuel Levinas" label="Emmanuel Levinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="2758" end="2766" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="3078" end="3095" title="11 September 2001" label="11 September 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="3152" end="3172" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q156516" start="3227" end="3238" title="Underground (1995 film)" label="Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q216393" start="3780" end="3787" title="Haaretz" label="Haaretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q265873" start="3859" end="3876" title="2005 French riots" label="2005 French riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="3944" end="3973" title="France national football team" label="France national football team"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4083" end="4099" title=":fr:wikt:black-blanc-beur" label="black-blanc-beur"/>
<link wikidata="Q585295" start="4183" end="4208" title="1998 FIFA World Cup final" label="1998 FIFA World Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219783" start="4403" end="4427" title="African-American Muslims" label="African-American Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326539" start="4570" end="4574" title="MRAP (organization)" label="MRAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137404" start="4585" end="4600" title="L&amp;#x27;Humanité" label="L&amp;#x27;Humanité"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="4672" end="4691" title="École polytechnique" label="École polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q713775" start="4805" end="4818" title="Emmanuel Todd" label="Emmanuel Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="5052" end="5057" title="The Holocaust" label="Shoah"/>
<link wikidata="Q584548" start="5249" end="5261" title="Anti-Zionist" label="Anti-Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q553092" start="5272" end="5282" title="Eyal Sivan" label="Eyal Sivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968672" start="5564" end="5596" title="Roman Polanski sexual abuse case" label="Roman Polanski sexual abuse case"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="5768" end="5781" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231840" start="5802" end="5823" title="David Bruce MacDonald" label="David Bruce MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449319" start="6011" end="6030" title="The Times of Israel" label="The Times of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q58805164" start="6348" end="6370" title="Yellow vests protesters" label="yellow vest protesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922078" start="6408" end="6433" title="Boulevard du Montparnasse" label="Boulevard du Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q859363" start="6809" end="6820" title="Sciences Po" label="Sciences Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q278364" start="6922" end="6928" title="Post–World War II anti-fascism" label="antifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831214" start="6947" end="6961" title="Eugénie Bastié" label="Eugénie Bastié"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="6971" end="6980" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207314" start="7256" end="7270" title="La Chaîne Info" label="La Chaîne Info"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091686" start="7292" end="7307" title="Duhamel scandal" label="Duhamel scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="7318" end="7324" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350998" start="7338" end="7353" title="Olivier Duhamel" label="Olivier Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="7694" end="7701" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134124" start="10117" end="10133" title="Éditions Hermann" label="Éditions Hermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q311005" start="10213" end="10225" title="Alain Badiou" label="Alain Badiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q274715" start="10633" end="10654" title="Élisabeth de Fontenay" label="Élisabeth de Fontenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q238990" start="11009" end="11048" title="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum" label="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223278" wikidata="Q3427953" url="?curid=223278" title="Rest of the world in sports and games">
<text>Within sports and games played at the international competitive level, the Rest of the World refers to a team of players from many countries of origin that compete against a single individual or a team from a single group, such as a club or country.

== Overview ==
As a Rest of the World team usually has little experience in playing together or working as a team, their ability is not usually considered indicative of their actual abilities, either individually or as members of their usual teams, and as such, games played against the rest of the world are not normally considered to show the true talent of either the rest of the world or the team competing against them. As a consequence, Rest of the World matches are usually played as one-off events either as friendly games or for a non-competitive special purpose, such as international aid or commemoration.

However, some such events can produce spectacular and intense games, such as the chess game between Garry Kasparov and the Rest of the World in 1999. The Russia (USSR) vs Rest of the World chess matches were also tightly contested.

==Examples==

In rugby league, the Other Nationalities team played from 1904 to 1975. In rugby union, the British and Irish Lions faced the Rest of the World XV in 1986.

In basketball, the NBA Rising Stars Challenge faces a Team USA versus a Team World since 2015.

===Cricket===
Noted examples of Rest of the World teams in cricket included those organised to tour England in 1970 and Australia in 1971-2 in place of planned tours from South Africa abandoned because of political opposition due to the apartheid policy. Although the matches in 1970 were declared at the time to have official Test cricket status, this was subsequently withdrawn. A World XI also played against Australia in the 2005 ICC Super Series. The first class match in that series retains Test match status, a move which was and is controversial with some cricket statisticians such as Bill Frindall. However the status is unlikely to be withdrawn in part because of the effect on noted cricket records; for instance without the wickets taken in this match, Muttiah Muralitharan would fall slightly short of 800 career test wickets. A world XI also competed in unofficial World Series Cricket in 1977-9, and a &quot;Rest of the World XI&quot; contested two short tournaments in England dubbed the &quot;World Cricket Cup&quot; in 1966 and 1967, struggling in the first, but emerging victorious in the second.

===Association football===
The first example of a Rest of the World team in football (soccer) is almost as old as the association game. In 1867 a side made up of players from Eton School and Harrow School played against a side described as &quot;the World&quot;, a fixture which was repeated over the next couple of years. Another Rest of the World side played the Wanderers to close the 1870–71 season. Given the association football world at this time barely extended beyond London, the name was not used as a serious epithet, and the media were in on the joke, Charles W. Alcock being nicknamed &quot;the Cochin&quot; for his captaincy of the World side in 1867.

The first properly organized &quot;Rest of the World&quot; match occurred on 23rd October 1963, when a Rest of the World side played against England at Wembley Stadium in an occasion to mark a centenary celebration of the sport. The game was marked by strong performances by Jimmy Greaves, Lev Yashin, Denis Law (who played for the Rest of the World), and Luis Eyzaguirre (which earned him the nickname &quot;Fifo,&quot; after FIFA). A similar event occurred on 8 August 1987 when such a side contested a match, also at Wembley, against a Football League XI to commemorate the centenary of the English football league. This comprised the last high-profile occasion on which Diego Maradona played on English soil. Although the game was sparsely attended, the hostile reception of Maradona, just over a year after the &quot;Hand of God&quot; incident, was notable. Gary Lineker, who at the time was playing for FC Barcelona, played alongside Maradona for the Rest of the World.

===Golf===
Two events in golf, one currently active and the other defunct, involve teams officially labeled &quot;International&quot; that are effectively &quot;rest of the world&quot; teams. The Presidents Cup in men&#x27;s golf, held in odd-numbered years, features competition between a United States team and an &quot;International&quot; team made up of non-European players (Europeans compete against the US in even-numbered years in the Ryder Cup). The now-defunct Lexus Cup in women&#x27;s golf was an annual competition that matched an Asia team against an &quot;International&quot; team drawn from all other nationalities.

==Non-sporting usage==
Outside sports and games, Rest of World (RoW) is also a term used to distinguish an unspecified but inclusive group of nations from one or more dominant players in the comparative analysis of markets, economies, military capabilities, and so forth, especially in graphs or charts to show the numbers representing the other countries.

The Federation of American Scientists, for instance, provides a list of RoW weapons systems, meaning systems belonging to nations other than the United States.

=== Eurovision Song Contest ===

On 22 November 2022, the European Broadcasting Union announced that, starting from , the Eurovision Song Contest would include a televote from non-participating countries for the first time. Viewers from those countries would be able to vote in all shows, with their votes being aggregated and presented as one individual set of points under &quot;Rest of the World&quot;.

==See also==

* Team World 
* World XI (association football)
* World XI (cricket)
* International XI women&#x27;s cricket team
* List of international rugby union teams
* Other Nationalities rugby league team
* :Category:Multi-national teams in international cricket

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3427953" start="75" end="92" title="Rest of the world in sports and games" label="Rest of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="832" end="849" title="international aid" label="international aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="969" end="983" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735148" start="988" end="1009" title="Kasparov versus the World" label="the Rest of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q339120" start="1023" end="1057" title="Russia (USSR) vs Rest of the World" label="Russia (USSR) vs Rest of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="1119" end="1131" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873078" start="1137" end="1156" title="Other Nationalities rugby league team" label="Other Nationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="1191" end="1202" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="1208" end="1231" title="British and Irish Lions" label="British and Irish Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316055" start="1242" end="1262" title="Rest of the World XV" label="Rest of the World XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="1292" end="1295" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632739" start="1296" end="1318" title="Rising Stars Challenge" label="Rising Stars Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114754" start="1401" end="1424" title="World XI (cricket)" label="Rest of the World teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="1428" end="1435" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="1540" end="1552" title="South Africa cricket team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="1606" end="1615" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="1696" end="1708" title="Test cricket" label="Test cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604400" start="1798" end="1819" title="2005 ICC Super Series" label="2005 ICC Super Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="1825" end="1836" title="First-class cricket" label="first class"/>
<link wikidata="Q862115" start="1963" end="1976" title="Bill Frindall" label="Bill Frindall"/>
<link wikidata="Q379709" start="2135" end="2155" title="Muttiah Muralitharan" label="Muttiah Muralitharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349761" start="2249" end="2269" title="World Series Cricket" label="World Series Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852838" start="2537" end="2559" title="World XI" label="Rest of the World team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2563" end="2580" title="association football" label="football (soccer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="2662" end="2673" title="Eton School" label="Eton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="2678" end="2691" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q841201" start="2848" end="2861" title="Wanderers F.C." label="the Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q967572" start="3051" end="3068" title="Charles W. Alcock" label="Charles W. Alcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="3095" end="3101" title="Kochi" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571095" start="3231" end="3248" title="1963 England v Rest of the World football match" label="23rd October 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="3306" end="3321" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q297271" start="3429" end="3442" title="Jimmy Greaves" label="Jimmy Greaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q167828" start="3444" end="3454" title="Lev Yashin" label="Lev Yashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233565" start="3456" end="3465" title="Denis Law" label="Denis Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860897" start="3510" end="3525" title="Luis Eyzaguirre" label="Luis Eyzaguirre"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="3581" end="3585" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="3748" end="3771" title="English football league" label="English football league"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="3828" end="3842" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q622495" start="3976" end="3987" title="The Hand of God" label="Hand of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="4017" end="4029" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="4063" end="4075" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="4156" end="4160" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647788" start="4327" end="4341" title="Presidents Cup" label="Presidents Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4421" end="4434" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4511" end="4517" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="4574" end="4583" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163327" start="4602" end="4611" title="Lexus Cup" label="Lexus Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="4675" end="4679" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q762201" start="5126" end="5159" title="Federation of American Scientists" label="Federation of American Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="5341" end="5368" title="European Broadcasting Union" label="European Broadcasting Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="5405" end="5428" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q10717530" start="5706" end="5716" title="Team World" label="Team World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852838" start="5720" end="5751" title="World XI" label="World XI (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114754" start="5754" end="5772" title="World XI (cricket)" label="World XI (cricket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054380" start="5775" end="5817" title="International XI women&amp;#x27;s cricket team" label="International XI women&amp;#x27;s cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968452" start="5820" end="5859" title="List of international rugby union teams" label="List of international rugby union teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873078" start="5862" end="5899" title="Other Nationalities rugby league team" label="Other Nationalities rugby league team"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5902" end="5957" title=":Category:Multi-national teams in international cricket" label=":Category:Multi-national teams in international cricket"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223289" wikidata="Q207693" url="?curid=223289" title="Bukkake">
<text>is a sex act in which one participant is ejaculated on by multiple participants. It is often portrayed in pornographic films.

Bukkake videos are a relatively prevalent niche in contemporary pornographic films. Originating in Japan in the 1980s, the genre subsequently spread to North America and Europe, and crossed over into gay pornography.

==Etymology==
Bukkake is the noun form of the Japanese verb &quot;bukkakeru&quot; (ぶっ掛ける, to dash or sprinkle water), and means &quot;to dash&quot;, &quot;splash&quot;, or &quot;heavy splash&quot;. The compound verb can be decomposed into a prefix and a verb: &quot;butsu&quot; (ぶつ) and &quot;kakeru&quot; (掛ける). &quot;Butsu&quot; is a prefix derived from the verb &quot;buchi&quot;, which literally means &quot;to hit&quot;, but the usage of the prefix is a verb-intensifier.

&quot;Kakeru&quot; in this context means to shower or pour. The word &quot;bukkake&quot; is often used in Japanese to describe pouring out a liquid with sufficient momentum to cause splashing or spilling. Indeed, bukkake is used in Japan to describe a type of dish where hot broth is poured over noodles, as in bukkake udon and bukkake soba.

==History==
Bukkake was first represented in pornographic films in the mid-to-late 1980s in Japan. One source named &quot;Jesus Clits Superstar part 1&quot; released in 1987 and directed by Saki Goto as the first Japanese pornographic movie with 10 facials. According to one commentator, a significant factor in the development of bukkake as a pornographic form was the mandatory censorship in Japan where genitals must be pixelated by a &quot;mosaic&quot;. One consequence of this is that Japanese pornography tends to focus more on the face and body of actresses rather than on their genitals. Since film producers could not show penetration, they sought other ways to depict sex acts without violating Japanese law, and since semen did not need to be censored, a loophole existed for harder sex scenes.

The first usage of the word bukkake in a pornographic film title was &quot;Bukkake Milky Showers 01&quot; by Shuttle Japan, released in 1995. According to Shiruou, an early Shuttle Japan employee, actor, and owner of the bukkake label Milky Cat, the term crossed over into Western usage when the English language site 
bukkakebath.com appeared in 1998 using stolen content from Shuttle Japan. However, the popularization of the act and the term for it have been credited to the director Kazuhiko Matsumoto in 1998. The Japanese adult video studio Shuttle Japan registered the term &quot;ぶっかけ/BUKKAKE&quot; as a trademark (No. 4545137) in January 2001.

The practice spread from Japan to the United States and Europe in the late 1990s. The first US bukkake-themed film was &quot;American Bukkake 1&quot;, by JM Productions released in 1999. The appearance of bukkake videos was part of a trend towards &quot;harder&quot; pornography in the 1990s, preceded by a fashion for double penetration videos in the mid-1990s and occurring in parallel to the appearance of gang bang videos towards the end of that decade. There was an economic advantage for Western pornographers to produce bukkake films since they only require one actress, and often amateur male performers whose pay rates are low. However, Western-style bukkake videos differ in some aspects from those in Japan; in Japanese bukkake videos, female performers are frequently dressed as office ladies or in school uniforms. They are being humiliated, whereas women in Western-style bukkake videos are portrayed as enjoying the scene. Another Japanese variant of bukkake is gokkun, in which several men ejaculate into a container for the receiver to drink. Bukkake is less popular than some other porn niches in the West, possibly because the implicit subordination of the woman does not appeal to many consumers, and because cum shots are normally the climax of a scene, rather than the main events.

The genre has also spread to gay pornography, featuring scenes in which several men ejaculate on another man. &quot;Lesbian bukkake&quot; videos are also produced. The 17th World Congress of Sexology in Montreal in July 2005 included a presentation on bukkake.

More recently, cum tributes have been compared to bukkake since both involve multiple men ejaculating towards a single woman.

==Male viewers&#x27; motivation==
American editor and publisher Russ Kick, quoting a sexologist, states that men enjoy a &quot;sense of closure and finality about sex&quot;, something that watching other men ejaculate provides. The viewer identifies with the ejaculating men, experiencing a sense of vicarious pleasure.

==Reception==
A number of authors have described bukkake as premised on humiliation. Forensic psychologist Karen Franklin has described bukkake as symbolic group rape, characterising its primary purpose as the humiliation, degradation and objectification of women. Lisa Jean Moore and Juliana Weissbein view the use of ejaculation in bukkake as part of a humiliation ritual, noting that it generally does not involve any of the female participants experiencing orgasm.
Gail Dines describes the money shot of a man ejaculating on the face or body of a woman, taken to a new extreme in bukkake through the involvement of multiple men, as &quot;one of the most degrading acts in porn&quot;.

Tristan Taormino, feminist author and sex educator, has likened bukkake to a &quot;gay circle jerk&quot;, noting the inconsistency between its billing as a heterosexual practice and the fact that it features a group of naked men standing in close proximity to each other, masturbating together.

Phillip Vannini, associate professor in the School of Communication and Culture at Royal Roads University, quotes &quot;self-proclaimed net sex commentator&quot; George Kranz, who views recent American interpretations of bukkake as a &quot;significant advance in human behaviour&quot;, emphasising the lively, almost party-like atmosphere of American bukkake videos compared to the more subdued Japanese style.

==See also==

*BDSM
*Cum shot
*Facial
*Ekiben (sexual act)
*Group sex
*Mating press
*Pornography in Japan
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="5" end="12" title="human sexual activity" label="sex act"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="41" end="50" title="ejaculate" label="ejaculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="106" end="123" title="pornographic film" label="pornographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067692" start="327" end="342" title="gay pornography" label="gay pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q471861" start="1142" end="1146" title="udon" label="udon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753910" start="1159" end="1163" title="soba" label="soba"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="1211" end="1229" title="pornographic films" label="pornographic films"/>
<link wikidata="Q76240" start="1415" end="1422" title="Facial (sexual act)" label="facials"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1536" end="1565" title="Censorship in Japan#Pornographic censorship" label="mandatory censorship in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188279" start="1589" end="1598" title="Pixelization" label="pixelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381437" start="2460" end="2478" title="Kazuhiko Matsumoto" label="Kazuhiko Matsumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505697" start="2520" end="2533" title="Shuttle Japan" label="Shuttle Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156927" start="2780" end="2794" title="JM Productions" label="JM Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243210" start="2945" end="2963" title="double penetration" label="double penetration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8410" start="3035" end="3044" title="gang bang" label="gang bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359551" start="3417" end="3430" title="office lady" label="office ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q862633" start="3437" end="3451" title="school uniform" label="school uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="3603" end="3609" title="gokkun" label="gokkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q76580" start="3855" end="3863" title="cum shot" label="cum shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067692" start="3960" end="3975" title="gay pornography" label="gay pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061273" start="4104" end="4130" title="World Association for Sexual Health" label="World Congress of Sexology"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="4134" end="4142" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116787794" start="4208" end="4220" title="cum tributes" label="cum tributes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381163" start="4384" end="4393" title="Russ Kick" label="Russ Kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q170912" start="4405" end="4415" title="sexologist" label="sexologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q932219" start="4726" end="4747" title="Forensic psychologist" label="Forensic psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369649" start="4748" end="4762" title="Karen Franklin" label="Karen Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192354" start="4797" end="4807" title="group rape" label="group rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="4851" end="4862" title="Sexual abuse" label="humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136859" start="4864" end="4875" title="Humiliation" label="degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530195" start="4880" end="4904" title="Sexual objectification" label="objectification of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732818" start="4906" end="4921" title="Lisa Jean Moore" label="Lisa Jean Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q968276" start="5110" end="5120" title="Gail Dines" label="Gail Dines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899287" start="5135" end="5145" title="money shot" label="money shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q430900" start="5330" end="5346" title="Tristan Taormino" label="Tristan Taormino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551045" start="5417" end="5428" title="Circle jerk (sexual practice)" label="circle jerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="5602" end="5614" title="masturbating" label="masturbating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5626" end="5641" title="Phillip Vannini" label="Phillip Vannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="5643" end="5662" title="associate professor" label="associate professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813315" start="5709" end="5731" title="Royal Roads University" label="Royal Roads University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190845" start="6053" end="6057" title="BDSM" label="BDSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q76580" start="6059" end="6067" title="Cum shot" label="Cum shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q76240" start="6069" end="6075" title="Facial (sex act)" label="Facial"/>
<link wikidata="Q116687840" start="6077" end="6096" title="Ekiben (sexual act)" label="Ekiben (sexual act)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675376" start="6098" end="6107" title="Group sex" label="Group sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q124570588" start="6109" end="6121" title="Mating press" label="Mating press"/>
<link wikidata="Q680729" start="6123" end="6143" title="Pornography in Japan" label="Pornography in Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223294" wikidata="Q472623" url="?curid=223294" title="Ari Behn">
<text>Ari Mikael Behn (; , ; 30 September 1972 – 25 December 2019) was a Norwegian author, playwright, and visual artist, best known for his marriage to Princess Märtha Louise of Norway from 2002 to 2017. He held no title or special status, and he remained a private citizen during the marriage.

Known as Mikael Bjørshol until 1996, Behn achieved modest literary success with his 1999 short story collection &quot;Trist som faen&quot; (&quot;Sad as hell&quot;) which received several favorable reviews in Norwegian newspapers, and which remains his best known work. His engagement to Märtha Louise sparked additional interest in the book, and by 2020 it had sold a total of nearly 100,000 copies since publication. Following his 2002 marriage to Märtha Louise, he wrote four novels, two short story collections, one play and a book about his wedding, although his later work received less favorable reviews than &quot;Trist som faen&quot;. He took part in other creative and artistic endeavours such as the design of a china set named &quot;Peacock&quot;. In the 2000s and 2010s his public activity and art were met with mixed reactions in Norway, and Behn acknowledged that many people regarded him as a &quot;fool&quot; and an amateur artist. From 2013 until his death he was active as a visual artist, painting in a neo-expressionist tradition inspired by Jean-Michel Basquiat. Behn&#x27;s artwork, described as &quot;highly narrative&quot;, was widely exhibited internationally in 2017–18.

==Background and early life==
Behn was born as Ari Mikael Bjørshol in 1972 in Aarhus, Denmark, to Olav Bjørshol (b. 1952) and Marianne Rafaela Solberg (b. 1953), Norwegians who were both Waldorf teachers and who married in 1973. The family lived in Aarhus, then in Plymouth, England, where his father trained as a photographer, and then in Tennevoll in Northern Norway where his mother worked as a teacher at the local school from 1977 to 1978. In 1978 the family settled in Moss in South Norway. Bjørshol was baptized and confirmed in The Christian Community and attended the Waldorf School in Moss from 1979.

In 1983, his parents divorced and married a couple who had been among their friends, Jan Pahle and Tone Bjerke, who had previously been married to each other. Tone Bjerke had family connections to several prominent cultural figures; she was the daughter of the well-known poet André Bjerke, and her extended family included people like writer Jens Bjørneboe (father&#x27;s cousin), actress Henny Moan (stepmother) and singer Ole Paus (stepmother&#x27;s new partner). In the 2000s his parents divorced Pahle and Bjerke, and they married each other for the second time in 2007.

In the 1990s, he studied history and religion at the University of Oslo, from which he received a bachelor&#x27;s degree.

Behn&#x27;s original surname was &quot;Bjørshol&quot; and he was known by family and during his childhood and youth under the given name Mikael. In 1996, he changed his name to Ari Behn when he took his maternal grandmother&#x27;s maiden name. The name Behn has German origin. He had two younger siblings, Anja Sabrina and Espen, neither of whom use the name Behn. In 2009, it was made public that Behn&#x27;s &quot;de jure&quot; paternal grandfather, the Tromsø lawyer Bjarne Nikolai Bjørshol, was not his biological grandfather. Behn&#x27;s father met his biological father, Terje Erling Ingebrigtsen (1933–2009), a retired car mechanic from Tromsø, for the first time, but Ingebrigtsen died before Behn had a chance to meet him.

==Work==
Behn was a founding member of &quot;Den Nye Vinen&quot; (&quot;The New Wine&quot;), an anarchist artist collective announced in Oslo in 1993 that included Bertrand Bisigye, Henning Braathen, and Per Heimly.

Behn achieved literary success in Norway with his first collection of short stories, titled &quot;Trist som faen&quot; (&quot;Sad as hell&quot;), in 1999. His work received several good reviews and sold more than 100,000 copies. As an author he is best known for his first book; he subsequently published four other novels to more mixed reviews.

Together with his wife, Princess Märtha, Behn wrote a book about their wedding in 2002. He also participated in various creative projects, for example, the design of a china set named &quot;Peacock&quot; for Magnor Glassverk, and he was a model for a clothing chain.

He also made TV documentaries, including a critical documentary on the Afghanistan War in 2002, titled &quot;Øst for krigen – invitert av Taliban&quot; (&quot;East of the war – invited by the Taliban&quot;).

Behn appeared in the comedy films &quot;Team Antonsen&quot; in 2004 and &quot;Long Flat Balls&quot; in 2006.

He was a freelance writer for several newspapers and magazines. In 2011, he co-hosted the award-winning TV series &quot;Ari og Per&quot; on NRK with his friend Per Heimly. The appeal of one episode of the show was attributed, in part, to the willingness of Behn and Heimly to be authentic and vulnerable participants on camera at an Ängsbacka festival. Behn and Heimly appeared together on a later TV program, &quot;Ari and Per Solve World Problems&quot; on TVNorge in 2013.

Behn was also a playwright; his first play, &quot;Treningstimen&quot; (&quot;The Training Hour&quot;) debuted in 2011. Although the play was reported to have received a standing ovation from the audience on opening night, reviews overall were mixed.

From 2013 until his death in 2019, Behn was active as a painter in a neo-expressionist tradition; he cited Jean-Michel Basquiat as his most important inspiration. As a painter he achieved commercial success by Norwegian standards, and sold paintings for 5.7 million NOK in 2018. Behn exhibited his work internationally, including at Gabba Gallery&#x27;s exhibit &quot;Borderless: Scandinavia&quot; in Los Angeles in 2018. Behn was paired with the Scandinavian painters Mikael Persbrandt and Espen Eiborg and artwork from the trio has been shown in over 60 international galleries since 2017.

Behn published &quot;Inferno&quot; in 2018 which detailed the aftermath of his divorce and included some of his struggles with mental health.

==Marriage and family==
On 24 May 2002, Behn married Princess Märtha Louise, the eldest child of Harald V of Norway. Märtha Louise is a self-described clairvoyant who led her own alternative therapy center named Astarte Education/Soulspring, commonly known in Norway as the &quot;angel school&quot; (), which provided training in communication with angels and communication with the dead.

At the time of their wedding, his wife was second in the line of succession to the Norwegian throne after her younger brother; from her birth in 1971 to 1990, she was not in the line of succession at all due to Norway&#x27;s agnatic primogeniture succession. She was, however, 31st in the line of succession to the British throne at the time of her birth, being descended from Edward VII. Behn remained a private citizen and held no title, royal status, or special privileges during the marriage; since 1814, Norway has had no nobility and no concept of commoners, only citizens. They had three daughters, all of whom are also private citizens: Maud Angelica Behn (born 2003), Leah Isadora Behn (born 2005), and Emma Tallulah Behn (born 2008).

The family lived for a time in Islington, north London, in New York, and then in the Lommedalen valley outside Oslo.

On 5 August 2016, the Royal Court announced that Princess Märtha Louise and Behn had started divorce proceedings and intended to share custody of their three daughters. They were divorced in 2017.

At the time of his death, Behn was in a relationship with lawyer Ebba Rysst Heilman.

==Reception and press coverage==
Around the turn of the century Behn and some of his friends, among them photographer Per Heimly, declared themselves to be &quot;The New Wine.&quot; During the early 2000s Behn was often portrayed in Norwegian media as a pretentious poseur. He was known for &quot;harsh public feuds&quot; with critics and artists and was often the subject of ridicule in the media. In 2001 he famously challenged critic Kjetil Rolness to a duel with pistol or sword. Even his relative Ole Paus called him &quot;Prins Kvaps von und zu Quasi&quot; [roughly: Prince Fool von und zu Fake] in 2002. In later years Behn was reconciled with many of his critics from this period, and public reception became less critical in the late 2010s after he became active as a visual artist. In his final novel &quot;Inferno&quot; Behn commented on how he was viewed in Norway: &quot;I also design tableware and wine glasses, I joke with my own position as a public figure in the media. I am a clown, in worst case. In best case, I am a debater and public figure. To many people I am a fool.&quot; Art historian Øivind Lorentz Storm Bjerke said that Behn &quot;is sometimes portrayed as a merry amateur who suddenly decided to try his hand at art, but this is not correct [...] he is part of a group of visual artists who lack formal training, but who are active in different art forms.&quot;

Behn made headlines in Norwegian newspapers in the autumn of 2006, when he revealed that he voted for the Norwegian Labour Party. His friendship with the former Minister of Culture and Labour leader Trond Giske attracted criticism from newspapers and politicians.
In January 2009, Behn received massive media coverage in the Norwegian press after going on a &quot;personal vendetta&quot; against former palace official Carl-Erik Grimstad, accusing him of spreading tabloid nonsense regarding Behn and his family.

Following his death Behn was widely praised for his personal qualities, and described as a caring, colourful personality.

In December 2017, Behn said that the actor Kevin Spacey had groped his genitals in 2007, at a nightclub during the afterparty for the Nobel Peace Prize concert; however he said he didn&#x27;t feel violated by the incident and that he &quot;had a wonderful time&quot; at the party; Behn said on the talkshow &quot;Skavlan&quot;: &quot;I didn&#x27;t experience it as sexual harassment [...] for me it was a compliment.&quot; Following his death American media portrayed him as a &quot;Spacey accuser&quot;, although he had not accused Spacey of wrongdoing or been involved in any legal cases against Spacey, and conspiracy theories focusing on the incident circulated on the Internet; Norwegian commentators pointed out that Behn had regarded the incident as a minor, entertaining anecdote, and accused American media of fostering conspiracy theories by blowing the incident out of proportion. Media studies scholar Gunn Enli described American coverage of Behn&#x27;s death and its focus on the Spacey incident &quot;taken out of context&quot; as a &quot;distorted version of reality.&quot;

Behn was the subject of a documentary series that followed him during a difficult period around the time of his divorce. The three-episode series, titled &quot;Ari Behn og halve kongeriket&quot; (&quot;Ari and Half the Kingdom&quot;), was produced for TV3. Prior to the release of the series, Behn and members of his family made clear that they did not support the final content and withheld their approval. TV3 aired the docuseries in 2018 despite the objections of Behn, his family, and his legal representatives. After Behn&#x27;s death, TV3 withdrew web access to the series on the day preceding his funeral.

==Death==
Behn died at his home in Lommedalen on 25 December 2019. A statement from his family said Behn had died by suicide. He had struggled with alcoholism and mental health problems. In a 2009 interview, he said he was chronically depressed and lonely.

The swift public announcement by the Norwegian royal family following his death was noted as unusually open and forthright; King Harald V, Queen Sonja, and other members of his former wife&#x27;s family as well as his own family expressed their sorrow at his death in statements released to the public. His funeral was held at Oslo Cathedral on 3 January 2020.

Ari Behn&#x27;s publisher said that Behn left behind a completed manuscript for a children&#x27;s book that he had written with his eldest daughter Maud Angelica. It is uncertain whether the book will be published.

His resting place is the Cemetery of Our Saviour.

==Honours==

===National honours===
* : Recipient of the Medal of the 100th Anniversary of the Birth of King Olav V
* : Recipient of the Royal House Centenary Medal
* : Recipient of the King Harald V Silver Jubilee Medal

===Foreign honours===
* : Grand Honorary Cross with Star of the Order of the Crown
* : Recipient of the 70th Birthday Medal of King Carl XVI Gustaf

==Bibliography==
*&quot;Trist som faen&quot; (&quot;Sad as Hell&quot;), 1999, collection of short stories, 93 pages, .
*&quot;Fra hjerte til hjerte&quot; (&quot;From Heart to Heart&quot;), 2002 in collaboration with wife Märtha Louise, is a book about their wedding, .
*&quot;Bakgård&quot; (&quot;Backyard&quot;), 2003, .
*&quot;Entusiasme og raseri&quot; (&quot;Enthusiasm and Rage&quot;), a roman à clef published in October 2006, .
*&quot;Vivian Seving etc.&quot;, 2009, .
*&quot;Talent for lykke&quot; (&quot;Talent for Happiness&quot;), 2011, collection of short stories, 96 pages, .
*&quot;Tiger i Hagen&quot; (&quot;Tiger in the Garden&quot;), 2015, collection of short stories, 96 pages, .
*&quot;Inferno&quot;, 2018, novel with paintings, 118 pages, .

==References==
==External links==
*Official Website 
*Memorialpage for Ari Behn</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q472623" start="0" end="15" title="Ari Behn" label="Ari Mikael Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q165096" start="147" end="179" title="Princess Märtha Louise of Norway" label="Princess Märtha Louise of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="261" end="268" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q851782" start="1014" end="1019" title="tableware" label="china"/>
<link wikidata="Q589655" start="1314" end="1331" title="neo-expressionist" label="neo-expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q155407" start="1354" end="1374" title="Jean-Michel Basquiat" label="Jean-Michel Basquiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="1568" end="1574" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216690" start="1677" end="1693" title="Waldorf education" label="Waldorf teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="1755" end="1763" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120095" start="1830" end="1839" title="Tennevoll" label="Tennevoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q109021" start="1965" end="1969" title="Moss, Norway" label="Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q12718866" start="1973" end="1985" title="South Norway" label="South Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="2013" end="2022" title="Confirmation" label="confirmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q666614" start="2026" end="2049" title="The Christian Community" label="The Christian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q216690" start="2067" end="2081" title="Waldorf education" label="Waldorf School"/>
<link wikidata="Q517118" start="2379" end="2391" title="André Bjerke" label="André Bjerke"/>
<link wikidata="Q558044" start="2445" end="2459" title="Jens Bjørneboe" label="Jens Bjørneboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967637" start="2492" end="2502" title="Henny Moan" label="Henny Moan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771939" start="2527" end="2535" title="Ole Paus" label="Ole Paus"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="2732" end="2750" title="University of Oslo" label="University of Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455914" start="3033" end="3044" title="Married and maiden names" label="maiden name"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="3218" end="3225" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q26087" start="3258" end="3264" title="Tromsø" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q26087" start="3446" end="3452" title="Tromsø" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771533" start="3699" end="3715" title="Bertrand Besigye" label="Bertrand Bisigye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584440" start="3739" end="3749" title="Per Heimly" label="Per Heimly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436780" start="4307" end="4323" title="Magnor Glassverk" label="Magnor Glassverk"/>
<link wikidata="Q190238" start="4826" end="4829" title="NRK" label="NRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q49096971" start="5019" end="5028" title="Ängsbacka" label="Ängsbacka"/>
<link wikidata="Q225430" start="5144" end="5151" title="TVNorge" label="TVNorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q589655" start="5482" end="5499" title="Neo-expressionism" label="neo-expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q155407" start="5520" end="5540" title="Jean-Michel Basquiat" label="Jean-Michel Basquiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="5679" end="5682" title="Norsk krone" label="NOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q723674" start="5882" end="5899" title="Mikael Persbrandt" label="Mikael Persbrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q165096" start="6202" end="6224" title="Princess Märtha Louise of Norway" label="Princess Märtha Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="6246" end="6264" title="Harald V of Norway" label="Harald V of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="6300" end="6311" title="Clairvoyance" label="clairvoyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="6509" end="6536" title="Mediumship" label="communication with the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="6764" end="6785" title="agnatic primogeniture" label="agnatic primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="6836" end="6868" title="succession to the British throne" label="succession to the British throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="6916" end="6926" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="6952" end="6959" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443060" start="7093" end="7101" title="commoner" label="commoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="7109" end="7116" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6299782" start="7184" end="7202" title="Maud Angelica Behn" label="Maud Angelica Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9509787" start="7216" end="7233" title="Leah Isadora Behn" label="Leah Isadora Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="7315" end="7324" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584440" start="7804" end="7814" title="Per Heimly" label="Per Heimly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15773735" start="8123" end="8137" title="Kjetil Rolness" label="Kjetil Rolness"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="9186" end="9208" title="Norwegian Labour Party" label="Norwegian Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q527177" start="9279" end="9290" title="Trond Giske" label="Trond Giske"/>
<link wikidata="Q11963117" start="9499" end="9517" title="Carl-Erik Grimstad" label="Carl-Erik Grimstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="9760" end="9772" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="9851" end="9868" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574497" start="10030" end="10037" title="Skavlan" label="Skavlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="10327" end="10346" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263655" start="11060" end="11063" title="TV3 (Norway)" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782665" start="11457" end="11467" title="Lommedalen" label="Lommedalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="11804" end="11817" title="Harald V of Norway" label="King Harald V"/>
<link wikidata="Q131045" start="11819" end="11830" title="Queen Sonja of Norway" label="Queen Sonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063209" start="12007" end="12021" title="Oslo Cathedral" label="Oslo Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069938" start="12283" end="12306" title="Cemetery of Our Saviour" label="Cemetery of Our Saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q826878" start="12366" end="12424" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Norway" label="Medal of the 100th Anniversary of the Birth of King Olav V"/>
<link wikidata="Q19377873" start="12446" end="12473" title="Norwegian Royal House Centenary Medal" label="Royal House Centenary Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q826878" start="12495" end="12529" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Norway" label="King Harald V Silver Jubilee Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272104" start="12595" end="12613" title="Order of the Crown (Netherlands)" label="Order of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861596" start="12635" end="12678" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Sweden" label="70th Birthday Medal of King Carl XVI Gustaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="12772" end="12785" title="short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q165096" start="12901" end="12914" title="Princess Märtha Louise of Norway" label="Märtha Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q512207" start="13073" end="13085" title="roman à clef" label="roman à clef"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223298" wikidata="Q366090" url="?curid=223298" title="Transitivity">
<text>Transitivity or transitive may refer to:
==Grammar==
* Transitivity (grammar), a property regarding whether a lexical item denotes a transitive object
* Transitive verb, a verb which takes an object
* Transitive case, a grammatical case to mark arguments of a transitive verb

==Logic and mathematics==
* Transitive group action
* Transitive relation, a binary relation in which if &quot;A&quot; is related to &quot;B&quot; and &quot;B&quot; is related to &quot;C&quot;, then &quot;A&quot; is related to &quot;C&quot;
* Syllogism, a related notion in propositional logic
* Intransitivity, properties of binary relations in mathematics
* Arc-transitive graph, a graph whose automorphism group acts transitively upon ordered pairs of adjacent vertices
* Edge-transitive graph, a graph whose automorphism group acts transitively upon its edges
* Vertex-transitive graph, a graph whose automorphism group acts transitively upon its vertices
* Transitive set a set &quot;A&quot; such that whenever &quot;x&quot; ∈ &quot;A&quot;, and &quot;y&quot; ∈ &quot;x&quot;, then &quot;y&quot; ∈ &quot;A&quot;
* Topological transitivity property of a continuous map for which every open subset &quot;U&quot;&#x27; of the phase space intersects every other open subset &quot;V&quot;, when going along trajectory

==Other==
* Transitive Corporation, a computer software firm that developed QuickTransit cross-platform virtualization
* Transitive dependency, a functional dependency of database management which holds by virtue of transitive relation

==See also==
* Intransitive (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q366090" start="0" end="12" title="Transitivity" label="Transitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q366090" start="16" end="26" title="Transitivity" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q830012" start="55" end="77" title="Transitivity (grammar)" label="Transitivity (grammar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774805" start="153" end="168" title="Transitive verb" label="Transitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140008" start="201" end="216" title="Transitive case" label="Transitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="305" end="328" title="Transitive group action" label="Transitive group action"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="331" end="350" title="Transitive relation" label="Transitive relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342" start="520" end="529" title="Syllogism" label="Syllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q54980267" start="573" end="587" title="Intransitivity" label="Intransitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205074" start="637" end="657" title="Arc-transitive graph" label="Arc-transitive graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391289" start="752" end="773" title="Edge-transitive graph" label="Edge-transitive graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q220997" start="843" end="866" title="Vertex-transitive graph" label="Vertex-transitive graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q671944" start="939" end="953" title="Transitive set" label="Transitive set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350572" start="1096" end="1120" title="Topological transitivity" label="Topological transitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927834" start="1308" end="1330" title="Transitive Corporation" label="Transitive Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834482" start="1417" end="1438" title="Transitive dependency" label="Transitive dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671564" start="1548" end="1577" title="Intransitive (disambiguation)" label="Intransitive (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223301" wikidata="Q4665241" url="?curid=223301" title="Abdul-Wahab Mirjan">
<text>Abdul-Wahab Mirjan (1909 – March 15, 1964) () served as Prime Minister of Iraq from 1957 to 1958 at the time of that country&#x27;s short-lived union with Jordan, which was formalized on February 14, 1958. A relative newcomer to the Iraqi government, Mirjan first joined the cabinet in 1947. He resigned, less than a month after the federation was declared, in favor of Nuri al-Said. He survived the republican coup later that year and died in 1964. He was known, along with his father Abdul-Razzak Mirjan, as being compassionate to his country; Abdul-Razzak Mirjan and his cousin Abdul-Abbas Mirjan donated a number of valuable assets, such as Mirjan Hospital in Hilla province (Babylon) and a large number of houses for the poor people of Iraq.

Abdul-Wahab, son of Abdul-Razzaq, son of Jawad, son of Mahmood AL Mirjan, came from a renowned family in Al-Hilla, where he was born in 1909. He graduated from the College of Law in Baghdad in 1932 and was appointed Justice of the Peace in Suweira (January 1938). However, he resigned after a short period, devoting himself to his law practice and the management of his estates. In September 1942 he was elected President of Al-Hilla Chamber of Agriculture.

In March 1947 he was elected member of the Iraqi lower house Chamber of Deputies of Iraq, representing Al-Hilla Liwa’ (province) and was re-elected in the following year. He was re-elected to the Chamber of Deputies in all subsequent terms until the revolution of 1958.

He was appointed Minister of Economy in Muzahim al-Pachachi&#x27;s cabinet from 26 June 1948 until November 1948. He was elected president of the Chamber of Deputies on first of December 1948 and re-elected to a new term as chamber president on first of December 1949.
After that he was appointed Minister of Communications and Public Works and acting Minister of Finance in Nuri al-Said&#x27;s eleventh cabinet (16 September 1950); then Minister of Finance (25 December 1950) and president of the Chamber of Deputies for the third time (first of December 1951), remaining in this office until the Chamber was dissolved on 27 October 1952.

In Al-Madfai&#x27;s sixth cabinet (29 January 1953) he undertook the Communications and Public Works portfolio, retaining his position in Al-Madfai&#x27;s seventh cabinet (7 May 1953) until he resigned on 21 May 1953.

He was elected president of the Chamber of Deputies for the fourth time on first December 1953, remaining until the Chamber was dissolved on 29 April 1954.

He was re-elected the president of the new Chamber which convened on 26 July 1954; but the Chamber was immediately dissolved on 3 August 1954.

He participated in Nuri al-Said&#x27;s twelfth cabinet as Minister of Agriculture (3 August 1954), then was elected another time to the presidency of the Chamber of Deputies on 16 September 1954; was re-elected as the chamber president on first of December 1954; again on first of December 1955 and on first of December 1956. He became Minister of Communications and Public Works in Al-Ayoubi&#x27;s third cabinet (20 June 1957); then president of the Chamber of Deputies (first of December 1957). He undertook the office of Prime Minister and acting Minister of Defence on 15 December 1957, remaining until 2 March 1958.

On 10 May 1958 he was re-elected president of the Chamber of Deputies, remaining in this position until the revolution of 14 July 1958.

Subsequent to the revolution he was detained for a short period then released. He got terminally ill and died in Baghdad on the morning of Sunday 15 March 1964.

Mr. Mirjan was a paragon of kindness, with a pristine soul and an affable character. He attained the highest government positions within ten years, which added to his modesty and tranquility. When first elected member of the Chamber of Deputies in March 1947, Khalid Al-Durra, one of the members of the upper echelon of Al-Hilla and a distinguished lawyer there, described him in &quot;Al-Wadi&quot; magazine: “Abdul-Wahab is a sincerely patriotic young man; undoubtedly desiring to work for his country’s eminence and progress. He is clean handed, clean spoken and loved by those who knew him ...”

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4665241" start="0" end="18" title="Abdul-Wahab Mirjan" label="Abdul-Wahab Mirjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476165" start="56" end="78" title="Prime Minister of Iraq" label="Prime Minister of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="155" end="161" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q381150" start="370" end="382" title="Nuri al-Said" label="Nuri al-Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q23617456" start="486" end="505" title="Abdul Razzak Mirjan" label="Abdul-Razzak Mirjan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="645" end="660" title="Mirjan Hospital" label="Mirjan Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="912" end="937" title="College of Law in Baghdad" label="College of Law in Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751401" start="1268" end="1295" title="Chamber of Deputies of Iraq" label="Chamber of Deputies of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891051" start="1518" end="1537" title="Muzahim al-Pachachi" label="Muzahim al-Pachachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751401" start="1607" end="1643" title="Chamber of Deputies of Iraq" label="president of the Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15626404" start="1830" end="1849" title="Ministry of Finance (Iraq)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q381150" start="1853" end="1865" title="Nuri al-Said" label="Nuri al-Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q15626404" start="1916" end="1935" title="Ministry of Finance (Iraq)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751401" start="1959" end="1995" title="Chamber of Deputies of Iraq" label="president of the Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751401" start="2353" end="2389" title="Chamber of Deputies of Iraq" label="president of the Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751401" start="2775" end="2812" title="Chamber of Deputies of Iraq" label="presidency of the Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751401" start="3074" end="3110" title="Chamber of Deputies of Iraq" label="president of the Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751401" start="3295" end="3331" title="Chamber of Deputies of Iraq" label="president of the Chamber of Deputies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223302" wikidata="Q2116584" url="?curid=223302" title="Vuosaari">
<text>Vuosaari () is a neighbourhood in the city of Helsinki, Finland. It is located by the sea in East Helsinki and with its area of is geographically the largest district in the city. It also has two Helsinki Metro stations, Rastila and Vuosaari

Vuosaari is one of the fastest-growing areas in Helsinki. The number of inhabitants has been increasing rapidly since early 1990s and it continues to grow as new residential areas are being built.

Among other things, Vuosaari is noted for its nature and large, relatively unspoilt recreational seashore areas. One of these is Uutela, a popular nature park located in the southeastern corner of Vuosaari. The continual planning of new residential zones has in fact raised criticism, as many people would rather preserve Vuosaari&#x27;s closeness to nature.

Vuosaari is the location of a new major seaport in Helsinki, the Vuosaari Harbour.

As of 2005, 7.7% of the population of Vuosaari are foreign citizens and 11.6% were born outside of Finland. This has given the neighbourhood an overtly multi-cultural image in Finnish folklore, even though the percentage is higher in many other places in the Capital Region.

The two natural gas power plants of Helsingin Energia, the power utility of the city of Helsinki, are located in Vuosaari.

== Etymology ==
The original Swedish name of the area was &quot;Norsö&quot;, which can be translated as &quot;string island&quot;. The word &quot;nor&quot; (&quot;nors&quot; in the genitive case) in the name properly means a string, but in this connection it is a geographical term, meaning a long and narrow flowing strait. Vuosaari was an island up to the 16th century, with this kind of a long and narrow strait separating it from the mainland. The middle part of the strait was so shallow that tectonic uplift has since caused it to become dry land, changing Vuosaari into a peninsula. The current bays of Vartiokylänlahti and Porvarinlahti are remnants of this ancient strait. During time, the name of the area also changed from &quot;Norsö&quot; to &quot;Nordsjö&quot;, as if referring to a northern sea. In maps from the early 20th century the area was sometimes marked with a Finnish name &quot;Pohjoisenmerenmaa&quot; (&quot;Northern sea land&quot;). In 1957 the Finnish name was confirmed as Vuosaari, referring to the original meaning of the Swedish name of the area.

== History ==


Vuosaari has been populated continuously since the Iron Age. In prehistoric times it was used as a fishing area by the Tavastians, but they did not live permantently in the area.

The first written record of the inhabitants of the area comes from a document dating back to Magnus IV of Sweden in the 14th century. During the Swedish colonisation of Finland in the Middle Ages Vuosaari received Swedish inhabitants either directly from Sweden or through Länsisalmi.

By the 16th century, Vuosaari had regained its connection to the mainland and the former island had two Rustholl mansions, Nordsjö and Rastböle respectively, formed from the numerous farmsteads in the area, several small villages and a military shipyard. Officers from Suomenlinna built houses on the peninsulas. This process was further amplified after a regular steam boat connection between Helsinki and Vuosaari was established in the 19th century.

Villa inhabitation in Vuosaari increased in the 1880s when steamship traffic to the area started. The areas of Kallahdenniemi and Ramsinniemi got their first villas in the early 20th century. Vuosaari was a Swedish-speaking agricultural area up to the 1930s, when the company Saseka started industrial production near the current residential area of Kallahti. Saseka produced Kahi calcium silicate bricks and Siporex light concrete. Production of these materials in Vuosaari ended in 1978 when the production moved to Ikaalinen.

Of military historical interest is that Russians built fortifications in Vuosaari during the First World War in 1917. During the Second World War, Vuosaari was used as a decoy Helsinki to divert the bombs away from the city. This was done by lighting bonfires and concentrating anti-aircraft guns on the island. The bombing of Helsinki lasted three nights, and in the end, only four percent of the bombs had actually hit their intended target in Helsinki.

Later, during the fast construction phase in the 1990s, the diversion of Soviet bombers led to halts on building sites, as unexploded aerial bombs were discovered hidden in the ground.

After the war, most of the lands in Vuosaari were owned by Oy Saseka Ab, a brick and stone company that had its factory on the island. Big lots of underdeveloped land at a close proximity to the capital prompted Saseka to start a zoning and building process to increase the value of land there. The Asuntosäästäjät Union &quot;(lit. apartment-savers)&quot; started to build houses in the 1960s, thus creating what colloquially is now known as Old Vuosaari. Some of Finland&#x27;s most famous architects participated in the planning, most notably Viljo Revell. Vuosaari was incorporated into Helsinki from the Helsinki rural municipality, now known as Vantaa, on 1 January 1966. At that time the majority of apartment buildings in Keski-Vuosaari had already been built. The rural municipality agreed to the transfer, as the joint board of the city and the rural municipality thought the rural municipality could not afford the construction of the infrastructure needed by the rapidly growing inhabitation. The Vuosaari bridge was built in July 1966, decreasing the travel time from Vuosaari to the city centre. There was a dumping ground at Vuosaarenhuippu in the northern part of Vuosaari from the middle 1960s to the late 1980s. A Valmet dock was built in the place of the current Vuosaari harbour in the 1970s, which was active in Vuosaari until 1987. The Rastila camping site was opened in 1971.


In the early 1970s the population of Vuosaari reached 15 thousand. After this, the increase in population stopped for almost 20 years. The population of Vuosaari has since increased again because of the new construction in the early 1990s. The residential areas of Kallahti, Meri-Rastila and Aurinkolahti were formed in eastern Vuosaari. In the middle 1990s the commercial centre of the district moved to the Columbus shopping centre between Keski-Vuosaari and Kallahti. The extension of the Helsinki Metro to the Vuosaari metro station was opened for passenger transport on 31 August 1998. The opening ceremony was attended by President of Finland Martti Ahtisaari with his wife Eeva.

As the first real influx of refugees and immigrants to Helsinki coincided with the building of Meri-Rastila in the beginning of the 1990s, the quarter quickly became home to an above average population of recent immigrants by Finnish standards. Russians, Estonians, Kurds and Somalis still form the basis of the immigrant population there - some 11% of the total population. The main street in Meri-Rastila became colloquially known as Mogadishu Avenue, which subsequently became the title of a Finnish television series that sought to deal with the intercultural differences between immigrants and native Finns from a comic point of view.

In 2006 Vuosaari had about 34 thousand inhabitants and it is estimated to have about 40 thousand inhabitants in the middle 2020s. The Cirrus high-rise building built to the south of the shopping centre was the tallest residential building in Finland at the time of its completion. The cargo harbour activity in Helsinki moved from the city centre in Vuosaari when the Vuosaari Harbour was taken into use in 2008.

Aku Louhimies&#x27;s 2012 film is named after the district.

== Geography and nature ==
Vuosaari is a peninsula on the shore of the Gulf of Finland, with an area of 17 square kilometres. There are many large greenspaces on both the northern and the southern parts of the area. The district also includes numerous small islands in front of the peninsula, such as Pikku Niinisaari, Iso Villasaari and Kalliosaari. The Vartiokylänlahti bay to the west of Vuosaari and the Porvarinlahti bay to the north are remnants of an ancient strait which has dried up because of tectonic uplift. The Kangaslampi lake, about a hectare in size, is located in the northern part of Keski-Vuosaari and is one of the few lakes located inside Helsinki. The soil in the middle of Vuosaari is mostly made of sand, whereas the lands in the eastern and western parts are made of till, cliffs and clay at some parts. The dominant mineral in the bedrock is gneiss, but there are also more rare minerals in the area, such as gabbro and pillow lava formed from ancient undersea volcanic activity.

There are three peninsulas reaching out to the Gulf of Finland in the southern part of Vuosaari: the oblong peninsulas of Ramsinniemi and Kallahdenniemi and the wider and rounder Uutela. Of these, Kallahdenniemi is an esker populated with pine forest, formed about 12 thousand years ago by melting waters from flowing glaciers. It continues underneath the sea as sandbanks and a sandy bottom, and its highest undersea parts form islands such as Santinen and Iso Leikosaari. Kallahdenharju is a nature preservation area, similarly to the multi-species grove forest located in Ramsinniemi. In the western part of Meri-Rastila is a forest area consisting of many forest types and an ancient shingle beach formed of ancient beach rocks. The Uutela area has many kinds of forests, beach cliffs, traditional biotopes and the Särkkäniemi nature preservation area. As well as Kallahdenniemi, the areas of Rastila and Aurinkolahti also have sandy beaches.

The area of Mustavuori is located in the northern part of Vuosaari, just next to the border to the neighbouring city of Vantaa. A large part of Mustavuori is also a nature preservation area, including the most valuable grove area in the Helsinki capital region with many rare plant species and Porvarinlahti which is significant as a bird-watching area. The 65-metre high hill Vuosaarenhuippu has formed from reclaimed land and is located in Niinisaari in the place of an old dumping ground. It includes many rare plant and animal species. There is a flat giant&#x27;s kettle between Mustavuori and Niinisaari, and Vuosaarenhuippu has formed partly attached to a drumlin.

== Population ==

In late 2020 Vuosaari had 38,961 inhabitants. The population is mostly concentrated on the southern, central and western parts of the area. Finnish and Sámi language speakers comprised 68,7 %, Swedish speakers 4,5 % of the population. People speaking foreign languages comprised 26,8 % of the population, which is clearly higher than that of Helsinki in average (15.7% on 31 December 2018). About a quarter of the inhabitants in Vuosaari come from a foreign background (almost 40% in the Kallahti and Meri-Rastila areas),
 which is also clearly higher than that in Helsinki in average. 17.9% of the inhabitants in Vuosaari were under 16 years old and 18.5% were over 65 years old (31 December 2018). About 45.9% of the apartments in Vuosaari are rental apartments, which is slightly lower than that in Helsinki in average (47.1% on 31 December 2018).

In comparison to the population, Vuosaari has quite few jobs, only slightly more than 6500 (31 December 2017), because Vuosaari has a large numbers of daily commute traffic to other parts of the city. The unemployment rate in 2018 was 13.1%, which is higher than that in Helsinki in average (9.2%), also the number of people on welfare in the same year was high (17.5% compared to 10.4% in Helsinki in average). The income level in Kallahti and Meri-Rastila was among the lowest in Helsinki in 2014, whereas the average income in Aurinkolahti is higher than that in the rest of Vuosaari, comparable to that in Töölö and Lauttasaari.

The district of Vuosaari forms its own congregation in the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland. In 2019 46.4% of the inhabitants in Vuosaari belonged to the congregation. The Orthodox Church of Finland has a congregation in Helsinki, which is also active in Vuosaari.

== Buildings ==

Keski-Vuosaari mainly consists of apartment buildings built in the 1960s. Its southern part has many eight-story-high apartment buildings, but otherwise the buildings have five stories at the most. The Vuosaari church designed by Pirkko and Arvi Ilonen and inaugurated in 1980 is located in Keski-Vuosaari. The current centre of Vuosaari is located on the southern edge of Keski-Vuosaari, however it was only built in the 1990s and 2000s. Nowadays it is the most important service centre in Vuosaari, hosting the Mosaiikkitori square, the Columbus shopping centre, the Vuotalo cultural centre and the Vuosaari metro station. The 26-story-high and 92 metres tall Cirrus apartment building built in 2006 is located near the shopping centre.

The area of Rastila located next to the Vuosaari bridge mostly consists of detached houses, and includes the Rastila camping ground around the main building of the Rastila manor. There are many apartment buildings near the Rastila metro station, of which some are quite high. The areas of Meri-Rastila and Kallahti to the south of the Vuotie street are tightly built apartment suburbs built in the 1990s. The buildings in these areas are muted in colour and quite low, which evokes a feeling of openness. The modern, tightly built and nature-friendly housing area of Ramsinranta is located in the southern part of Meri-Rastila. The Mustankivenpuisto park is the centre of Kallahti, and the facades of the buildings in its northern end are curved.

The apartment building areas of Kallahti and Aurinkolahti almost reach to the sea shore. A pedestrian avenue running along the coastline and several boat harbours are located in front of the areas. Aurinkolahti is a newer area, with apartment buildings built in the 2000s and a clear zoning plan. There are three small parks in the middle of the area and detached houses inside apartment building blocks. The Paulig factory used to be located in the area until it moved to the Vuosaari harbour in 2009. The old factory building was dismantled in 2012 and new apartment buildings were built in its place. There is a long sandy beach in front of Aurinkolahti. The area ends in a boat harbour, with the Uutelankanava canal with two waterfalls entering inland from its end. There is a hemispherical amphitheatre-like house at the northern end of the canal.

There are many old villas all around Vuosaari, of which many are protected. Most of the villas are located near the sea shore and in the nature-friendly areas of Uutela, Kallahdenniemi and Ramsinniemi.

== Services ==
The commercial centre of Vuosaari, located around the Vuosaari metro station and the Mosaiikkitori square, consists mainly of the Columbus shopping centre built in 1996. In the centre of Vuosaari to the north of the metro station are also located the Vuotalo cultural centre containing the Vuosaari library and the Vuosaari sports hall with a swimming pool. The Vuosaari health and welfare centre is located to the south of the metro station. There are also small shopping centres in Meri-Rastila and northern Keski-Vuosaari.

=== Education ===
There are four Finnish-speaking primary schools in Vuosaari, all of which including both the junior and the senior part: the Puistopolku school with two premises in Keski-Vuosaari and Kallahti, the Merilahti school with two premises at Meri-Rastila and Kallahti, the Vuoniitty school with three premises in northern Keski-Vuosaari and the Aurinkolahti school with three premises in Aurinkolahti. Vuosaari also has a Swedish-speaking junior primary school called Nordsjö lågstadieskola; the nearest Swedish-speaking senior primary school is Botby grundskola in Vartiokylä. The Vuosaari gymnasium is located in the centre of Vuosaari.

== Traffic ==

The street Vuotie, mostly built like a highway, is the most important car traffic connection in Vuosaari, connecting the district via the Vuosaari bridge to Ring I and Itäväylä. Other important connections are Kallahdentie leading to Itäväylä and Vuosaaren satamatie leading to Ring III.

The Helsinki Metro expanded to Vuosaari in 1998. There are two metro stations in Vuosaari. The Vuosaari metro station is located in the exact centre of Vuosaari next to the Columbus shopping centre, serving the areas of Keski-Vuosaari, Kallahti and Aurinkolahti. The Rastila metro station serves the areas of Rastila and Meri-Rastila. The trunk bus line 560 travels through Vuosaari and continues via Kontula, Malmi and Paloheinä to Myyrmäki in the neighbouring city of Vantaa.

In 2012 cruise ship traffic from Vuosaari to the city centre was started. During summer season, the cruise ship MS &quot;Okeanos&quot; travels twice per day from the pier at the end of Hiekkalaiturintie to Hakaniemi. The ship travels via Satamasaari, Iiluoto, Vartiosaari, Laajasalo and Herttoniemi to Hakaniemenranta. The ship is operated by Suomen Saaristokuljetus.

=== Vuosaari Harbour ===
The Vuosaari Harbour is a cargo ship harbour located in the northeastern part of Vuosaari in the Niinisaari area. It was completed in late November 2008. In addition to ships only carrying cargo, it is used by passenger-cargo ships of Finnlines travelling to Travemünde and Rostock in Germany, as well as the Tallink ship MS &quot;Sea Wind&quot; and the Eckerö Line ship MS &quot;Finbo Cargo&quot; travelling to Tallinn in Estonia, also carrying passengers along with cargo. The harbour has a total area of 240 hectares and covers almost 15 percent of the total area of Vuosaari.

The Vuosaari Harbour has a connection to Ring III and to highways leading outside the capital region via the highway-level street Vuosaaren Satamatie, mostly running in a tunnel. Cargo trains can travel from the Finnish Main Line to the harbour via the 19-kilometre-long Vuosaari harbour track, of which over 13 kilometres runs in a tunnel.

== Sports ==
=== Exercise services ===

The Vuosaari sports hall in the centre of Vuosaari is a popular place for exercise. After its renovation is complete it is estimated to reach over 750 thousand visitors per year. The Vuosaari exercise park is located to the west of the centre near Nordsjön kartano, containing a skateboarding park, three football fields and an exercise point. The Aimo Mäkinen Areena ice hockey hall is located next to the exercise park. The only paintball forest field in Helsinki, Arena Harbour, is located in the Vuosaari Harbour. One of the two full-sized 18-hole golf courses in Helsinki is located in Vuosaari.

=== Sports clubs ===
The sports life in Vuosaari is concentrated around the sports club Vuosaaren Viikingit. The football club FC Viikingit, separated from the main club, rose into the Veikkausliiga in 2007. In 2008 it fell to Ykkönen. FC Viikingit plays their home matches on the Vuosaari sports ground, which is colloquially known as &quot;Hettari&quot; or &quot;Monttu&quot; (&quot;the pit&quot;) because of its location at the end of Heteniityntie and its shape. FC Viikingit also has an active junior sports club with about 750 players in 40 different teams. The other popular sport in Vuosaari is floorball with the primary team being SSV Helsinki (although it plays its home matches in Pasila).

== References ==
== External links ==

* http://www.vuosaari.net/
* http://www.vuosaari.fi/
* Vuosaari at Google Maps (Satellite photos/map)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2116584" start="0" end="8" title="Vuosaari" label="Vuosaari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17" end="30" title="Subdivisions of Helsinki#Neighbourhoods" label="neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="46" end="54" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784748" start="93" end="106" title="East Helsinki" label="East Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q207287" start="196" end="210" title="Helsinki Metro" label="Helsinki Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291138" start="221" end="228" title="Rastila metro station" label="Rastila"/>
<link wikidata="Q643636" start="233" end="241" title="Vuosaari metro station" label="Vuosaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608603" start="570" end="576" title="Uutela" label="Uutela"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="841" end="848" title="seaport" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943692" start="866" end="882" title="Vuosaari Harbour" label="Vuosaari Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="1037" end="1051" title="Multiculturalism" label="multi-cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="1169" end="1180" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="1181" end="1192" title="power plant" label="power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="1314" end="1321" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="1466" end="1479" title="genitive case" label="genitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="1783" end="1798" title="tectonic uplift" label="tectonic uplift"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1895" end="1911" title="Vartiokylänlahti" label="Vartiokylänlahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411923" start="1916" end="1929" title="Porvarinlahti" label="Porvarinlahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="2169" end="2176" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2432" end="2440" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864082" start="2500" end="2510" title="Tavastians" label="Tavastians"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="2654" end="2673" title="Magnus IV of Sweden" label="Magnus IV of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42901487" start="2706" end="2737" title="Swedish colonisation of Finland" label="Swedish colonisation of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292442" start="3116" end="3127" title="Suomenlinna" label="Suomenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3577" end="3583" title="Saseka" label="Saseka"/>
<link wikidata="Q916964" start="3710" end="3717" title="Siporex" label="Siporex"/>
<link wikidata="Q735133" start="3819" end="3828" title="Ikaalinen" label="Ikaalinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3924" end="3939" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3960" end="3976" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9505308" start="4082" end="4089" title="bonfire" label="bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="4109" end="4126" title="anti-aircraft gun" label="anti-aircraft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q937566" start="5020" end="5032" title="Viljo Revell" label="Viljo Revell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="5125" end="5131" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5483" end="5498" title="Vuosaari bridge" label="Vuosaari bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407039" start="5614" end="5629" title="Vuosaarenhuippu" label="Vuosaarenhuippu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197161" start="5706" end="5712" title="Valmet" label="Valmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070029" start="6140" end="6148" title="Kallahti" label="Kallahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070019" start="6150" end="6162" title="Meri-Rastila" label="Meri-Rastila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871913" start="6167" end="6179" title="Aurinkolahti" label="Aurinkolahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11855459" start="6284" end="6292" title="Columbus (shopping centre)" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207287" start="6367" end="6381" title="Helsinki Metro" label="Helsinki Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q643636" start="6389" end="6411" title="Vuosaari metro station" label="Vuosaari metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558" start="6503" end="6523" title="President of Finland" label="President of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q29230" start="6524" end="6540" title="Martti Ahtisaari" label="Martti Ahtisaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11856875" start="6555" end="6559" title="Eeva Ahtisaari" label="Eeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890408" start="6998" end="7014" title="Mogadishu Avenue" label="Mogadishu Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533051" start="7337" end="7343" title="Cirrus (Helsinki building)" label="Cirrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943692" start="7571" end="7587" title="Vuosaari Harbour" label="Vuosaari Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735652" start="7617" end="7630" title="Aku Louhimies" label="Aku Louhimies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336344" start="7638" end="7647" title="Naked Harbour" label="2012 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="7749" end="7764" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7979" end="7995" title="Pikku Niinisaari" label="Pikku Niinisaari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7997" end="8011" title="Iso Villasaari" label="Iso Villasaari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8016" end="8027" title="Kalliosaari" label="Kalliosaari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8033" end="8049" title="Vartiokylänlahti" label="Vartiokylänlahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411923" start="8086" end="8099" title="Porvarinlahti" label="Porvarinlahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="8181" end="8196" title="tectonic uplift" label="tectonic uplift"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8202" end="8213" title="Kangaslampi, Helsinki" label="Kangaslampi"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="8470" end="8474" title="till" label="till"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="8487" end="8491" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="8535" end="8542" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="8546" end="8552" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="8613" end="8619" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q502339" start="8624" end="8635" title="pillow lava" label="pillow lava"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8807" end="8818" title="Ramsinniemi" label="Ramsinniemi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8823" end="8837" title="Kallahdenniemi" label="Kallahdenniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608603" start="8864" end="8870" title="Uutela" label="Uutela"/>
<link wikidata="Q332784" start="8903" end="8908" title="esker" label="esker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9130" end="9138" title="Santinen" label="Santinen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9143" end="9157" title="Iso Leikosaari" label="Iso Leikosaari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9159" end="9173" title="Kallahdenharju" label="Kallahdenharju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510380" start="9236" end="9241" title="Grove (nature)" label="grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070019" start="9296" end="9308" title="Meri-Rastila" label="Meri-Rastila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059407" start="9373" end="9386" title="shingle beach" label="shingle beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q175208" start="9487" end="9494" title="biotope" label="biotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q761948" start="9582" end="9589" title="Rastila" label="Rastila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871913" start="9594" end="9606" title="Aurinkolahti" label="Aurinkolahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069659" start="9645" end="9655" title="Mustavuori" label="Mustavuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="9753" end="9759" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133436" start="10075" end="10085" title="Niinisaari" label="Niinisaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358604" start="10189" end="10208" title="giant&amp;#x27;s kettle" label="giant&amp;#x27;s kettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192701" start="10296" end="10303" title="drumlin" label="drumlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="10464" end="10471" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="10476" end="10480" title="Sámi languages" label="Sámi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="10517" end="10524" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070029" start="10812" end="10820" title="Kallahti" label="Kallahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070019" start="10825" end="10837" title="Meri-Rastila" label="Meri-Rastila"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="11381" end="11393" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871913" start="11706" end="11718" title="Aurinkolahti" label="Aurinkolahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q520367" start="11786" end="11791" title="Töölö" label="Töölö"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020168" start="11796" end="11807" title="Lauttasaari" label="Lauttasaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="11869" end="11907" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q752470" start="11988" end="12014" title="Orthodox Church of Finland" label="Orthodox Church of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070050" start="12099" end="12113" title="Keski-Vuosaari" label="Keski-Vuosaari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12301" end="12316" title="Vuosaari church" label="Vuosaari church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12612" end="12625" title="Mosaiikkitori" label="Mosaiikkitori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11855459" start="12638" end="12646" title="Columbus (shopping centre)" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662981" start="12668" end="12675" title="Vuotalo" label="Vuotalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q643636" start="12700" end="12722" title="Vuosaari metro station" label="Vuosaari metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533051" start="12761" end="12767" title="Cirrus (Helsinki building)" label="Cirrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q761948" start="12851" end="12858" title="Rastila" label="Rastila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291138" start="13062" end="13083" title="Rastila metro station" label="Rastila metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070019" start="13128" end="13140" title="Meri-Rastila" label="Meri-Rastila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070029" start="13145" end="13153" title="Kallahti" label="Kallahti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13174" end="13180" title="Vuotie" label="Vuotie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13471" end="13488" title="Mustankivenpuisto" label="Mustankivenpuisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871913" start="13632" end="13644" title="Aurinkolahti" label="Aurinkolahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="13871" end="13877" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065096" start="13996" end="14002" title="Paulig" label="Paulig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608603" start="14603" end="14609" title="Uutela" label="Uutela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14611" end="14625" title="Kallahdenniemi" label="Kallahdenniemi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14630" end="14641" title="Ramsinniemi" label="Ramsinniemi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14744" end="14757" title="Mosaiikkitori" label="Mosaiikkitori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11855459" start="14789" end="14797" title="Columbus (shopping centre)" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662981" start="14910" end="14917" title="Vuotalo" label="Vuotalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q376203" start="15764" end="15774" title="Vartiokylä" label="Vartiokylä"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15864" end="15870" title="Vuotie" label="Vuotie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101624" start="16010" end="16016" title="Ring I" label="Ring I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445372" start="16021" end="16029" title="Itäväylä" label="Itäväylä"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16100" end="16119" title="Vuosaaren satamatie" label="Vuosaaren satamatie"/>
<link wikidata="Q771137" start="16131" end="16139" title="Ring III" label="Ring III"/>
<link wikidata="Q207287" start="16146" end="16160" title="Helsinki Metro" label="Helsinki Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q643636" start="16237" end="16259" title="Vuosaari metro station" label="Vuosaari metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291138" start="16409" end="16430" title="Rastila metro station" label="Rastila metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133413" start="16543" end="16550" title="Kontula, Helsinki" label="Kontula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087996" start="16552" end="16557" title="Malmi, Helsinki" label="Malmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069676" start="16562" end="16571" title="Paloheinä" label="Paloheinä"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736737" start="16575" end="16583" title="Myyrmäki" label="Myyrmäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="16612" end="16618" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569858" start="16827" end="16836" title="Hakaniemi" label="Hakaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069168" start="16881" end="16892" title="Vartiosaari" label="Vartiosaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552730" start="16894" end="16903" title="Laajasalo" label="Laajasalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614778" start="16908" end="16919" title="Herttoniemi" label="Herttoniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q94710346" start="16923" end="16938" title="Hakaniemenranta" label="Hakaniemenranta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133436" start="17112" end="17122" title="Niinisaari" label="Niinisaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418246" start="17250" end="17259" title="Finnlines" label="Finnlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q321792" start="17274" end="17284" title="Travemünde" label="Travemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="17289" end="17296" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="17300" end="17307" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536909" start="17324" end="17331" title="Tallink" label="Tallink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742278" start="17337" end="17360" title="MS Sea Wind" label="MS &amp;quot;Sea Wind&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q912755" start="17369" end="17380" title="Eckerö Line" label="Eckerö Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718050" start="17386" end="17412" title="MS Finbo Cargo" label="MS &amp;quot;Finbo Cargo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="17427" end="17434" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="17438" end="17445" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771137" start="17637" end="17645" title="Ring III" label="Ring III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357601" start="17808" end="17825" title="Finnish Main Line" label="Finnish Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17982" end="18002" title="Vuosaari sports hall" label="Vuosaari sports hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18161" end="18183" title="Vuosaari exercise park" label="Vuosaari exercise park"/>
<link wikidata="Q431539" start="18226" end="18242" title="Nordsjön kartano" label="Nordsjön kartano"/>
<link wikidata="Q842284" start="18257" end="18270" title="skateboarding" label="skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524" start="18283" end="18297" title="association football field" label="football field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18326" end="18345" title="Aimo Mäkinen Areena" label="Aimo Mäkinen Areena"/>
<link wikidata="Q192832" start="18409" end="18418" title="paintball" label="paintball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18668" end="18687" title="Vuosaaren Viikingit" label="Vuosaaren Viikingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192755" start="18707" end="18719" title="FC Viikingit" label="FC Viikingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q220875" start="18765" end="18778" title="Veikkausliiga" label="Veikkausliiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q123953863" start="18807" end="18814" title="Ykkönen" label="Ykkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11902010" start="18861" end="18883" title="Vuosaari sports ground" label="Vuosaari sports ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q206763" start="19183" end="19192" title="floorball" label="floorball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752810" start="19221" end="19233" title="SSV Helsinki" label="SSV Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636613" start="19273" end="19279" title="Pasila" label="Pasila"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223305" wikidata="Q2608603" url="?curid=223305" title="Uutela">
<text>Uutela () is a nature park in Vuosaari, Helsinki, Finland. It is surrounded by the sea on three sides, and as one of Helsinki&#x27;s best-preserved nature parks, Uutela attracts visitors from all over the Helsinki capital area. You can get there by taking the subway to Vuosaari and then either walk or take the bus 90K. Uutela has a small idyllic marina where people keep their boats, right next to which is cafe Kampela which offers traditional pancakes and salmon soup. This area is known for hikers and outdoor people because of its landscape and vegetation.

Uutela is large enough to contain Skatta farm - one of several farms within the boundaries of Helsinki. The farm is known for having previously been inhabited by the artist Miina Äkkijyrkkä, but it is now rented to Suomen Setlementtisäätiö.

==External links==
*Uutela Nature Trail - photos
ОЗюп</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2608603" start="0" end="6" title="Uutela" label="Uutela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116584" start="30" end="38" title="Vuosaari" label="Vuosaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="40" end="48" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="50" end="57" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18691387" start="205" end="226" title="Helsinki capital area" label="Helsinki capital area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420442" start="460" end="471" title="Lohikeitto" label="salmon soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304425" start="737" end="753" title="Äkkijyrkkä" label="Miina Äkkijyrkkä"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223307" wikidata="Q1253036" url="?curid=223307" title="McDonnell F2H Banshee">
<text>The McDonnell F2H Banshee (company designation McDonnell Model 24) is a single-seat carrier-based jet fighter aircraft designed and produced by the American aircraft manufacturer McDonnell Aircraft. It was an early jet fighter operated by United States Navy and United States Marine Corps, as well as being the only jet-powered fighter to ever be deployed by the Royal Canadian Navy. The aircraft&#x27;s name is derived from the banshee of Irish mythology.

The Banshee was developed during the mid to late 1940s. It was a derivative of the earlier FH Phantom, although the resulting aircraft would be considerably larger, more heavily armed, and furnished with far more powerful engines in the form of a pair of Westinghouse J34 turbojets. The Banshee incorporated several recent innovations, including a pressurized cockpit, &quot;kneeling&quot; nose landing gear and an ejection seat, which the Phantom lacked, as well as a large number of improvements to other aircraft systems. On 11 January 1947, the first prototype performed its maiden flight. During August 1948, the first &quot;F2H-1&quot;, the initial production model, was completed. The F2H-2 was the basis for three sub-variants; the nuclear-armed &quot;F2H-2B&quot;, the &quot;F2H-2N&quot; night fighter, and the &quot;F2H-2P&quot; photo reconnaissance aircraft.

Upon its introduction in late 1948, the Banshee proved to be almost slower than the latest land-based fighters, which has been largely attributed to its use of a straight wing rather than a swept wing configuration. Nevertheless, several variants were procured; the F2H-2N was the first carrier-based jet-powered night fighter flown by the U.S. Navy, albeit only in limited numbers, while the &quot;F2H-2P&quot; was also the service&#x27;s first jet-powered reconnaissance aircraft. US Navy and Marine pilots often referred to the F2H as the &quot;Banjo&quot;. It was one of the primary American fighters used during the Korean War, typically being flown as an escort fighter and reconnaissance aircraft. Radar-equipped Banshees were also used for all-weather fleet defense. Furthermore, during 1955, 27 overflights of potential Chinese staging areas were conducted by USMC Banshees in response to a possible Chinese invasion of Taiwan.

During the mid 1950s, the U.S. Navy and USMC began retiring their Banshees in favour of newer and more capable jet aircraft, such as the swept wing Grumman F-9 Cougar and McDonnell F3H Demon, and the delta wing Douglas F4D Skyray. Several of these aircraft would be acquired by Canada for the Royal Canadian Navy as production of the Banshee was terminated in 1953. Introduced to Canadian service in 1955, the type became the sole fighter operated following the retirement of the piston-engined Hawker Sea Fury. It operated at sea from or from shore bases as NORAD interceptor aircraft. Amid a reorientation towards anti-submarine warfare (ASW) and reduced value being placed on fighter operations, as well as decreasing reliability, Canada opted to withdraw its last Banshees without any direct replacement in September 1962.

==Design and development==
===Background===
The origins of the Banshee can be traced back to the FH Phantom, the United States Navy&#x27;s first carrier-based jet fighter. This predecessor had been first proposed by McDonnell in January 1943 and made its first flight on 2 January 1945. Even prior to production-standard Phantoms commencing delivery in January 1947, the company had already progressed with development of a successor. On 2 March 1945, the U.S. Navy&#x27;s Bureau of Aeronautics instructed McDonnell to produce three prototypes of the improved derivative they had envisioned, designated &quot;XF2D-1&quot;. The company&#x27;s design team had originally intended for this aircraft to be a straightforward modification of the Phantom and thus to share many components between the two aircraft, but it promptly became clear that the new aircraft ought to possess heavier armament, greater internal fuel capacity, and several other improvements that made the original concept infeasible.

The resulting aircraft required the use of much larger and more powerful engines; the powerplant selected was a pair of newly developed Westinghouse J34 turbojets, which provided nearly double the total thrust from compared to the Phantom but, since the larger engines still had to fit within the wing roots, this required a larger and thicker wing. The more powerful engines were more fuel hungry, thus the fuselage was enlarged and strengthened to facilitate an increase in fuel capacity, which permitted a mission radius of up to 600 miles to be flown. No provisions for external stores were present on early production aircraft.

Armament comprised four cannon, the U.S. Navy&#x27;s successor to the obsolete World War II-era machine guns; these were mounted underneath the redesigned nose as this positioning meant that pilots would not be blinded by muzzle flash when firing at night, which had been a problem with the Phantom. From the tenth production aircraft onwards, the Banshee incorporated an ejection seat, another feature that had been absent on the Phantom. The aircraft also incorporated a large number of improvements to various onboard systems. The cockpit was pressurized and air conditioned, while the flaps, landing gear, folding wings, canopy, and air brakes were electrically rather than pneumatically operated. The front of the windscreen was bulletproof glass that was electrically heated to prevent frost.

The Banshee was provisioned with a &quot;kneeling&quot; nose landing gear that had a pair of small wheels forward of the regular nosewheel. The regular nosewheel could be retracted so that the aircraft would rest on the smaller wheels; it could taxi with its nose down, redirecting the hot jet blast upwards to pose less risk to ground crews, and to allow parked aircraft to be tucked under each other to save space. This function was usually removed from later variants as it was found to be of little practical use and caused deck handling problems. During April 1945, a mockup was completed. The project survived the numerous cancellations that came around the end of the conflict, however, the pace of development was slowed considerably, leading to the first of three prototypes not being completed until late 1946.

===Into flight===
On 11 January 1947, the first prototype performed its maiden flight from Lambert Field, St. Louis, Missouri, piloted by McDonnell test pilot Robert M. Eldholm. During this first test flight, the aircraft demonstrated a climb rate of , twice that of the F8F Bearcat, the Navy&#x27;s primary fleet defense interceptor. The flight test programme, which included carrier trials, was considered to be a success, however, various improvements and refinements to the aircraft were suggested. The U.S. Navy also permitted McDonnell to borrow one of the prototypes to assist in the development of afterburners and to test fly a modified wing design with an extended trailing edge.

During 1947, the prototype was redesignated &quot;XF2H-1&quot; after the Navy placed an order for an unrelated jet fighter from the Douglas Aircraft Company, which had previously been assigned the manufacturer&#x27;s letter &quot;D&quot;. An initial order for 56 aircraft was issued by the U.S. Navy on 29 May 1947. During August 1949, an F2H-1 set a US Navy jet fighter altitude record of , but it wasn&#x27;t enough to beat the reached by a de Havilland Vampire on 23 March 1948. This altitude record was motivated at least partially by inter-service rivalries, as the feat proved that the Convair B-36 Peacemaker strategic bombers of the United States Air Force (the existence of which had been a factor in the cancellation of the , which would have been the U.S. Navy&#x27;s first &quot;supercarrier&quot;) was vulnerable to interceptor aircraft even at its maximum altitude.
During August 1948, similarities to the FH-1 meant that McDonnell was able to complete the first &quot;F2H-1&quot;, a mere three months after the last FH-1 was built; service evaluations commenced that same month Compared to the XF2D-1, the F2H was a larger aircraft in practically all aspects, while the fuel capacity was increased to . The empennage was a new design, the dorsal fin was reduced, and the dihedral was eliminated from the horizontal stabilizers. The wing and tail were reduced in thickness to increase the critical Mach number and different airfoil sections were used. The F2H-1 was retrofitted with engines as they became available.

Although the Navy was satisfied with the F2H-1, it was the more capable &quot;F2H-2&quot; that was most widely used. Powered by Westinghouse J34-WE-34 engines, capable of producing of thrust, it proved to be capable of significantly improved performance. The wings were strengthened to add provision for wingtip fuel tanks but, unlike those of the contemporary Grumman F9F Panther, the Banshee&#x27;s wingtip tanks were detachable. A pair of armament pylons were added under each inboard and outboard wing, for a total of eight, allowing the aircraft to carry of stores, consisting of up to four bombs and four unguided rockets. The &quot;kneeling&quot; nose gear was omitted from the F2H-2 and most subsequent Banshee variants.

===Further development===
The F2H-2 was the basis for three sub-variants. The &quot;F2H-2B&quot; had strengthened wings and an additional pylon adjacent to the intake on the port side to allow it to carry a Mark 7 nuclear bomb or a Mark 8 nuclear bomb. To compensate for the increased load, the F2H-2B was fitted with stiffer landing gear struts and a pilot-switchable aileron power boost. The latter was necessary to control the roll to the left when a heavy nuclear bomb was carried. One cannon was removed to provide room for the electronics needed to arm the weapon. 25 F2H-2Bs were built.

The &quot;F2H-2N&quot; was the U.S. Navy&#x27;s first carrier-based jet night fighter, making its first flight on 3 February 1950, although only 14 would be built. It had a longer nose that housed a Sperry Corporation AN/APS-19 radar which required that the cannons be moved back to make room. An F2H-2N was returned to McDonnell to serve as the prototype for the enlarged F2H-3. Some F2H-2Ns retained the &quot;kneeling&quot; nose feature of the earlier F2H-1.

The &quot;F2H-2P&quot; photo reconnaissance version had six cameras in a longer nose and was the US Navy&#x27;s first jet-powered carrier-based reconnaissance aircraft. First flight was on 12 October 1950, and 90 were built. The pilot could rotate the cameras in both vertical and horizontal planes, and the aircraft could carry a pair of underwing pods that each contained 20 flash cartridges for night photography. The camera bay was electrically heated. The F2H-2P was a valuable photo-reconnaissance asset due to its long range for a jet aircraft, high ceiling of , and speed that made it difficult to intercept even by other jet aircraft. As a result, the F2H-2P was responsible for supplying roughly 40% of the United States Air Force (USAF) Fifth Air Force&#x27;s daytime reconnaissance needs.

The &quot;F2H-3&quot; was an all-weather fighter, with a larger diameter Westinghouse AN/APQ-41 radar fitted in an longer fuselage which also increased its internal fuel load by over 50%, to . This allowed the detachable wingtip fuel tanks to be reduced to each, and due to the increased internal capacity, these were now seldom needed. The cannons were moved back, away from the nose to accommodate the larger diameter radar while allowing for an increased ammunition capacity. The horizontal stabilizers were lowered from the fin to the fuselage and were given dihedral, and on all but the first aircraft, large triangular fillets were added to the leading edges. The weapons load was increased to and AIM-9 Sidewinder air-to-air missiles would be cleared for use. The F2H-3 also added provisions for aerial refueling consisting of as-needed bolt-on, in-flight refueling probe that replaced the upper port cannon. 250 were built, with the first flight being made on March 29 1952. 

The final variant to be produced was the &quot;F2H-4&quot;. It had a Hughes AN/APG-37 radar and slightly more powerful Westinghouse J34-WE-38 engines that increased the aircraft&#x27;s service ceiling to . The F2H-4 was externally indistinguishable from the F2H-3.

McDonnell also created at least 48 proposals, including a long range escort fighter (&quot;Model 24H&quot;), a two-seat night fighter (&quot;Model 24N&quot;), a two-seat trainer (&quot;Model 24P&quot;), a two seat interceptor (&quot;Model 24Q&quot;), several single seat interceptors (&quot;models 24R &amp; 24S&quot;), multiple variants with lengthened fuselages, alternate wings and tails, swept wings (&quot;model 24J&quot;, and others) and afterburners (&quot;model 24K, 24L&quot; and others), and various engine (&quot;model 24W&quot;, and others) and radar installations (&quot;model 24Y&quot;, and others), few of which were built. Plans for adding afterburners were canceled after a test aircraft suffered extensive damage to the wing and tail after the afterburners were lit. An &quot;F2H-3P&quot; reconnaissance variant was proposed to replace the F2H-2P, but was ultimately not built.

On 24 September 1953, production of the Banshee was ended following the delivery of 895 aircraft. Under the 1962 unified designation system surviving F2H-3 and F2H-4 were redesignated &quot;F-2C&quot; and &quot;F-2D&quot; respectively. The &quot;F-2A&quot; and &quot;F-2B&quot; designations were never assigned, as the F2H-1 and F2H-2 had already been retired. No Banshee flew under the new designations as the last examples were already in storage when the new designations came into effect.

==Operational history==
===US Navy and Marine Corps===
The F2H-2 served during the Korean War with the US Navy&#x27;s Task Force 77 and the Marine Corps. On 23 August 1951, a Banshee flew the type&#x27;s first combat mission in the Korean theatre from USS Essex. The F2H-2 initially proved its worth as an escort fighter for the USAF bombers supporting United Nations Command (UNC) ground forces, largely due to its favourable performance when flown at high altitude. The Banshee was able to demonstrate clear performance advantages over the Grumman F9F Panther. 

From mid-1950, the F2H-2 had negligible exposure to hostile aircraft over Korea, due to several factors. During the opening weeks of the war, the North Korean air force had been almost completely annihilated by UNC fighter units. Later, North Korea and its allies were unable to operate from airfields near combat zones in South Korea, forcing them to operate out of air bases in China. As a result of their air superiority throughout most of 1950, UNC squadrons were able to carry out ground attack missions instead, especially close air support and interdiction of North Korean army supply lines.

The Banshee, like most naval jets of its generation, had a serious handicap. Naval air services, including the USN, had resisted faster, swept wing designs from fears that poor low speed flight characteristics made them unsafe to operate from aircraft carriers. Consequently, the Banshee was almost slower than the latest land-based fighters. Their obsolescence was reinforced by the introduction of the Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15 in November 1950. Most UNC air combat missions, such as patrols over &quot;MiG Alley&quot;, were undertaken by North American F-86 Sabres of the USAF Far East Air Forces. Consequently, F2H fighters operated most of the war beyond the range of enemy fighters. Banshee pilots scored no victories, while three F2H-2s were lost to anti-aircraft gunfire.

The F2H-2P flew reconnaissance missions during the Korean War, primarily with the USMC. At that time of the war, surface-to-air missiles had not yet been deployed and few enemy aircraft had radar, while AA guns were ineffective against fast, high-altitude targets. Air defense was still largely visual, and so a lone high-flying F2H-2P was almost impossible for ground forces to shoot down. The aircraft was in demand for its invaluable battlefield photography. F2H-2Ps had USAF fighter escorts when in areas frequented by enemy fighters. Despite being deployed constantly throughout the war, only two F2H-2Ps were lost to radar-directed AA gunfire, and suffered no air-to-air losses.

The USN deployed the radar-equipped F2H-3 and F2H-4 for all-weather fleet defense after the Korean War as a stopgap measure until the swept wing Grumman F-9 Cougar and McDonnell F3H Demon, and delta wing Douglas F4D Skyray could be deployed. Later Banshee variants were only briefly on the front lines and saw no action. Similarly, the F2H-2P was superseded by the F9F-8P (later RF-9J) variant of the F9F Cougar and the F8U-1P (later RF-8A) variant of the Vought F8U Crusader as these aircraft became available.

During 1954, a Banshee flew coast-to-coast, nonstop without refueling, approximately from NAS Los Alamitos, California to NAS Cecil Field, Florida, in approximately four hours.

During the Korean War, the US was concerned about the lack of intelligence available should there be a war in Europe involving the Soviet Union, in particular on the location of airfields. The US Navy&#x27;s &quot;Operation Steve Brody&quot;, with four F2H-2P photo reconnaissance Banshees were to fly from a carrier on routine maneuvers off Greece and fly north, photographing Russian territory bordering the Black Sea. In May 1952, this was presented to Secretary of Defense Robert A. Lovett, but Lovett canceled it.

Later, during 1955, fears of a possible Chinese invasion of Taiwan led to Marine F2H-2Ps performing 27 overflights of possible Chinese staging areas without incident, escorted by Marine fighter Banshees based in South Korea.

===Royal Canadian Navy===

During 1951, the Royal Canadian Navy (RCN) drafted a $40 million deal for 60 new Banshees to replace its obsolete fleet of Hawker Sea Furies. However, the purchase was not approved by the Parliament of Canada until 1953, by which point production of the Banshee had been terminated. Accordingly, the RCN acquired 39 second-hand US Navy F2H-3s for $25 million which were delivered between 1955 and 1958. They would be flown from or as NORAD interceptors from shore bases.

In order to improve the Banshee as an interceptor, the RCN equipped their aircraft with AIM-9 Sidewinder missiles. During November 1959, the RCN conducted sea trials of the Sidewinder, resulting in the successful downing of several remotely piloted drones.

Although initially well-liked by its Canadian pilots for its flying qualities, the Banshee began to suffer from problems. The RCN would eventually lose 12 of its original 39 Banshees to accidents, a loss rate of 30.8%. One Banshee and its pilot were lost after an inflight failure of the folding wing mechanism, and another Banshee suffered a brake failure and rolled off the carrier&#x27;s deck into the ocean, drowning its pilot. 

Banshee utilization fell as the RCN shifted to anti-submarine warfare (ASW), which did not anticipate aerial attacks, and so there was little need for the Banshee under this doctrine. Also, due to the carrier&#x27;s small size, there was no room to accommodate Banshees when &quot;Bonaventure&quot; was carrying enough Grumman CS2F Trackers to conduct around-the-clock ASW patrols, so it regularly operated without them. The Canadian military was also under pressure to reduce its budget, and the obsolescent Banshees were expensive to maintain as their age, punishing carrier service, and the harsh North Atlantic were taking their toll. Having been the only jet-powered carrier-based fighters deployed by the RCN, the last examples were retired without replacement during September 1962.

Banshees were the primary aircraft of the short-lived RCN Grey Ghosts aerobatic team. The team&#x27;s name was a play on the Banshee name and the RCN color scheme. The RCN was too small to dedicate aircraft for airshows, so the team flew available operational Banshees for each show.

Aside from the three former RCN Banshees that survive, RCN Banshees were cut up for scrap or burned in firefighting exercises upon their retirement.

==Variants==
;XF2H-1
:Company designation Model 24B, originally designated XF2D-1. Prototype aircraft, three built.
;F2H-1
:Single-seat fighter version, two 3,000 lbf (1,400 kgf) Westinghouse J34-WE-22 turbojet engines. Initial production version, 56 built.
;XF2H-2
:Company designation Model 24K, proposed swept-wing variant with afterburners. Unrelated to the production F2H-2.
;F2H-2
:Improved version with detachable wingtip fuel tanks, eight underwing weapons pylons for 1,580 lb (454 kg) stores capability, 3,250 lbf (1,475 kgf) Westinghouse J34-WE-34 turbojet engines. Second production version, 308 built.
;F2H-2B
:Single-seat fighter-bomber version, strengthened portside weapons pylon for 3,230 lb (1,465 kg) Mark 8 nuclear bomb, 25 built.
;F2H-2N
:Single-seat night fighter version with APS-19 radar housed in lengthened nose, 14 built.
;Model 24AN
:A single F2H-2N (BuNo 123311) modified with a fuselage extension as an aerodynamic prototype for an all-weather fighter variant.
;F2H-2P
:Single-seat photo-reconnaissance version with lengthened nose housing six cameras, 89 built.
;XF2H-3
:Company designation Model 24L, proposed swept-wing variant with afterburners. Unrelated to the production F2H-3.
;F2H-3
:Company designation Model 24AR, single-seat all-weather fighter version, lengthened fuselage, redesigned tail, increased fuel capacity, eight underwing weapons pylons for 3,000 lb (1,361 kg) bomb load, APQ-41 radar in enlarged nose. 250 built. Redesignated as F-2C in 1962.
;F2H-3P
:Proposed photo-reconnaissance version of the F2H-3; not built.
;XF2H-4
:Company designation Model 24M, proposed swept-wing variant without afterburners. Unrelated to the production F2H-4.
;F2H-4
:Improved all-weather fighter version, thrust Westinghouse J34-WE-38 turbojet engines, APG-37 radar, otherwise similar to F2H-3. Final production version, 150 built. Redesignated as F-2D in 1962.
;XF2H-5
:Unofficial designation for unbuilt proposed swept-wing version with wings, tail and afterburners similar to those of the XF-88 Voodoo.

==Operators==

* Royal Canadian Navy (F2H-3)
** 870 Naval Air Squadron
** 871 Naval Air Squadron
** VX-10 (Test Squadron)
* United States Navy
** VX-3 (Evaluation) (F2H-1, F2H-4)
** VF-11 (F2H-2, F2H-4)
** VF-12 (F2H-2)
** VF-22 (F2H-2, F2H-4)
** VF-23 (F2H-3)
** VF-31 (F2H-3)
** VF-41 (F2H-3)
** VF-52 (F2H-3)
** VF-62 (F2H-2, F2H-2P)
** VF-92 (F2H-3, F2H-4)
** VF-101 (F2H-1, F2H-2B)
** VF-114 (F2H-3)
** VF-141 (F2H-3)
** VF-152 (F2H-3)
** VF-171 (F2H-1, F2H-2)
** VF-172 (F2H-1, F2H-2, F2H-2B, F2H-4)
** VF-213 (F2H-3)
** VC-3 (F2H-3)
** VC-4 (F2H-2B, F2H-2N, F2H-3, F2H-4)
** VC-61 (F2H-2P)
** VC-62 (F2H-2P)

* United States Marine Corps Aviation
** VMF-114
** VMF-122 (F2H-2)
** VMF-214 (F2H-4)
** VMF-224 (F2H-2)
** VMF(N)-533 (F2H-4)
** VMJ-1 (F2H-2P)
** VMJ-2 (F2H-2P)

==Aircraft on display==
Surviving examples are on display in private collections and at several naval air stations and marine corps air stations in the United States as well as in Canada.

===Canada===
;F2H-3
* BuNo 126334 – The Military Museums, in Calgary, Alberta.
* BuNo 126402 – Shearwater Aviation Museum in Shearwater, Nova Scotia.
* BuNo 126464 – Canada Aviation and Space Museum in Ottawa, Ontario.

===United States===
;F2H-2
* BuNo 124988 – Flying Leatherneck Aviation Museum, MCAS Miramar, California.
* BuNo 125052 – USS Lexington Museum, Corpus Christi, Texas.
* BuNo 127693 – NAS Oceana Air Park at NAS Oceana, Virginia.

;F2H-2P
* BuNo 125690 – Pima Air &amp; Space Museum, adjacent to Davis-Monthan AFB in Tucson, Arizona.
* BuNo 126673 – National Naval Aviation Museum at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida.
* BuNo 128885 – Howell Park in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

;F2H-4
* BuNo 127663 – National Naval Aviation Museum at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida. Painted as F2H-3 126419.

==Specifications (F2H-3)==


==See also==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* Baugher, Joe. &quot;McDonnell F2D-1/F2H-1 Banshee.&quot; &quot;Joe Baugher&#x27;s Encyclopedia of American Military Aircraft&quot;, 3 September 2003. Retrieved: 23 January 2011.
* 
* 
* &quot;McDonnell Banshee.&quot; &quot;Shearwater Aviation Museum Aircraft History,&quot; 2009. Retrieved: 1 March 2009.
* &quot;McDonnell Banshee Serial Number 1263334.&quot; &quot;Naval Museum of Alberta&quot;, 2009. Retrieved: 1 March 2009.
* 
* 
* &quot;Standard Aircraft Characteristics: F2H-3,-4 Banshee.&quot; Washington, D.C.: United States Navy, 1 May 1951.
* 
* 

==External links==
* RCN Banshee 126402 at Shearwater Aviation Museum </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1253036" start="4" end="25" title="McDonnell F2H Banshee" label="McDonnell F2H Banshee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253036" start="47" end="65" title="McDonnell F2H Banshee" label="McDonnell Model 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261534" start="84" end="97" title="carrier-based" label="carrier-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="102" end="118" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q750141" start="179" end="197" title="McDonnell Aircraft" label="McDonnell Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="239" end="257" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="262" end="288" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="316" end="327" title="Jet aircraft" label="jet-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="363" end="382" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273112" start="429" end="436" title="banshee" label="banshee"/>
<link wikidata="Q550166" start="549" end="559" title="McDonnell FH Phantom" label="FH Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q611039" start="713" end="729" title="Westinghouse J34" label="Westinghouse J34"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="730" end="738" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="806" end="817" title="Cabin pressurization" label="pressurized"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="853" end="865" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="873" end="886" title="ejection seat" label="ejection seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="1037" end="1050" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="1198" end="1211" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear-armed"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="1255" end="1268" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="1297" end="1317" title="aerial reconnaissance" label="photo reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="1519" end="1529" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="1950" end="1960" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="2258" end="2264" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q401053" start="2415" end="2433" title="Grumman F-9 Cougar" label="Grumman F-9 Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423312" start="2438" end="2457" title="McDonnell F3H Demon" label="McDonnell F3H Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252297" start="2478" end="2496" title="Douglas F4D Skyray" label="Douglas F4D Skyray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366779" start="2762" end="2777" title="Hawker Sea Fury" label="Hawker Sea Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q748010" start="2826" end="2831" title="NORAD" label="NORAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="2832" end="2852" title="interceptor aircraft" label="interceptor aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="2883" end="2905" title="anti-submarine warfare" label="anti-submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q550166" start="3192" end="3202" title="McDonnell FH Phantom" label="FH Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3208" end="3226" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647257" start="3568" end="3589" title="Bureau of Aeronautics" label="Bureau of Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q611039" start="4232" end="4248" title="Westinghouse J34" label="Westinghouse J34"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="4249" end="4257" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112061" start="4754" end="4760" title="Colt Mk 12 cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4809" end="4821" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="4826" end="4838" title="M2 Browning" label="machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425142" start="4952" end="4964" title="muzzle flash" label="muzzle flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="5102" end="5115" title="ejection seat" label="ejection seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="5276" end="5287" title="Cabin pressurization" label="pressurized"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="5292" end="5307" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="5319" end="5324" title="flap (aircraft)" label="flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="5326" end="5338" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827941" start="5340" end="5352" title="folding wing" label="folding wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004684" start="5367" end="5377" title="air brake (aircraft)" label="air brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211500" start="5408" end="5421" title="pneumatics" label="pneumatically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133376" start="5464" end="5481" title="bulletproof glass" label="bulletproof glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="5591" end="5603" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="6424" end="6437" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425838" start="6443" end="6456" title="Lambert-St. Louis International Airport" label="Lambert Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="6458" end="6477" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q476388" start="6623" end="6634" title="Grumman F8F Bearcat" label="F8F Bearcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="6674" end="6685" title="interceptor aircraft" label="interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="6958" end="6969" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q975211" start="7027" end="7040" title="trailing edge" label="trailing edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q651778" start="7175" end="7199" title="Douglas Aircraft Company" label="Douglas Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q179835" start="7486" end="7506" title="de Havilland Vampire" label="de Havilland Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q332657" start="7635" end="7658" title="Convair B-36 Peacemaker" label="Convair B-36 Peacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="7659" end="7675" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="7684" end="7707" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="7834" end="7846" title="supercarrier" label="supercarrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506785" start="8265" end="8274" title="empennage" label="empennage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972636" start="8329" end="8337" title="dihedral (aircraft)" label="dihedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8879" end="8897" title="Aircraft_fuel_tank#Tip_tanks" label="wingtip fuel tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q390816" start="8936" end="8955" title="Grumman F9F Panther" label="Grumman F9F Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057294" start="9512" end="9531" title="Mark 7 nuclear bomb" label="Mark 7 nuclear bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q286965" start="9537" end="9556" title="Mark 8 nuclear bomb" label="Mark 8 nuclear bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="9674" end="9681" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="9972" end="9985" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q784567" start="10099" end="10117" title="Sperry Corporation" label="Sperry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10118" end="10127" title="AN/APS-19" label="AN/APS-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="10128" end="10133" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="10386" end="10406" title="aerial reconnaissance" label="photo reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q221836" start="10740" end="10756" title="Flash (photography)" label="flash cartridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q905424" start="10889" end="10894" title="Range (aircraft)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197176" start="10937" end="10942" title="Airspeed" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="11080" end="11103" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817902" start="11111" end="11126" title="Fifth Air Force" label="Fifth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="11238" end="11250" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526240" start="11251" end="11260" title="AN/APQ-41" label="AN/APQ-41"/>
<link wikidata="Q235396" start="11869" end="11885" title="AIM-9 Sidewinder" label="AIM-9 Sidewinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="11968" end="11984" title="aerial refueling" label="aerial refueling"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="12018" end="12037" title="in-flight refueling" label="in-flight refueling"/>
<link wikidata="Q33127619" start="12219" end="12225" title="Hughes Electronics" label="Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12226" end="12235" title="AN/APG-37" label="AN/APG-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="13072" end="13083" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q637381" start="13421" end="13452" title="1962 United States Tri-Service aircraft designation system" label="1962 unified designation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="13890" end="13900" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687291" start="13925" end="13938" title="Task Force 77 (U.S. Navy)" label="Task Force 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q562674" start="14059" end="14068" title="USS Essex (CV-9)" label="USS Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q482864" start="14160" end="14182" title="United Nations Command" label="United Nations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q390816" start="14349" end="14368" title="Grumman F9F Panther" label="Grumman F9F Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q698296" start="14518" end="14540" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army Air Force" label="North Korean air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14752" end="14757" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="14901" end="14918" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="14939" end="14956" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="North Korean army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="15109" end="15119" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="15215" end="15231" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="15376" end="15399" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="15427" end="15437" title="Aerial warfare" label="air combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q562692" start="15475" end="15484" title="MiG Alley" label="MiG Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="15511" end="15536" title="North American F-86 Sabre" label="North American F-86 Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045517" start="15550" end="15569" title="Far East Air Forces" label="Far East Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="15727" end="15740" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="15864" end="15886" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="15941" end="15946" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="15954" end="15956" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="AA"/>
<link wikidata="Q401053" start="16582" end="16600" title="Grumman F-9 Cougar" label="Grumman F-9 Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423312" start="16605" end="16624" title="McDonnell F3H Demon" label="McDonnell F3H Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252297" start="16641" end="16659" title="Douglas F4D Skyray" label="Douglas F4D Skyray"/>
<link wikidata="Q502126" start="16893" end="16912" title="Vought F-8 Crusader" label="Vought F8U Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298050" start="17040" end="17056" title="Los Alamitos AAF" label="NAS Los Alamitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015462" start="17072" end="17087" title="NAS Cecil Field" label="NAS Cecil Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612035" start="17352" end="17363" title="Steve Brodie (bridge jumper)" label="Steve Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063424" start="17605" end="17621" title="Robert A. Lovett" label="Robert A. Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="17708" end="17714" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="17918" end="17937" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366779" start="18024" end="18041" title="Hawker Sea Fury" label="Hawker Sea Furies"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="18089" end="18109" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q748010" start="18335" end="18340" title="NORAD" label="NORAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="18622" end="18628" title="drone aircraft" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="19112" end="19134" title="anti-submarine warfare" label="anti-submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065437" start="19384" end="19404" title="Grumman CS2F Tracker" label="Grumman CS2F Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="19671" end="19679" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19914" end="19925" title="Grey Ghosts" label="Grey Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070669" start="20067" end="20074" title="airshow" label="airshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="20622" end="20633" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273702" start="21169" end="21173" title="Bureau Number" label="BuNo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="21252" end="21271" title="all-weather fighter" label="all-weather fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957732" start="22317" end="22329" title="XF-88 Voodoo" label="XF-88 Voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="22349" end="22368" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761505" start="22380" end="22402" title="870 Naval Air Squadron" label="870 Naval Air Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577455" start="22406" end="22428" title="871 Naval Air Squadron" label="871 Naval Air Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="22456" end="22474" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198758" start="22514" end="22519" title="VF-11" label="VF-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906419" start="22538" end="22543" title="Attack Squadron 12 (United States Navy)" label="VF-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198754" start="22555" end="22560" title="VF-22" label="VF-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906834" start="22579" end="22584" title="VFA-151" label="VF-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028398" start="22596" end="22601" title="VFA-31" label="VF-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680746" start="22613" end="22618" title="VFA-41" label="VF-41"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198731" start="22630" end="22635" title="VF-52" label="VF-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q21716194" start="22647" end="22652" title="VA-106 (U.S. Navy)" label="VF-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030328" start="22672" end="22677" title="Fighter Squadron 92" label="VF-92"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906753" start="22696" end="22702" title="VF-101" label="VF-101"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906754" start="22722" end="22728" title="VF-114" label="VF-114"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198732" start="22740" end="22746" title="VF-53" label="VF-141"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986085" start="22758" end="22764" title="VA-152 (U.S. Navy)" label="VF-152"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198721" start="22776" end="22782" title="VF-171" label="VF-171"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986114" start="22801" end="22807" title="VA-172 (U.S. Navy)" label="VF-172"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986477" start="22841" end="22847" title="VFA-213" label="VF-213"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906856" start="22859" end="22863" title="VC-3 (military)" label="VC-3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22875" end="22879" title="VF(AW)-4" label="VC-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198739" start="22914" end="22919" title="VFP-63" label="VC-61"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906871" start="22932" end="22937" title="VFP-62" label="VC-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q11558759" start="22950" end="22985" title="United States Marine Corps Aviation" label="United States Marine Corps Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980245" start="22989" end="22996" title="VMF-114" label="VMF-114"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907236" start="23000" end="23007" title="VMF-122" label="VMF-122"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506341" start="23019" end="23026" title="VMF-214" label="VMF-214"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072277" start="23038" end="23045" title="VMFA(AW)-224" label="VMF-224"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907231" start="23057" end="23067" title="VMF(N)-533" label="VMF(N)-533"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907190" start="23079" end="23084" title="VMAQ-1" label="VMJ-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907191" start="23097" end="23102" title="VMAQ-2" label="VMJ-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751416" start="23338" end="23358" title="The Military Museums" label="The Military Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="23363" end="23379" title="Calgary" label="Calgary, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492221" start="23397" end="23423" title="Shearwater Aviation Museum" label="Shearwater Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492213" start="23427" end="23450" title="Shearwater, Nova Scotia" label="Shearwater, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031932" start="23468" end="23500" title="Canada Aviation and Space Museum" label="Canada Aviation and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="23504" end="23519" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463466" start="23565" end="23599" title="Flying Leatherneck Aviation Museum" label="Flying Leatherneck Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029503" start="23601" end="23613" title="MCAS Miramar" label="MCAS Miramar"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="23615" end="23625" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423093" start="23643" end="23663" title="USS Lexington (CV-16)" label="USS Lexington Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="23665" end="23686" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394215" start="23704" end="23714" title="NAS Oceana" label="NAS Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394215" start="23727" end="23737" title="NAS Oceana" label="NAS Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="23739" end="23747" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062422" start="23774" end="23801" title="Pima Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="Pima Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177897" start="23815" end="23832" title="Davis-Monthan AFB" label="Davis-Monthan AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="23836" end="23851" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368608" start="23869" end="23899" title="National Naval Aviation Museum" label="National Naval Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="23903" end="23930" title="Naval Air Station Pensacola" label="Naval Air Station Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="23932" end="23939" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="23972" end="23994" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368608" start="24020" end="24050" title="National Naval Aviation Museum" label="National Naval Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="24054" end="24081" title="Naval Air Station Pensacola" label="Naval Air Station Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="24083" end="24090" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223309" wikidata="Q8569" url="?curid=223309" title="Mainz-Bingen">
<text>Mainz-Bingen is a district (&quot;Kreis&quot;) in the east of Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany. Neighboring districts are (from north clockwise) Rheingau-Taunus, the district-free cities Wiesbaden and Mainz, the districts Groß-Gerau, Alzey-Worms, Bad Kreuznach, and Rhein-Hunsrück.

==History==
During the French occupation under Napoleon the district was part of the department of Mont-Tonnerre. After the Congress of Vienna, the area north of the Nahe river went to the Prussian Rhine province, the biggest part however became part of the Grand Duchy of Hesse and was called Rhenish Hesse. In 1835 the Mainz district was created when the province Rheinhessen was abolished. In 1852 the Oppenheim district was created, and took some of the area of the Mainz district; in 1938 this district was abolished again. The current area of the district was formed in 1969, when the districts of Mainz and Bingen were merged.

==Geography==
The main river in the district is the Rhine, which marks the border of the district to the east. In Bingen the river Nahe enters the Rhine, after flowing a short part through the district. The flanks of the Hunsrück mountains in the west of the district to the Rhine valley are used for wine production. The southern part of the district is part of the &quot;Rheinhessische Hügellandschaft&quot;, its gentle hills and the good climate make it a farming area for vegetables, especially asparagus, and cherries.

==Coat of arms==
The district coat of arms might be described thus: Per pale gules a wheel spoked of six argent and sable a lion rampant Or armed, langued and crowned of the first, in a chief of the last an eagle displayed of the third armed, langued and beaked of the first. The charges in the coat of arms show the three historic states which influenced the district. In the chief (horizontal band at the top) is the Imperial eagle, on the dexter (armsbearer&#x27;s right, viewer&#x27;s left) side the Wheel of Mainz, and on the sinister (armsbearer&#x27;s left, viewer&#x27;s right) side the lion of the Electorate of the Palatinate (&quot;Kurpfalz&quot;). The coat of arms was designed by Dr. Hans Leitermann of Mainz, and was granted in 1970.

==Towns and municipalities==


== Festivals and cultural events ==
Beneath the typical regional carnival with parades and in nearly every village or municipality there are a number of wine festivals, like the Bodenheimer Albansfest, the Guntersblumer Kellerwegfest, the Ingelheimer Rotweinfest, the wine presentation on the Roten Hang in Nierstein or the feast of the young wine in Gau-Algesheim.

==References==
==External links==

*Official website (German)
*Germany at one view
*city population</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8569" start="0" end="12" title="Mainz-Bingen" label="Mainz-Bingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="62" end="82" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="84" end="91" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907" start="142" end="157" title="Rheingau-Taunus" label="Rheingau-Taunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="184" end="193" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="198" end="203" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914" start="219" end="229" title="Groß-Gerau (district)" label="Groß-Gerau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8566" start="231" end="242" title="Alzey-Worms" label="Alzey-Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8572" start="244" end="257" title="Bad Kreuznach (district)" label="Bad Kreuznach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8574" start="263" end="277" title="Rhein-Hunsrück" label="Rhein-Hunsrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="327" end="335" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="365" end="375" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q568751" start="379" end="392" title="Mont-Tonnerre" label="Mont-Tonnerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="404" end="422" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="469" end="476" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20135" start="538" end="558" title="Grand Duchy of Hesse" label="Grand Duchy of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q707297" start="574" end="587" title="Rhenish Hesse" label="Rhenish Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="967" end="972" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q285879" start="1029" end="1035" title="Bingen am Rhein" label="Bingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q168696" start="1046" end="1050" title="Nahe (Rhine)" label="Nahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q311234" start="1136" end="1144" title="Hunsrück" label="Hunsrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="1216" end="1220" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="1414" end="1423" title="asparagus" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1470" end="1482" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424805" start="1720" end="1726" title="charge (heraldry)" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="1868" end="1873" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q457449" start="1944" end="1958" title="Wheel of Mainz" label="Wheel of Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q338814" start="2035" end="2039" title="lion (heraldry)" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="2047" end="2075" title="Electorate of the Palatinate" label="Electorate of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="2156" end="2161" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="2285" end="2293" title="carnival" label="carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q657449" start="2299" end="2306" title="parades" label="parades"/>
<link wikidata="Q462100" start="2373" end="2386" title="wine festival" label="wine festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2398" end="2420" title="Bodenheimer Albansfest" label="Bodenheimer Albansfest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2426" end="2449" title="Guntersblumer Kellerweg" label="Guntersblumer Kellerweg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2459" end="2482" title="Ingelheimer Rotweinfest" label="Ingelheimer Rotweinfest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2513" end="2523" title="Roter Hang (Rheinhessen)" label="Roten Hang"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223315" wikidata="Q1436016" url="?curid=223315" title="Stellar population">
<text>In 1944, Walter Baade categorized groups of stars within the Milky Way into stellar populations.
In the abstract of the article by Baade, he recognizes that Jan Oort originally conceived this type of classification in 1926.

Baade observed that bluer stars were strongly associated with the spiral arms, and yellow stars dominated near the central galactic bulge and within globular star clusters. Two main divisions were defined as Population I star and population II, with another newer, hypothetical division called population III added in 1978.

Among the population types, significant differences were found with their individual observed stellar spectra. These were later shown to be very important and were possibly related to star formation, observed kinematics, stellar age, and even galaxy evolution in both spiral and elliptical galaxies. These three simple population classes usefully divided stars by their chemical composition or metallicity.

By definition, each population group shows the trend where lower metal content indicates higher age of stars. Hence, the first stars in the universe (very low metal content) were deemed population III, old stars (low metallicity) as population II, and recent stars (high metallicity) as population I. The Sun is considered population I, a recent star with a relatively high 1.4% metallicity. Note that astrophysics nomenclature considers any element heavier than helium to be a &quot;metal&quot;, including chemical non-metals such as oxygen.

==Stellar development==
Observation of stellar spectra has revealed that stars older than the Sun have fewer heavy elements compared with the Sun. This immediately suggests that metallicity has evolved through the generations of stars by the process of stellar nucleosynthesis.

===Formation of the first stars===
Under current cosmological models, all matter created in the Big Bang was mostly hydrogen (75%) and helium (25%), with only a very tiny fraction consisting of other light elements such as lithium and beryllium. When the universe had cooled sufficiently, the first stars were born as population III stars, without any contaminating heavier metals. This is postulated to have affected their structure so that their stellar masses became hundreds of times more than that of the Sun. In turn, these massive stars also evolved very quickly, and their nucleosynthetic processes created the first 26 elements (up to iron in the periodic table).

Many theoretical stellar models show that most high-mass population III stars rapidly exhausted their fuel and likely exploded in extremely energetic pair-instability supernovae. Those explosions would have thoroughly dispersed their material, ejecting metals into the interstellar medium (ISM), to be incorporated into the later generations of stars. Their destruction suggests that no galactic high-mass population III stars should be observable. However, some population III stars might be seen in high-redshift galaxies whose light originated during the earlier history of the universe. Scientists have found evidence of an extremely small ultra metal-poor star, slightly smaller than the Sun, found in a binary system of the spiral arms in the Milky Way. The discovery opens up the possibility of observing even older stars.

Stars too massive to produce pair-instability supernovae would have likely collapsed into black holes through a process known as photodisintegration. Here some matter may have escaped during this process in the form of relativistic jets, and this could have distributed the first metals into the universe.

===Formation of the observed stars===

The oldest stars observed thus far, known as population II, have very low metallicities; as subsequent generations of stars were born, they became more metal-enriched, as the gaseous clouds from which they formed received the metal-rich dust manufactured by previous generations of stars from population III.

As those population II stars died, they returned metal-enriched material to the interstellar medium via planetary nebulae and supernovae, enriching further the nebulae, out of which the newer stars formed. These youngest stars, including the Sun, therefore have the highest metal content, and are known as population I stars.

==Chemical classification by Walter Baade==

===Population I stars===

Population I stars are young stars with the highest metallicity out of all three populations and are more commonly found in the spiral arms of the Milky Way galaxy. The Sun is considered as an intermediate population I star, while the sun-like Arae is much richer in metals. (The term &quot;metal rich star&quot; is used to describe stars with a significantly higher metallicity than the Sun; higher than can be explained by measurement error.)

Population I stars usually have regular elliptical orbits of the Galactic Center, with a low relative velocity. It was earlier hypothesized that the high metallicity of population I stars makes them more likely to possess planetary systems than the other two populations, because planets, particularly terrestrial planets, are thought to be formed by the accretion of metals. However, observations of the Kepler Space Telescope data have found smaller planets around stars with a range of metallicities, while only larger, potential gas giant planets are concentrated around stars with relatively higher metallicity – a finding that has implications for theories of gas-giant formation. Between the intermediate population I and the population II stars comes the intermediate disc population.

===Population II stars===

Population II, or metal-poor, stars are those with relatively little of the elements heavier than helium. These objects were formed during an earlier time of the universe. Intermediate population II stars are common in the bulge near the centre of the Milky Way, whereas population II stars found in the galactic halo are older and thus more metal-deficient. Globular clusters also contain high numbers of population II stars.

A characteristic of population II stars is that despite their lower overall metallicity, they often have a higher ratio of &quot;alpha elements&quot; (elements produced by the alpha process, like oxygen and neon) relative to iron (Fe) as compared with population I stars; current theory suggests that this is the result of type II supernovas being more important contributors to the interstellar medium at the time of their formation, whereas type Ia supernova metal-enrichment came at a later stage in the universe&#x27;s development.

Scientists have targeted these oldest stars in several different surveys, including the HK objective-prism survey of Timothy C. Beers &quot;et al&quot;. and the Hamburg-ESO survey of Norbert Christlieb et al., originally started for faint quasars. Thus far, they have uncovered and studied in detail about ten ultra-metal-poor (UMP) stars (such as Sneden&#x27;s Star, Cayrel&#x27;s Star, BD +17° 3248) and three of the oldest stars known to date: HE 0107-5240, HE 1327-2326 and HE 1523-0901. Caffau&#x27;s star was identified as the most metal-poor star yet when it was found in 2012 using Sloan Digital Sky Survey data. However, in February 2014 the discovery of an even lower-metallicity star was announced, SMSS J031300.36-670839.3 located with the aid of SkyMapper astronomical survey data. Less extreme in their metal deficiency, but nearer and brighter and hence longer known, are HD 122563 (a red giant) and HD 140283 (a subgiant).

===Population III stars===

Population III stars are a hypothetical population of extremely massive, luminous and hot stars with virtually no &quot;metals&quot;, except possibly for intermixing ejecta from other nearby, early population III supernovae. The term was first introduced by Neville J. Woolf in 1965. Such stars are likely to have existed in the very early universe (i.e., at high redshift) and may have started the production of chemical elements heavier than hydrogen, which are needed for the later formation of planets and life as we know it.

The existence of population III stars is inferred from physical cosmology, but they have not yet been observed directly. Indirect evidence for their existence has been found in a gravitationally lensed galaxy in a very distant part of the universe. Their existence may account for the fact that heavy elements – which could not have been created in the Big Bang – are observed in quasar emission spectra. They are also thought to be components of faint blue galaxies. These stars likely triggered the universe&#x27;s period of reionization, a major phase transition of the hydrogen gas composing most of the interstellar medium. Observations of the galaxy UDFy-38135539 suggest that it may have played a role in this reionization process. The European Southern Observatory discovered a bright pocket of early population stars in the very bright galaxy Cosmos Redshift 7 from the reionization period around 800 million years after the Big Bang, at . The rest of the galaxy has some later redder population II stars. Some theories hold that there were two generations of population III stars.
Current theory is divided on whether the first stars were very massive or not. One possibility is that these stars were much larger than current stars: several hundred solar masses, and possibly up to 1,000 solar masses. Such stars would be very short-lived and last only 2–5 million years. Such large stars may have been possible due to the lack of heavy elements and a much warmer interstellar medium from the Big Bang. Conversely, theories proposed in 2009 and 2011 suggest that the first star groups might have consisted of a massive star surrounded by several smaller stars. The smaller stars, if they remained in the birth cluster, would accumulate more gas and could not survive to the present day, but a 2017 study concluded that if a star of 0.8 solar masses () or less was ejected from its birth cluster before it accumulated more mass, it could survive to the present day, possibly even in our Milky Way galaxy.

Analysis of data of extremely low-metallicity population II stars such as HE 0107-5240, which are thought to contain the metals produced by population III stars, suggest that these metal-free stars had masses of 20~130 solar masses. On the other hand, analysis of globular clusters associated with elliptical galaxies suggests pair-instability supernovae, which are typically associated with very massive stars, were responsible for their metallic composition. This also explains why there have been no low-mass stars with zero metallicity observed, despite models constructed for smaller population III stars. Clusters containing zero-metallicity red dwarfs or brown dwarfs (possibly created by pair-instability supernovae) have been proposed as dark matter candidates, but searches for these types of MACHOs through gravitational microlensing have produced negative results.

Population III stars are considered seeds of black holes in the early universe. Unlike high-mass black hole seeds, such as direct collapse black holes, they would have produced light ones. If they could have grown to larger than expected masses, then they could have been quasi-stars, other hypothetical seeds of heavy black holes which would have existed in the early development of the Universe before hydrogen and helium were contaminated by heavier elements.

Detection of population III stars is a goal of NASA&#x27;s James Webb Space Telescope. 

On 8 December 2022, astronomers reported the possible detection of Population III stars, in a high-redshift galaxy called RX J2129–z8He II.

== See also ==
* Lists of astronomical objects
* Lists of stars
* Peekaboo Galaxy

== Notes ==
==References==

==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="3" end="7" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="9" end="21" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="61" end="70" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="76" end="95" title="Stellar population" label="stellar populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q309861" start="157" end="165" title="Jan Oort" label="Jan Oort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="218" end="222" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="348" end="362" title="Spiral galaxy#Structure#Galactic bulge" label="galactic bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="374" end="396" title="globular cluster" label="globular star clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="433" end="450" title="Stellar population" label="Population I star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="455" end="468" title="Stellar population" label="population II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="519" end="533" title="Stellar population" label="population III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11476" start="759" end="769" title="kinematics" label="kinematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="793" end="809" title="Galaxy formation and evolution" label="galaxy evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="818" end="824" title="Spiral galaxy" label="spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="829" end="839" title="Elliptical galaxy" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="944" end="955" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1263" end="1266" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="1360" end="1372" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="1421" end="1427" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q126901412" start="1474" end="1484" title="non-metals" label="non-metals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1541" end="1556" title="Astronomical spectroscopy#Stars and their properties" label="stellar spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="1755" end="1778" title="stellar nucleosynthesis" label="stellar nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="1877" end="1885" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1897" end="1905" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="1916" end="1922" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="2004" end="2011" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="2016" end="2025" title="beryllium" label="beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q471702" start="2362" end="2377" title="nucleosynthesis" label="nucleosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2425" end="2429" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="2437" end="2451" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q245701" start="2605" end="2631" title="pair-instability supernova" label="pair-instability supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="2961" end="2969" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q58315594" start="3080" end="3120" title="2MASS J18082002−5104378" label="an extremely small ultra metal-poor star"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="3204" end="3213" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="3376" end="3386" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394769" start="3415" end="3434" title="photodisintegration" label="photodisintegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q284657" start="3505" end="3521" title="relativistic jet" label="relativistic jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="3807" end="3810" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="3869" end="3873" title="cosmic dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="4022" end="4041" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="4046" end="4062" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="4184" end="4187" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311038" start="4468" end="4478" title="spiral arm" label="spiral arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="4487" end="4496" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="4509" end="4512" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q667504" start="4584" end="4588" title="Mu Arae" label="Arae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="4826" end="4842" title="elliptical orbit" label="elliptical orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="4851" end="4866" title="Galactic Center" label="Galactic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376323" start="4879" end="4896" title="relative velocity" label="relative velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="5008" end="5024" title="planetary system" label="planetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="5066" end="5072" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="5088" end="5106" title="terrestrial planet" label="terrestrial planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q419978" start="5141" end="5150" title="accretion (astrophysics)" label="accretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47272" start="5191" end="5213" title="Kepler Space Telescope" label="Kepler Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q854155" start="5830" end="5835" title="bulge (astronomy)" label="bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="5859" end="5868" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5911" end="5924" title="Galactic spheroid#Galactic spheroid" label="galactic halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="5966" end="5983" title="Globular clusters" label="Globular clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143386" start="6164" end="6178" title="alpha elements" label="alpha elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143386" start="6211" end="6224" title="alpha process" label="alpha process"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="6231" end="6237" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="6242" end="6246" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="6260" end="6264" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6358" end="6375" title="type II supernova" label="type II supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="6418" end="6437" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6478" end="6495" title="type Ia supernova" label="type Ia supernova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6689" end="6705" title="Timothy C. Beers" label="Timothy C. Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="6741" end="6744" title="European Southern Observatory" label="ESO"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="6811" end="6818" title="quasars" label="quasars"/>
<link wikidata="Q796881" start="6920" end="6938" title="Sneden&amp;#x27;s Star" label="Sneden&amp;#x27;s Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q796883" start="6940" end="6958" title="Cayrel&amp;#x27;s Star" label="Cayrel&amp;#x27;s Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q795778" start="6960" end="6972" title="BD +17° 3248" label="BD +17° 3248"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7019" end="7031" title="HE 0107-5240" label="HE 0107-5240"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7033" end="7045" title="HE 1327-2326" label="HE 1327-2326"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7050" end="7062" title="HE 1523-0901" label="HE 1523-0901"/>
<link wikidata="Q491497" start="7064" end="7082" title="SDSS J102915+172927" label="Caffau&amp;#x27;s star"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="7162" end="7186" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7282" end="7306" title="SMSS J031300.36-670839.3" label="SMSS J031300.36-670839.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486419" start="7331" end="7340" title="SkyMapper" label="SkyMapper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7459" end="7468" title="HD 122563" label="HD 122563"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="7472" end="7481" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7487" end="7496" title="HD 140283" label="HD 140283"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227" start="7500" end="7508" title="subgiant" label="subgiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="7654" end="7672" title="metallicity" label="&amp;quot;metals&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="7953" end="7969" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7984" end="7992" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="8038" end="8044" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="8050" end="8054" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="8126" end="8144" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="8250" end="8279" title="gravitationally lensed galaxy" label="gravitationally lensed galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="8424" end="8432" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="8451" end="8457" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="8458" end="8474" title="emission spectrum" label="emission spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094528" start="8518" end="8537" title="faint blue galaxy" label="faint blue galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670901" start="8598" end="8610" title="reionization" label="reionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="8620" end="8636" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q841362" start="8727" end="8740" title="UDFy-38135539" label="UDFy-38135539"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="8814" end="8843" title="European Southern Observatory" label="European Southern Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8923" end="8940" title="Cosmos Redshift 7" label="Cosmos Redshift 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="9330" end="9340" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="9545" end="9564" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="10120" end="10131" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10160" end="10172" title="HE 0107-5240" label="HE 0107-5240"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="10350" end="10366" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="10384" end="10403" title="elliptical galaxies" label="elliptical galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q245701" start="10413" end="10439" title="pair-instability supernova" label="pair-instability supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="10525" end="10533" title="metallicity" label="metallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="10614" end="10625" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="10734" end="10744" title="red dwarfs" label="red dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="10748" end="10760" title="brown dwarfs" label="brown dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="10833" end="10844" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457669" start="10889" end="10894" title="Massive compact halo object" label="MACHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028022" start="10904" end="10930" title="gravitational microlensing" label="gravitational microlensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="11061" end="11071" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853025" start="11087" end="11114" title="Direct collapse black hole" label="direct collapse black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439884" start="11236" end="11247" title="Quasi-star" label="quasi-stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="11487" end="11513" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="11616" end="11624" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309613" start="11675" end="11704" title="Lists of astronomical objects" label="Lists of astronomical objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q13383618" start="11707" end="11721" title="Lists of stars" label="Lists of stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q91462684" start="11724" end="11739" title="Peekaboo Galaxy" label="Peekaboo Galaxy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223316" wikidata="Q919298" url="?curid=223316" title="Windows Hardware Engineering Conference">
<text>The Windows Hardware Engineering Community (WinHEC) is a series of technical conferences and workshops, where Microsoft elaborates on its hardware plans for Windows devices.

The WinHEC from 1992 to 2008, which stood for Windows Hardware Engineering Conference, was an annual software and hardware developer-oriented trade show and business conference, where Microsoft elaborated on its hardware plans for Microsoft Windows-compatible PCs. From 2008 to 2015, WinHEC was then replaced in Microsoft&#x27;s schedule by the Professional Developers Conference, later merged into the Build conference.

On September 26, 2014, Microsoft announced that WinHEC would be returning in 2015 in the form of multiple conferences held throughout the year. The first conference was to be held in Shenzhen, China on March 18 to 19. The industry had changed significantly since Microsoft&#x27;s prior WinHEC event, with innovation happening at a much quicker pace and across more geographically diverse locations. Because of that, Microsoft evolved WinHEC to be more than a single annual conference. WinHEC was to consist of technical conferences and smaller, more frequent, topic focused workshops that were local to the hardware ecosystem hubs. The WinHEC acronym also changed its meaning to &quot;Windows Hardware Engineering Community&quot;.

On December 17, 2014, Microsoft announced that registration was open for the first of its re-launched WinHEC summit, taking place March 18–19, 2015 in Shenzhen, China. The company also announced that Terry Myerson, Executive Vice President of the Operating Systems Group would keynote the event. They would discuss advancements in the Windows platform making it easier for companies to build devices powered by Windows as well as Microsoft’s growing investments in the Shenzhen and China ecosystem.

==Audience==
WinHEC will stay true to its strong technical roots. The agenda will be packed with executive keynotes, deep technical training sessions, hands-on labs, and opportunities for Q&amp;A on topics across the spectrum of Windows-based hardware. For executives, engineering managers, engineers and technical product managers at OEMs, ODMs, IHVs, and IDHs who are working with or want to work with Windows technologies

==Events==
* 1992 – San Francisco, California. March 1–3, 1992
* 1993 – San Jose, California. March 1–3, 1993 
* 1994 – San Francisco, California. February 23–25, 1994
* 1995 – San Francisco, California. March 20–22, 1995
* 1996 – San Jose, California. April 1–3, 1996
* 1997 – San Francisco, California. April 8–10, 1997
* 1998 – Orlando, Florida. March 25–27, 1998
* 1999 – Los Angeles, California. April 7–9, 1999
* 2000 – New Orleans, Louisiana. April 25–27, 2000
* 2001 – Anaheim, California. March 26–28, 2001.
**Announcement of the availability of Windows XP Beta 2, which includes the first public beta of Internet Explorer 6.
* 2002 – Seattle, Washington. April 16–18, 2002.
* 2003 – New Orleans, Louisiana. May 6–8, 2003.
**Bill Gates keynote; demonstrated &quot;Athens&quot; PC concept, discussed 64-bit computing, uptake of Windows XP.
**Initial Windows Longhorn demonstrations and discussions, focusing on a new Desktop Composition Engine (which later became known as the Desktop Window Manager)
* 2004 – Seattle, Washington. May 4–7, 2004.
**Discussion of Longhorn release timeline and upcoming service packs for Windows XP and Windows Server 2003
**Updated Athens concept PC design, named &quot;Troy&quot; based on a Longhorn user interface
* 2005 – Washington State Convention and Trade Center, Seattle, Washington. April 25–27, 2005.
**Bill Gates gave a keynote speech on various topics including Windows &quot;Longhorn&quot; (known later as Windows Vista) and 64-bit computing.
* 2006 – Washington State Convention and Trade Center, Seattle, Washington. May 23–25, 2006. Attendance of more than 3,700.
**Microsoft announced the release of beta 2 of Windows Vista, Windows Server &quot;Longhorn&quot; and Microsoft Office 2007.
**The Free Software Foundation staged a protest outside the venue, wearing yellow hazmat suits and handing out pamphlets claiming that Microsoft products are &quot;Defective by Design&quot; because of the digital rights management technologies included in them.
* 2007 – Los Angeles Convention Center, Los Angeles, California. May 15–17, 2007.
* 2008 – Los Angeles Convention Center, Los Angeles, California. November 4–6, 2008.
** Immediately following PDC 2008, held at the same venue, October 27–30.
** Focusing on the then upcoming Windows 7.
* 2015 – Grand Hyatt Shenzhen Hotel, Shenzhen, China. March 18–19, 2015.
** Microsoft released the source of the Windows Driver Frameworks.
** Focused on Windows 10.

==References==
==External links==
; Main
; 2006
* Press materials from WinHEC 2006
* Online videos etc. from WinHEC 2006
; 2005
* WinSuperSite show report for WinHEC 2005
* WinHEC 2005: Microsoft&#x27;s 64 Bit Promises</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q919298" start="4" end="42" title="Windows Hardware Engineering Conference" label="Windows Hardware Engineering Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q919298" start="44" end="50" title="Windows Hardware Engineering Conference" label="WinHEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="110" end="119" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q919298" start="221" end="260" title="Windows Hardware Engineering Conference" label="Windows Hardware Engineering Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305" start="317" end="327" title="trade fair" label="trade show"/>
<link wikidata="Q625994" start="332" end="351" title="Convention (meeting)" label="business conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="359" end="368" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="387" end="395" title="Computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="406" end="423" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="435" end="438" title="personal computer" label="PCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243559" start="520" end="554" title="Professional Developers Conference" label="Professional Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836792" start="578" end="583" title="Build (developer conference)" label="Build"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193458" start="1529" end="1542" title="Terry Myerson" label="Terry Myerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2275" end="2288" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2290" end="2300" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="2327" end="2335" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2337" end="2347" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2375" end="2388" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2390" end="2400" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2432" end="2445" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2447" end="2457" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="2486" end="2494" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2496" end="2506" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2533" end="2546" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2548" end="2558" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="2586" end="2593" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="2595" end="2602" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2631" end="2642" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2644" end="2654" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="2681" end="2692" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="2694" end="2703" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="2732" end="2739" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2741" end="2751" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="2810" end="2820" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072258" start="2869" end="2888" title="Internet Explorer 6" label="Internet Explorer 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="2899" end="2906" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="2908" end="2918" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="2948" end="2959" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="2961" end="2970" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="3063" end="3079" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636078" start="3113" end="3129" title="Development of Windows Vista" label="Windows Longhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200785" start="3240" end="3262" title="Desktop Window Manager" label="Desktop Window Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972232" start="3520" end="3564" title="Washington State Convention Center" label="Washington State Convention and Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="3566" end="3585" title="Seattle" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="3714" end="3727" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233" start="3937" end="3972" title="Windows Server 2008" label="Windows Server &amp;quot;Longhorn&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q644542" start="3977" end="3998" title="Microsoft Office 2007" label="Microsoft Office 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="4006" end="4030" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182568" start="4164" end="4183" title="Defective by Design" label="Defective by Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="4205" end="4230" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q564589" start="4271" end="4300" title="Los Angeles Convention Center" label="Los Angeles Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4302" end="4325" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q564589" start="4353" end="4382" title="Los Angeles Convention Center" label="Los Angeles Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4384" end="4407" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243559" start="4454" end="4462" title="Professional Developers Conference" label="PDC 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="4536" end="4545" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="4584" end="4592" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4594" end="4599" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067615" start="4660" end="4685" title="Windows Driver Frameworks" label="Windows Driver Frameworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="4701" end="4711" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223318" wikidata="Q192365" url="?curid=223318" title="Cassiodorus">
<text>Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus Senator (c. 485 – c. 585), commonly known as Cassiodorus (), was a Christian Roman statesman, a renowned scholar and writer who served in the administration of Theodoric the Great, king of the Ostrogoths. &quot;Senator&quot; was part of his surname, not his rank. He also founded a monastery, Vivarium (or &quot;Castellum&quot;), where he worked extensively the last three decades of his life.

== Life ==
Cassiodorus was born at Scylletium, near present-day Catanzaro in the Calabria region of Italy, into a family of Syrian origin. His ancestry included some of the most prominent ministers of the state extending back several generations. His great-grandfather held a command in the defense of the coasts of southern Italy from Vandal sea-raiders in the middle of the fifth century; his grandfather appears in a Roman embassy to Attila the Hun, and his father (who bore the same name) served as &quot;comes sacrarum largitionum&quot; and &quot;comes rerum privatarum&quot; to Odovacer and as Praetorian Prefect to Theoderic the Great.

Cassiodorus began his career under the auspices of his father, about in his twentieth year, when the latter made him his &quot;consiliarius&quot; upon his own appointment to the Praetorian Prefecture. In the judicial capacity of the prefect, he held absolute right of appeal over any magistrate in the empire (or Gothic kingdom, later) and the &quot;consiliarius&quot; served as a sort of legal advisor in cases of greater complexity. Evidently, therefore, Cassiodorus had received some education in the law. During his working life he worked as &quot;quaestor sacri palatii&quot; c. 507–511, as a consul in 514, then as &quot;magister officiorum&quot; under Theoderic, and later under the regency for Theoderic&#x27;s young successor, Athalaric. Cassiodorus kept copious records and letterbooks concerning public affairs. At the Gothic court his literary skill, which seems mannered and rhetorical to modern readers, was so esteemed that when in Ravenna he was often entrusted with drafting significant public documents. His culminating appointment was as praetorian prefect for Italy, effectively the prime ministership of the Ostrogothic civil government and a high honor to finish any career. Cassiodorus also collaborated with Pope Agapetus I to establish a library of Greek and Latin texts that were intended to support a Christian school in Rome.

James O&#x27;Donnell notes:
[I]t is almost indisputable that he accepted advancement in 523 as the immediate successor of Boethius, who was then falling from grace after less than a year as &quot;magister officiorum&quot;, and who was sent to prison and later executed. In addition, Boethius&#x27; father-in-law (and step-father) Symmachus, by this time a distinguished elder statesman, followed Boethius to the block within a year. All this was a result of the worsening split between the ancient senatorial aristocracy centered in Rome and the adherents of Gothic rule at Ravenna. But to read Cassiodorus&#x27; Variae one would never suspect such goings-on.

There is no mention in Cassiodorus&#x27;s selection of official correspondence of the death of Boethius.

Athalaric died in early 534, and the remainder of Cassiodorus&#x27;s public career was dominated by the Byzantine reconquest and dynastic intrigue among the Ostrogoths. His last letters were drafted in the name of Vitiges. Around 537–38, he left Italy for Constantinople, from where his successor was appointed; Cassiodorus remained in the eastern capital for almost two decades, concentrating on religious questions. He notably met Junillus, the quaestor of Justinian I there. His Constantinopolitan journey contributed to the improvement of his religious knowledge.

Cassiodorus spent his career trying to bridge the 6th-century cultural divides: between East and West, Greek culture and Latin, Roman and Goth, and between an orthodox people and their Arian rulers. He speaks fondly in his &quot;Institutiones&quot; of Dionysius Exiguus, the calculator of the Anno Domini era.

In his retirement, he founded the monastery of Vivarium on his family estates on the shores of the Ionian Sea, and his writings turned to religion.

== Monastery at Vivarium ==
Cassiodorus&#x27;s Vivarium &quot;monastery school&quot; was composed of two main buildings: a coenobitic monastery and a retreat, for those who desired a more solitary life. Both were located on the site of the modern Santa Maria de Vetere near Squillace. The twin structure of Vivarium was to permit coenobitic (communal) monks and hermits to coexist. The Vivarium appears not to have been governed by a strict monastic rule, such as that of the Benedictine Order. Rather Cassiodorus&#x27;s work &quot;Institutiones&quot; was written to guide the monks&#x27; studies. To this end, the &quot;Institutiones&quot; focus largely on texts assumed to have been available in Vivarium&#x27;s library. The &quot;Institutiones&quot; seem to have been composed over a lengthy period of time, from the 530s into the 550s, with redactions up to the time of Cassiodorus&#x27;s death. Cassiodorus composed the &quot;Institutiones&quot; as a guide for introductory learning of both &quot;divine&quot; and &quot;secular&quot; writings, in place of his formerly planned Christian school in Rome:I was moved by divine love to devise for you, with God&#x27;s help, these introductory books to take the place of a teacher. Through them I believe that both the textual sequence of Holy Scripture and also a compact account of secular letters may, with God&#x27;s grace, be revealed.The first section of the &quot;Institutiones&quot; deals with Christian texts, and was intended to be used in combination with the &quot;Expositio Psalmorum&quot;. The order of subjects in the second book of the &quot;Institutiones&quot; reflected what would become the &quot;Trivium&quot; and &quot;Quadrivium&quot; of medieval liberal arts: grammar, rhetoric, dialectic, arithmetic, music, geometry, and astronomy. While he encouraged study of secular subjects, Cassiodorus clearly considered them useful primarily as aids to the study of divinity, much in the same manner as St. Augustine. Cassiodorus&#x27;s &quot;Institutiones&quot; thus attempted to provide what Cassiodorus saw as a well-rounded education necessary for a learned Christian, all &quot;in uno corpore&quot;, as Cassiodorus put it.

The library at Vivarium was still active c. 630, when the monks brought the relics of Saint Agathius from Constantinople, dedicating to him a spring-fed fountain shrine that still exists. However, its books were later dispersed, the Codex Grandior of the Bible being purchased by the Anglo-Saxon Ceolfrith when he was in Italy in 679–80, and taken by him to Wearmouth Jarrow, where it served as the source for the copying of the Codex Amiatinus, which was then brought back to Italy by the now aged Ceolfrith. Despite the demise of the Vivarium, Cassiodorus&#x27;s work in compiling classical sources and presenting a sort of bibliography of resources would prove extremely influential in Late Antique Western Europe.

== Educational philosophy ==
Cassiodorus devoted much of his life to supporting education within the Christian community at large. When his proposed theological university in Rome was denied, he was forced to re-examine his entire approach to how material was learned and interpreted. His &quot;Variae&quot; shows that, like Augustine of Hippo, Cassiodorus viewed reading as a transformative act for the reader. It is with this in mind that he designed and mandated the course of studies at the Vivarium, which demanded an intense regimen of reading and meditation. By assigning a specific order of texts to be read, Cassiodorus hoped to create the discipline necessary within the reader to become a successful monk. The first work in this succession of texts would be the Psalms, with which the untrained reader would need to begin because of its appeal to emotion and temporal goods. By examining the rate at which copies of his Psalmic commentaries were issued, it is fair to assess that, as the first work in his series, Cassiodorus&#x27;s educational agenda had been implemented to some degree of success.

Beyond demanding the pursuit of discipline among his students, Cassiodorus encouraged the study of the liberal arts. He believed these arts were part of the content of the Bible, and some mastery of them—especially grammar and rhetoric—was necessary for a complete understanding of it. These arts were divided into trivium (which included rhetoric, idioms, vocabulary and etymology) and quadrivium: arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy. He also encouraged the Benedictine monks to study the medical texts of that era, the known herbals and texts of Hippocrates, Dioscorides and Galen.

==Classical connections==
Cassiodorus is rivalled only by Boethius in his drive to preserve and explore classical literature during the 6th century AD. He found the writings of the Greeks and Romans valuable for their expression of higher truths where other arts failed. Though he saw these texts as vastly inferior to the perfect word of Scripture, the truths presented in them played to Cassiodorus&#x27;s educational principles. Thus he is unafraid to cite Cicero alongside sacred text, and acknowledge the classical ideal of good being part of the practice of rhetoric.

His love for classical thought also influenced his administration of Vivarium. Cassiodorus connected deeply with Christian neoplatonism, which saw beauty as concomitant with the Good. This inspired him to adjust his educational program to support the aesthetic enhancement of manuscripts within the monastery, something which had been practiced before, but not in the universality that he suggests.

Classical learning would by no means replace the role of Scripture within the monastery; it was intended to augment the education already under way. It is also worth noting that all Greek and Roman works were heavily screened to ensure only proper exposure to text, fitting with the rest of the structured learning.

==Lasting impact==
Cassiodorus&#x27;s legacy is quietly profound. Before the founding of Vivarium, the copying of manuscripts had been a task reserved for either inexperienced or physically infirm devotees, and was performed at the whim of literate monks. Through the influence of Cassiodorus, the monastic system adopted a more vigorous, widespread, and regular approach to reproducing documents within the monastery. This approach to the development of the monastic lifestyle was perpetuated especially through German religious institutions.

This change in daily life also became associated with a higher purpose: the process was not merely associated with disciplinary habit, but also with the preservation of history. During Cassiodorus&#x27;s lifetime, theological study was on the decline and classical writings were disappearing. Even as the victorious Ostrogoth armies remained in the countryside, they continued to pillage and destroy Christian relics in Italy. Cassiodorus&#x27;s programme helped ensure that both classical and Christian literature were preserved through the Middle Ages.

Despite his contributions to monastic order, literature, and education, Cassiodorus&#x27;s labors were not well acknowledged. After his death he was only partially recognized by historians of the age, including Bede, as an obscure supporter of the Church. In their descriptions of Cassiodorus, medieval scholars have been documented to change his name, profession, place of residence, and even his religion. Some chapters from his works have been copied into other texts, suggesting that he may have been read, but not generally known.

The works not assigned as a part of Cassiodorus&#x27;s educational program must be examined critically. Because he had been working under the newly dominant power of the Ostrogoths, the writer demonstrably alters the narrative of history for the sake of protecting himself. The same could easily be said about his ideas, which were presented as non-threatening in their approach to peaceful meditation and its institutional isolationism.

== Works ==
*&quot;Laudes&quot; (very fragmentary published panegyrics on public occasions)
*&quot;Chronica&quot; (ending at 519), uniting all world history in one sequence of rulers, a union of Goth and Roman antecedents, flattering Goth sensibilities as the sequence neared the date of composition
*&quot;Gothic History&quot; (526–533), a lengthy and multi-volume work, survives only in Jordanes&#x27; abridgment &quot;Getica&quot;, which must be considered a separate work and is the only surviving ancient work about the Goths&#x27; early history
*&quot;Variae epistolae&quot; (537), Theoderic&#x27;s state papers. &quot;Editio princeps&quot; by M. Accurius (1533). English translations by Thomas Hodgkin &quot;The Letters of Cassiodorus&quot; (1886); S. J. B. Barnish &quot;Cassiodorus: Variae&quot; (Liverpool: University Press, 1992) 
*&quot;Expositio psalmorum&quot; (Exposition of the Psalms)
*&quot;De anima&quot; (&quot;On the Soul&quot;) (540)
*&quot;Institutiones divinarum et saecularium litterarum&quot; (543–555)
*&quot;De artibus ac disciplinis liberalium litterarum&quot; (&quot;On the Liberal Arts&quot;)
*&quot;Codex Grandior&quot; (a version of the Bible)
*&quot;De orthographia&quot; ( 580), a compilation of the works of eight grammarians to act as a guide to proper spelling. It is the last known work by Cassiodorus, completed when he was 93 years old.
*&quot;Historiae Ecclesiasticae Tripartitae Epitome&quot; co-produced with Epiphanius Scholasticus

==See also==
* Benedict of Nursia
* Copanello

==References==
==Sources==
*Barnish, S. J. &quot;Roman Responses to an Unstable World: Cassiodorus&#x27; &quot;Variae&quot; in Context&quot; in: &quot;Vivarium in Context&quot; 7–22 (Centre Leonard Boyle: Vicenza 2008). 
*
* 
*Irwin, Raymond. “VII. Cassiodorus Senator.” &quot;The Heritage of the English Library&quot;. Vol. 1. United Kingdom: Taylor &amp; Francis Group, 2021.
*O&#x27;Donnell, James J. (1969). &quot;Cassiodorus&quot; University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
*O&#x27;Donnell, James J. (1979 and 1995). &quot;Cassiodorus&quot; (Berkeley: University of California Press). Online e-text, 1995 Post-Print.
*Rand, E. K. “The New Cassiodorus.” &quot;Speculum&quot; 13.4 (1938): 433–447.

== External links ==
*Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon life, works, critical editions, translations and comprehensive bibliography on Cassiodorus.
*James J. O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s Cassiodorus webpage: an assessment of Cassiodorus&#x27; cultural predicament
* 
*Opera omnia vol. 1, Joannes Garetius, ed., Rouen, 1679. (Google Books)
*Opera omnia vol. 2, Joannes Garetius, ed., Rouen, 1679. (Google Books)
*History of the Christian Church/A.D. 590–1073 by Philip Schaff at &#x27;ccel.org&#x27;
*&quot;History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire — Volume 4&quot; by Gibbon at Project Gutenberg.
*Cassiodorus – Catholic Encyclopedia article
*Site of the Vivarium of Cassiodorus – An account of survey and recognition at the proposed archaeological site of Vivarium (Coscia di Staletti&#x27;, Catanzaro, Calabria). 
*Societas internationalis pro Vivario for the study of Cassiodorus and his times
*The fountain of Cassiodorus A spring situated at the Coscia di Staletti on the grounds of the monastery of Cassiodorus, with a grotto, formerly a site of pagan worship and eventually Christianized by the addition of two large crosses.
* &quot;Vivarium in Context&quot;. Book description and reviews of the essays by Sam J. Barnish and Lellia Cracco Ruggini.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192365" start="0" end="35" title="Cassiodorus" label="Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q192365" start="73" end="84" title="Cassiodorus" label="Cassiodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="95" end="104" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="105" end="110" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="188" end="207" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="221" end="231" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="310" end="319" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q902445" start="321" end="329" title="Vivarium (monastery)" label="Vivarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084264" start="458" end="468" title="Scylletium" label="Scylletium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="487" end="496" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="504" end="512" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="523" end="528" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="759" end="765" title="Vandal" label="Vandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="860" end="874" title="Attila the Hun" label="Attila the Hun"/>
<link wikidata="Q181495" start="932" end="958" title="comes sacrarum largitionum" label="comes sacrarum largitionum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684311" start="975" end="997" title="comes rerum privatarum" label="comes rerum privatarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="1007" end="1015" title="Odovacer" label="Odovacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="1023" end="1041" title="Praetorian Prefect" label="Praetorian Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="1045" end="1064" title="Theoderic the Great" label="Theoderic the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281633" start="1619" end="1641" title="quaestor sacri palatii" label="quaestor sacri palatii"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="1665" end="1671" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258027" start="1694" end="1713" title="magister officiorum" label="magister officiorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q110895" start="1803" end="1812" title="Athalaric" label="Athalaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="2014" end="2021" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="2124" end="2142" title="praetorian prefect" label="praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q160900" start="2299" end="2314" title="Pope Agapetus I" label="Pope Agapetus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2351" end="2356" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2395" end="2404" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2415" end="2419" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="2544" end="2552" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q631833" start="2752" end="2761" title="Quintus Aurelius Memmius Symmachus" label="Symmachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3293" end="3302" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q312607" start="3403" end="3410" title="Vitiges" label="Vitiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="3445" end="3459" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q11729424" start="3622" end="3630" title="Junillus" label="Junillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="3636" end="3644" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="3648" end="3659" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3917" end="3925" title="Orthodoxy#Christianity" label="orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="3943" end="3948" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q274091" start="4010" end="4027" title="Dionysius Exiguus" label="Dionysius Exiguus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="4051" end="4062" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="4103" end="4112" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q902445" start="4116" end="4124" title="Vivarium (monastery)" label="Vivarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="4168" end="4178" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640151" start="4274" end="4302" title="Monastic school" label="&amp;quot;monastery school&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q674824" start="4341" end="4351" title="coenobitic" label="coenobitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q53727" start="4492" end="4501" title="Squillace" label="Squillace"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="4570" end="4574" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="4694" end="4711" title="Benedictine Order" label="Benedictine Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q205186" start="5884" end="5891" title="Trivium (education)" label="Trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q273822" start="5908" end="5918" title="Quadrivium" label="Quadrivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="5937" end="5949" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="6186" end="6199" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="St. Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982149" start="6498" end="6512" title="Agathius" label="Saint Agathius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140213" start="6645" end="6659" title="Codex Grandior" label="Codex Grandior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="6667" end="6672" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054504" start="6708" end="6717" title="Ceolfrith" label="Ceolfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101170" start="6770" end="6786" title="Monkwearmouth–Jarrow Abbey" label="Wearmouth Jarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567818" start="6841" end="6856" title="Codex Amiatinus" label="Codex Amiatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="7456" end="7474" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="7904" end="7910" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q205186" start="8558" end="8565" title="trivium (education)" label="trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q273822" start="8630" end="8640" title="quadrivium" label="quadrivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="8709" end="8725" title="Benedictine monk" label="Benedictine monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="8798" end="8809" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="8811" end="8822" title="Dioscorides" label="Dioscorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="8827" end="8832" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="8893" end="8901" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="9295" end="9301" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="9533" end="9545" title="neoplatonism" label="neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311247" start="9584" end="9592" title="the Good" label="the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="10988" end="10997" title="Ostrogoth" label="Ostrogoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="11439" end="11443" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q591055" start="12264" end="12273" title="panegyric" label="panegyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="12593" end="12601" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250583" start="12625" end="12631" title="Getica" label="Getica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="12729" end="12734" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="12829" end="12844" title="Editio princeps" label="Editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990642" start="12898" end="12912" title="Thomas Hodgkin (historian)" label="Thomas Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140213" start="13335" end="13349" title="Codex Grandior" label="Codex Grandior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="13374" end="13379" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q451286" start="13454" end="13464" title="Grammarian (Greco-Roman world)" label="grammarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004612" start="13589" end="13633" title="Historiae Ecclesiasticae Tripartitae Epitome" label="Historiae Ecclesiasticae Tripartitae Epitome"/>
<link wikidata="Q710039" start="13657" end="13680" title="Epiphanius Scholasticus" label="Epiphanius Scholasticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44265" start="13697" end="13715" title="Benedict of Nursia" label="Benedict of Nursia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3690921" start="13718" end="13727" title="Copanello" label="Copanello"/>
<link wikidata="Q115922" start="14900" end="14913" title="Philip Schaff" label="Philip Schaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="15027" end="15044" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="15061" end="15082" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51120660" start="15682" end="15703" title="Lellia Cracco Ruggini" label="Lellia Cracco Ruggini"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223321" wikidata="Q1961443" url="?curid=223321" title="Worse is better">
<text>Worse is better (also called the New Jersey style) is a term conceived by Richard P. Gabriel in a 1989 essay to describe the dynamics of software acceptance. It refers to the argument that software quality does not necessarily increase with functionality: that there is a point where less functionality (&quot;worse&quot;) is a preferable option (&quot;better&quot;) in terms of practicality and usability. Software that is limited, but simple to use, may be more appealing to the user and market than the reverse.

As to the oxymoronic title, Gabriel calls it a caricature, declaring the style bad in comparison with &quot;The Right Thing&quot;. However he also states that &quot;it has better survival characteristics than the-right-thing&quot; development style and is superior to the &quot;MIT Approach&quot; with which he contrasted it.

The essay was included into the 1994 book &quot;The UNIX-HATERS Handbook&quot;, and has been referred to as the origin of the notion of a conceptual split between developers on the east and west coasts of the United States.

== Origin ==

Gabriel was a Lisp programmer when he formulated the concept in 1989, presenting it in his essay &quot;Lisp: Good News, Bad News, How to Win Big&quot;. A section of the article, titled &quot;The Rise of &#x27;Worse is Better, was widely disseminated beginning in 1991, after Jamie Zawinski found it in Gabriel&#x27;s files at Lucid Inc. and emailed it to friends and colleagues.

== Characteristics ==

Gabriel argued that early Unix and C, developed by Bell Labs, are examples of the worse-is-better design approach. He also calls them &quot;the ultimate computer viruses&quot;.

== Effects ==

Gabriel argued that &quot;Worse is better&quot; produced more &quot;successful&quot; software than the MIT approach: As long as the initial program is basically good, it will take much less time and effort to implement initially and it will be easier to adapt to new situations. Porting software to new machines, for example, becomes far easier this way. Thus its use will spread rapidly, long before a program developed using the MIT approach has a chance to be developed and deployed (first-mover advantage). Once it has spread, there will be pressure to improve its functionality, but users have already been conditioned to accept &quot;worse&quot; rather than the &quot;right thing&quot;:

Gabriel credits Jamie Zawinski for excerpting the worse-is-better sections of &quot;Lisp: Good News, Bad News, How to Win Big&quot; and e-mailing them to his friends at Carnegie Mellon University, who sent them to their friends at Bell Labs, &quot;who sent them to their friends everywhere.&quot; He apparently connected these ideas to those of Richard Stallman and saw related ideas that are important in the design philosophy of Unix, and more generally in the open-source movement, both of which were central to the development of Linux.

In December 2000 Gabriel answered his earlier essay with one titled &quot;Worse Is Better Is Worse&quot; under the pseudonym Nickieben Bourbaki (an allusion to Nicolas Bourbaki), while also writing &quot;Is Worse Really Better?&quot;, applying the concept to C++&#x27;s success in the field of object-oriented programming despite the existence of more elegant languages designed around the concept.

The &quot;UNIX-HATERS Handbook&quot; includes &quot;Worse is Better&quot; as an appendix, and frames the concept in terms of worse-is-better in the form of Unix being &quot;evolutionarily superior&quot; to its competition.

== See also ==

* Gresham&#x27;s law
* If it ain&#x27;t broke, don&#x27;t fix it
* Less is more
* Minimum viable product
* Perfect is the enemy of good
* Progressive disclosure
* Satisficing
* Rule of least power
* Keep it simple, stupid
* Wabi-sabi

== Further reading ==
* 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="33" end="43" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328227" start="74" end="92" title="Richard P. Gabriel" label="Richard P. Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412670" start="189" end="205" title="software quality" label="software quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q169429" start="526" end="534" title="oxymoron" label="oxymoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051340" start="891" end="915" title="The UNIX-HATERS Handbook" label="The UNIX-HATERS Handbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="1096" end="1100" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q92958" start="1357" end="1371" title="Jamie Zawinski" label="Jamie Zawinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696915" start="1408" end="1418" title="Lucid Inc." label="Lucid Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1511" end="1515" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1520" end="1521" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="1536" end="1545" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q121716" start="2165" end="2186" title="first-mover advantage" label="first-mover advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="2541" end="2567" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="2717" end="2733" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14652" start="2782" end="2807" title="Unix philosophy" label="design philosophy of Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096419" start="2835" end="2855" title="open-source movement" label="open-source movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="2906" end="2911" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="3029" end="3038" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q190529" start="3074" end="3090" title="Nicolas Bourbaki" label="Nicolas Bourbaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="3173" end="3176" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="3208" end="3235" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051340" start="3324" end="3344" title="UNIX-HATERS Handbook" label="UNIX-HATERS Handbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q648404" start="3556" end="3574" title="Gresham&amp;#x27;s law" label="Gresham&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3577" end="3618" title="Bert Lance#If it ain&amp;#x27;t broke, don&amp;#x27;t fix it" label="If it ain&amp;#x27;t broke, don&amp;#x27;t fix it"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="3621" end="3633" title="Less is more (architecture)" label="Less is more"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017127" start="3636" end="3658" title="Minimum viable product" label="Minimum viable product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168086" start="3661" end="3689" title="Perfect is the enemy of good" label="Perfect is the enemy of good"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845034" start="3692" end="3714" title="Progressive disclosure" label="Progressive disclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578122" start="3717" end="3728" title="Satisficing" label="Satisficing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378965" start="3731" end="3750" title="Rule of least power" label="Rule of least power"/>
<link wikidata="Q131560" start="3753" end="3775" title="Keep it simple, stupid" label="Keep it simple, stupid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142664" start="3778" end="3787" title="Wabi-sabi" label="Wabi-sabi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223325" wikidata="Q857102" url="?curid=223325" title="Software design">
<text>Software design is the process of conceptualizing how a software system will work before it is implemented or modified.
Software design also refers to the direct result of the design process the concepts of how the software will work which consists of both design documentation and undocumented concepts.

Software design usually is directed by goals for the resulting system and involves problem-solving and planning including both 
high-level software architecture and low-level component and algorithm design.

In terms of the waterfall development process, software design is the activity of following requirements specification and before coding.

== General process ==

The design process enables a designer to model various aspects of a software system before it exists. 

Creativity, past experience, a sense of what makes &quot;good&quot; software, and a commitment to quality are success factors for a competent design. However, the design process is not always a straightforward procedure.

The software design model can be compared to an architected plan for a house. High-level plans represent the totality of the house (e.g., a three-dimensional rendering of the house). Lower-level plans provide guidance for constructing each detail (e.g., the plumbing lay). Similarly, the software design model provides a variety of views of the proposed software solution.

== Iterative Design for Software Components ==

Software systems inherently deal with uncertainties, and the size of software components can significantly influence a system&#x27;s outcomes, both positively and negatively. Neal Ford and Mark Richards propose an iterative approach to address the challenge of identifying and right-sizing components. This method emphasizes continuous refinement as teams develop a more nuanced understanding of system behavior and requirements. 

The approach typically involves a cycle with several stages:

* A high-level partitioning strategy is established, often categorized as technical or domain-based. Guidelines for the smallest meaningful deployable unit, referred to as &quot;quanta,&quot; are defined. While these foundational decisions are made early, they may be revisited later in the cycle if necessary.
* Initial components are identified based on the established strategy.
* Requirements are assigned to the identified components.
* The roles and responsibilities of each component are analyzed to ensure clarity and minimize overlap.
* Architectural characteristics, such as scalability, fault tolerance, and maintainability, are evaluated.
* Components may be restructured based on feedback from development teams.

This cycle serves as a general framework and can be adapted to different domains.

== Value ==

Software design documentation may be reviewed or presented to allow constraints, specifications and even requirements to be adjusted prior to coding. Redesign may occur after a review of a programmed simulation or prototype. It is possible to design software in the process of coding, without a plan or requirement analysis, but for more complex projects this is less feasible. A separate design prior to coding allows for multidisciplinary designers and subject-matter experts (SMEs) to collaborate with programmers in order to produce software that is useful and technically sound.

== Requirements analysis ==

One component of software design is software requirements analysis (SRA). SRA is a part of the software development process that lists specifications used in software engineering. 

The output of the analysis is smaller problems to solve.
In contrast, the design focuses on capabilities, and thus multiple designs for the same problem can exist. Depending on the environment, the design often varies, whether it is created from reliable frameworks or implemented with suitable design patterns.

== Artifacts ==

A design process may include the production of artifacts such as flow chart, use case, Pseudocode, Unified Modeling Language model and other Fundamental modeling concepts. For user centered software, design may involve user experience design yielding a storyboard to help determine those specifications. 

Sometimes the output of a design process is 
design documentation.

== Design principles ==

Basic design principles enable a software engineer to navigate the design process. Davis suggests a set of principles for software design, which have been adapted and extended in the following list:
* The design process should not suffer from &quot;tunnel vision&quot;. A good designer should consider alternative approaches, judging each based on the requirements of the problem, the resources available to do the job. 
* The design should be traceable to the analysis model. Because a single element of the design model can often be traced back to multiple requirements, it is necessary to have a means for tracking how requirements have been satisfied by the design model. 
* The design should not reinvent the wheel. Systems are constructed using a set of design patterns, many of which have likely been encountered before. These patterns should always be chosen as an alternative to reinvention. Time is short and resources are limited; design time should be invested in representing (truly new) ideas by integrating patterns that already exist (when applicable). 
* The design should &quot;minimize the intellectual distance&quot; between the software and the problem as it exists in the real world. That is, the structure of the software design should, whenever possible, mimic the structure of the problem domain. 
* The design should exhibit uniformity and integration. A design is uniform if it appears fully coherent. In order to achieve this outcome, rules of style and format should be defined for a design team before design work begins. A design is integrated if care is taken in defining interfaces between design components.
* The design should be structured to accommodate change. The design concepts discussed in the next section enable a design to achieve this principle.
* The design should be structured to degrade gently, even when aberrant data, events, or operating conditions are encountered. Well-designed software should never &quot;bomb&quot;; it should be designed to accommodate unusual circumstances, and if it must terminate processing, it should do so in a graceful manner.
* Design is not coding, coding is not design. Even when detailed procedural designs are created for program components, the level of abstraction of the design model is higher than the source code. The only design decisions made at the coding level should address the small implementation details that enable the procedural design to be coded.
* The design should be assessed for quality as it is being created, not after the fact. A variety of design concepts and design measures are available to assist the designer in assessing quality throughout the development process.
* The design should be reviewed to minimize conceptual (semantic) errors. There is sometimes a tendency to focus on minutiae when the design is reviewed, missing the forest for the trees. A design team should ensure that major conceptual elements of the design (omissions, ambiguity, inconsistency) have been addressed before worrying about the syntax of the design model.

== Design concepts ==

Design concepts provide a designer with a foundation from which more sophisticated methods can be applied. A set of design concepts has evolved including:

*Abstraction - Abstraction is the process or result of generalization by reducing the information content of a concept or an observable phenomenon, typically to retain only information that is relevant for a particular purpose. It is an act of Representing essential features without including the background details or explanations.
*Refinement - It is the process of elaboration. A hierarchy is developed by decomposing a macroscopic statement of function in a step-wise fashion until programming language statements are reached. In each step, one or several instructions of a given program are decomposed into more detailed instructions. Abstraction and Refinement are complementary concepts.
*Modularity - Software architecture is divided into components called modules.
*Software Architecture - It refers to the overall structure of the software and the ways in which that structure provides conceptual integrity for a system. Good software architecture will yield a good return on investment with respect to the desired outcome of the project, e.g. in terms of performance, quality, schedule and cost.
*Control Hierarchy - A program structure that represents the organization of a program component and implies a hierarchy of control.
*Structural Partitioning - The program structure can be divided horizontally and vertically. Horizontal partitions define separate branches of modular hierarchy for each major program function. Vertical partitioning suggests that control and work should be distributed top-down in the program structure.
*Data Structure - It is a representation of the logical relationship among individual elements of data.
*Software Procedure - It focuses on the processing of each module individually.
*Information Hiding - Modules should be specified and designed so that information contained within a module is inaccessible to other modules that have no need for such information.

In his object model, Grady Booch mentions Abstraction, Encapsulation, Modularisation, and Hierarchy as fundamental software design principles. The acronym PHAME (Principles of Hierarchy, Abstraction, Modularisation, and Encapsulation) is sometimes used to refer to these four fundamental principles.

== Design considerations ==

There are many aspects to consider in the design of a piece of software. The importance of each consideration should reflect the goals and expectations that the software is being created to meet. Some of these aspects are:

* Compatibility - The software is able to operate with other products that are designed for interoperability with another product. For example, a piece of software may be backward-compatible with an older version of itself.
* Extensibility - New capabilities can be added to the software without major changes to the underlying architecture.
* Modularity - the resulting software comprises well defined, independent components which leads to better maintainability. The components could be then implemented and tested in isolation before being integrated to form a desired software system. This allows division of work in a software development project.
* Fault-tolerance - The software is resistant to and able to recover from component failure.
* Maintainability - A measure of how easily bug fixes or functional modifications can be accomplished. High maintainability can be the product of modularity and extensibility.
* Reliability (Software durability) - The software is able to perform a required function under stated conditions for a specified period of time.
* Reusability - The ability to use some or all of the aspects of the preexisting software in other projects with little to no modification.
* Robustness - The software is able to operate under stress or tolerate unpredictable or invalid input. For example, it can be designed with resilience to low memory conditions.
* Security - The software is able to withstand and resist hostile acts and influences.
* Usability - The software user interface must be usable for its target user/audience. Default values for the parameters must be chosen so that they are a good choice for the majority of the users.
* Performance - The software performs its tasks within a time-frame that is acceptable for the user, and does not require too much memory.
* Portability - The software should be usable across a number of different conditions and environments.
* Scalability - The software adapts well to increasing data or added features or number of users. According to Marc Brooker: &quot;a system is scalable in the range where marginal cost of additional workload is nearly constant.&quot; Serverless technologies fit this definition but you need to consider total cost of ownership not just the infra cost.

== Modeling language ==

A modeling language can be used to express information, knowledge or systems in a structure that is defined by a consistent set of rules. These rules are used for interpretation of the components within the structure. A modeling language can be graphical or textual. Examples of graphical modeling languages for software design include:
* Architecture description language (ADL) is a language used to describe and represent the software architecture of a software system.
* Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) is an example of a Process Modeling language.
* EXPRESS and EXPRESS-G (ISO 10303-11) is an international standard general-purpose data modeling language.
* Extended Enterprise Modeling Language (EEML) is commonly used for business process modeling across a number of layers.
* Flowcharts are schematic representations of algorithms or other step-wise processes.
* Fundamental Modeling Concepts (FMC) is modeling language for software-intensive systems.
* IDEF is a family of modeling languages, the most notable of which include IDEF0 for functional modeling, IDEF1X for information modeling, and IDEF5 for modeling ontologies.
* Jackson Structured Programming (JSP) is a method for structured programming based on correspondences between data stream structure and program structure.
* LePUS3 is an object-oriented visual Design Description Language and a formal specification language that is suitable primarily for modeling large object-oriented (Java, C++, C#) programs and design patterns.
* Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a general modeling language to describe software both structurally and behaviorally. It has a graphical notation and allows for extension with a Profile (UML).
* Alloy (specification language) is a general purpose specification language for expressing complex structural constraints and behavior in a software system. It provides a concise language base on first-order relational logic.
* Systems Modeling Language (SysML) is a new general-purpose modeling language for systems engineering.
* Service-oriented modeling framework (SOMF)

== Design patterns ==

A software designer may identify a design aspect which has been visited and perhaps even solved by others in the past. A template or pattern describing a solution to a common problem is known as a design pattern. The reuse of such patterns can increase software development velocity.

== Code as design ==

The difficulty of using the term &quot;design&quot; in relation to software is that in some senses, the source code of a program &quot;is&quot; the design for the program that it produces. To the extent that this is true, &quot;software design&quot; refers to the design of the design. Edsger W. Dijkstra referred to this layering of semantic levels as the &quot;radical novelty&quot; of computer programming, and Donald Knuth used his experience writing TeX to describe the futility of attempting to design a program prior to implementing it:

== See also ==

* Aspect-oriented software development
* Design
* Design rationale
* Graphic design
* Interaction design
* Icon design
* Outline of software
* Outline of software development
* Outline of software engineering
* Search-based software engineering
* Software Design Description (IEEE 1016)
* Software development
* User experience
* User interface design
* Web design
* Zero One Infinity

== References ==

^</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q857102" start="0" end="15" title="Software design" label="Software design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429814" start="56" end="71" title="software system" label="software system"/>
<link wikidata="Q245962" start="95" end="106" title="Implementation" label="implemented"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503831" start="345" end="349" title="goal" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="445" end="466" title="software architecture" label="software architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="495" end="511" title="algorithm design" label="algorithm design"/>
<link wikidata="Q478175" start="530" end="559" title="Waterfall model" label="waterfall development process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462275" start="606" end="632" title="Software requirements" label="requirements specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="644" end="650" title="Computer programming" label="coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297624" start="2741" end="2765" title="Software design document" label="Software design document"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="2883" end="2889" title="computer programming" label="coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="2941" end="2951" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="2955" end="2964" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="3164" end="3181" title="multidisciplinary" label="multidisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833645" start="3196" end="3217" title="subject-matter expert" label="subject-matter expert"/>
<link wikidata="Q187147" start="3391" end="3421" title="software requirements analysis" label="software requirements analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904257" start="3450" end="3478" title="software development process" label="software development process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101564" start="3490" end="3504" title="specifications" label="specifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="3513" end="3533" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q271680" start="3792" end="3802" title="Software framework" label="frameworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253831" start="3832" end="3847" title="design patterns" label="design patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="3932" end="3942" title="flow chart" label="flow chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q613417" start="3944" end="3952" title="use case" label="use case"/>
<link wikidata="Q189224" start="3954" end="3964" title="Pseudocode" label="Pseudocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="3966" end="3991" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="Unified Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474098" start="4008" end="4037" title="Fundamental modeling concepts" label="Fundamental modeling concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136996" start="4043" end="4056" title="user centered design" label="user centered"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248500" start="4086" end="4108" title="user experience design" label="user experience design"/>
<link wikidata="Q334667" start="4120" end="4130" title="storyboard" label="storyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q788790" start="4225" end="4238" title="documentation" label="documentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q224055" start="7502" end="7513" title="Abstraction (computer science)" label="Abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417382" start="7836" end="7846" title="Program refinement" label="Refinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q912009" start="8198" end="8208" title="Modularity" label="Modularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="8277" end="8298" title="Software Architecture" label="Software Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8610" end="8627" title="Control Hierarchy" label="Control Hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8743" end="8766" title="Structural Partitioning" label="Structural Partitioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="9047" end="9061" title="Data Structure" label="Data Structure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9151" end="9169" title="Software Procedure" label="Software Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912075" start="9231" end="9249" title="Information Hiding" label="Information Hiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q92803" start="9434" end="9445" title="Grady Booch" label="Grady Booch"/>
<link wikidata="Q224055" start="9455" end="9466" title="Abstraction (computer science)" label="Abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305241" start="9468" end="9481" title="Encapsulation (computer programming)" label="Encapsulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q912009" start="9483" end="9497" title="Modularity" label="Modularisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="9503" end="9512" title="Hierarchy" label="Hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115054" start="10193" end="10206" title="Extensibility" label="Extensibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q912009" start="10311" end="10321" title="Modularity" label="Modularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="10623" end="10638" title="Fault-tolerance" label="Fault-tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389965" start="10716" end="10731" title="Maintainability" label="Maintainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964318" start="10905" end="10924" title="Software durability" label="Software durability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369184" start="11038" end="11049" title="Reusability" label="Reusability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="11178" end="11188" title="Fault-tolerant system" label="Robustness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="11356" end="11364" title="Computer security" label="Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q216378" start="11443" end="11452" title="Usability" label="Usability"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="11468" end="11482" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197550" start="11641" end="11652" title="Computer performance" label="Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080428" start="11780" end="11791" title="Software portability" label="Portability"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="11884" end="11895" title="Scalability" label="Scalability"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="12053" end="12066" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958022" start="12116" end="12126" title="Serverless computing" label="Serverless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941921" start="12262" end="12279" title="modeling language" label="modeling language"/>
<link wikidata="Q362356" start="12599" end="12632" title="Architecture description language" label="Architecture description language"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="12688" end="12709" title="software architecture" label="software architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429814" start="12715" end="12730" title="software system" label="software system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017605" start="12734" end="12768" title="Business Process Modeling Notation" label="Business Process Modeling Notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27610560" start="12795" end="12811" title="Process Modeling" label="Process Modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062272" start="12824" end="12831" title="EXPRESS (data modeling language)" label="EXPRESS"/>
<link wikidata="Q367664" start="12906" end="12919" title="data modeling" label="data modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421812" start="12932" end="12969" title="Extended Enterprise Modeling Language" label="Extended Enterprise Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="13053" end="13062" title="Flowchart" label="Flowchart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474098" start="13140" end="13169" title="Fundamental Modeling Concepts" label="Fundamental Modeling Concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515863" start="13231" end="13235" title="IDEF" label="IDEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522551" start="13305" end="13310" title="IDEF0" label="IDEF0"/>
<link wikidata="Q385210" start="13336" end="13342" title="IDEF1X" label="IDEF1X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969997" start="13373" end="13378" title="IDEF5" label="IDEF5"/>
<link wikidata="Q324254" start="13392" end="13402" title="Ontology (information science)" label="ontologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419353" start="13406" end="13436" title="Jackson Structured Programming" label="Jackson Structured Programming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13562" end="13568" title="Lepus3" label="LePUS3"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="13575" end="13590" title="object-oriented" label="object-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437424" start="13632" end="13652" title="formal specification" label="formal specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="13725" end="13729" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="13731" end="13734" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="13736" end="13738" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253831" start="13753" end="13768" title="design patterns" label="design patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="13772" end="13797" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="Unified Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421951" start="13952" end="13965" title="Profile (UML)" label="Profile (UML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733254" start="13969" end="13999" title="Alloy (specification language)" label="Alloy (specification language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117885" start="14196" end="14221" title="Systems Modeling Language" label="Systems Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531643" start="14239" end="14263" title="general-purpose modeling" label="general-purpose modeling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14300" end="14342" title="service-oriented modeling#Service-oriented modeling framework" label="Service-oriented modeling framework (SOMF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q181156" start="14564" end="14578" title="Design pattern (computer science)" label="design pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8556" start="14960" end="14978" title="Edsger W. Dijkstra" label="Edsger W. Dijkstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="15088" end="15100" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="15129" end="15132" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q30267" start="15237" end="15273" title="Aspect-oriented software development" label="Aspect-oriented software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="15276" end="15282" title="Design" label="Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264368" start="15285" end="15301" title="Design rationale" label="Design rationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="15304" end="15318" title="Graphic design" label="Graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061656" start="15321" end="15339" title="Interaction design" label="Interaction design"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986640" start="15342" end="15353" title="Icon design" label="Icon design"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922260" start="15356" end="15375" title="Outline of software" label="Outline of software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112733" start="15378" end="15409" title="Outline of software development" label="Outline of software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112734" start="15412" end="15443" title="Outline of software engineering" label="Outline of software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441615" start="15446" end="15479" title="Search-based software engineering" label="Search-based software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297624" start="15482" end="15509" title="Software Design Description" label="Software Design Description"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="15524" end="15544" title="Software development" label="Software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047808" start="15547" end="15562" title="User experience" label="User experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q135707" start="15565" end="15586" title="User interface design" label="User interface design"/>
<link wikidata="Q190637" start="15589" end="15599" title="Web design" label="Web design"/>
<link wikidata="Q191947" start="15602" end="15619" title="Zero One Infinity" label="Zero One Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15639" end="15640" title="Software design#Design Principles" label="^"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223328" wikidata="Q208446" url="?curid=223328" title="Ghoul">
<text>In folklore, a ghoul (from , &quot;&quot;) is a demon-like being or monstrous humanoid, often associated with graveyards and the consumption of human flesh. In the legends or tales in which they appear, a ghoul is far more ill-mannered and foul than goblins. The concept of the ghoul originated in pre-Islamic Arabian religion. Modern fiction often uses the term to label a specific kind of monster.

By extension, the word &quot;ghoul&quot; is also used in a derogatory sense to refer to a person who delights in the macabre or whose occupation directly involves death, such as a gravedigger or graverobber.

== Etymology ==
The English word &quot;ghoul&quot; is from the Arabic (), from () . The term was first used in English literature in 1786 in William Beckford&#x27;s Orientalist novel &quot;Vathek&quot;, which describes the of Arabic folklore. This definition of the ghoul has persisted into modern times, with ghouls appearing in popular culture.

In early Arabic, the term is treated as a feminine word. Later, the term became treated as a masculine word, and ghouls became perceived as masculine creatures with Si&#x27;lat as feminine counterpart.

== Folklore ==
In Arabic folklore, the &quot;ghul&quot; is said to dwell in cemeteries and other uninhabited places. A male ghoul is referred to as &quot;ghul&quot; while the female is called &quot;ghulah&quot;. Scholar Dwight F. Reynolds identifies the Arabic ghoul as a female creature – sometimes called &quot;Mother Ghoul&quot; (&quot;ʾUmm Ghulah&quot;), &quot;Our Aunt Ghoul&quot;, or a similar relational term – in tales told to girls and young women. In these tales, the ghoul appears to men as a long-lost female relative or an unassuming old woman; she uses this glamor to lure the hapless characters, who are usually husbands or fathers, into her home, where she can eat them. The male characters&#x27; female relatives can often see through the illusion and warn them of the danger; the men survive if they believe the women (and are eaten if they do not). 

An example of this can be found in a Syrian folktale, &quot;The Woodcutter&#x27;s Wealthy Sister&quot; or &quot;The Woodcutter&#x27;s Weary Wife&quot;, which was adapted into an animated story in the series &quot;Britannica&#x27;s Tales Around the World&quot;. A poor, arrogant and spiteful woodcutter encounters a beautiful, wealthy princess who claims to be his long-lost sister, even though he had no sisters at all. The woodcutter accepts the mysterious princess&#x27;s invitation to bring him, his abused wife and their numerous children to her palace to live in luxury. However, the wife discovers that the &quot;princess&quot; is in fact a female ghoul (simply referred to as a &quot;monster&quot; in the Britannica adaptation) who is planning to eat the woodcutter and his family. After narrowly escaping the ghoul&#x27;s attempts to eat them, the wife and her children flee the palace in the night and leave the woodcutter to be devoured by the ghoul.

The ghoul is said to lure unwary people into the desert wastes or abandoned places to slay and devour them. The creature also preys on young children, drinks blood, steals coins, eats the dead, and takes the form of the person most recently eaten. One of the narratives identified a ghoul named Ghul-e Biyaban, a particularly monstrous character believed to be inhabiting the wilderness of Afghanistan and Iran. A hyena who attacked a woman in Mecca in 1667 was referred to by locals as a &quot;ghul&quot;, possibly due to a perceived similarity to the creature of folklore.

Al-Dimashqi describes the ghoul as cave-dwelling animals who only leave at night and avoid the light of the sun. They would eat both humans and animals.

It was not until Antoine Galland translated &quot;One Thousand and One Nights&quot; into French that the Western concept of ghouls was introduced into European society. Galland depicted the ghoul as a monstrous creature that dwelled in cemeteries, feasting upon corpses.

===Similar creatures===
In ancient Mesopotamia, there were demonic entities known as &quot;Gallu&quot;, which scholar Ahmed Al-Rawi believes may have influenced the Arabic ghoul via early contact between Bedouin traders and Akkadians. The Gallu was an Akkadian underworld demon, associated with the stories of Dumuzid and Inanna.

== Arabic and Islamic literature ==
Ghouls belong to the jinn attested in pre-Islamic Arabic poetry. A famous poem narrates about a fight between Ta&#x27;abbata Sharra and a ghoul. Belief in ghouls was not universally accepted in Islam, the Mu&#x27;tazilites denied their existence. Al-Jahiz denounced Ta&#x27;abbata Sharra for boasting about his victory over the ghoul.

Although not mentioned in the Quran, ghouls appear in &quot;hadith&quot;. Al-Masudi reports that on his journey to Syria, Umar slew a ghoul with his sword. In one &quot;hadith&quot; it is said, lonely travelers can escape a ghoul&#x27;s attack by reciting the &quot;adhan&quot; (call to prayer). Unlike demons, a ghoul may convert to Islam when reciting the Throne Verse.

The ghoul could appear in male and female shape, but usually appeared female to lure male travelers to devour them. According to &quot;History of the Prophets and Kings&quot;, the rebellious (&quot;maradatuhum&quot;) among the devils and the ghouls have been chased away to the deserts and mountains and valleys a long time ago. A ghoul is said to have stolen dates from the house of Abu Ayyub al-Ansari. When she was caught, she told him that reciting &quot;Ayat Al-Kursi&quot; will protect his house from devils and other misfortune. In return for this information, he released her. Muhammad told him that the ghoul spoke the truth, although she is a liar. Other Muslim scholars, like Abī al-Sheikh al-Aşbahânī, describe the ghoul as a female jinn that was able to change its shape and appear to travelers in the wilderness to delude and harm.

According to some exegetes of the Quran (&quot;tafsir&quot;) ghouls are jinn and devils (&quot;shayatin&quot;) (devils), who were burned when angels threw meteors at them.

== Modern ghoul ==

The word ghoul entered the English tradition and was further identified as a grave-robbing creature that feeds on dead bodies and children. In the West, ghouls have no specific shape and have been described by Edgar Allan Poe as &quot;neither man nor woman... neither brute nor human.&quot;
In &quot;Pickman&#x27;s Model&quot;, a short story by H. P. Lovecraft, ghouls are members of a subterranean race. Their diet of dead human flesh mutated them into bestial humanoids able to carry on intelligent conversations with the living. The story has ghouls set underground with ghoul tunnels that connect ancient human ruins with deep underworlds. Lovecraft hints that the ghouls emerge in subway tunnels to feed on train wreck victims.

Lovecraft&#x27;s vision of the ghoul, shared by associated authors Clark Ashton-Smith and Robert E. Howard, has heavily influenced the collective idea of the ghoul in American culture. Ghouls as described by Lovecraft are dog-faced and hideous creatures but not necessarily malicious. Though their primary (perhaps only) food source is human flesh, they do not seek out or hunt living people. They are able to travel back and forth through the wall of sleep. This is demonstrated in Lovecraft&#x27;s &quot;The Dream Quest of Unknown Kadath&quot; in which Randolph Carter encounters Pickman in the dream world after his complete transition into a mature ghoul.

Ghouls in this vein are also changelings in the traditional way. The ghoul parent abducts a human infant and replaces it with one of its own. Ghouls appear entirely human as children but begin to take on the &quot;ghoulish&quot; appearance as they age past adulthood. The fate of the replaced human children is not entirely clear but Pickman offers a clue in the form of a painting depicting mature ghouls as they encourage a human child while it cannibalizes a corpse. This version of the ghoul appears in stories by authors such as Neil Gaiman, Brian Lumley, and Guillermo del Toro.

== See also ==
* Lists of legendary creatures
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Ghoul&quot; (miniseries)

== Notes ==

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="3" end="11" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q208446" start="15" end="20" title="Ghoul" label="ghoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="48" end="53" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q276453" start="68" end="77" title="Monster" label="monstrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q502931" start="78" end="86" title="humanoid" label="humanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="110" end="120" title="graveyards" label="graveyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q308697" start="250" end="256" title="goblin" label="goblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="298" end="326" title="pre-Islamic Arabian religion" label="pre-Islamic Arabian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705215" start="518" end="525" title="macabre" label="macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q537575" start="581" end="592" title="gravedigger" label="gravedigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537376" start="596" end="607" title="graverobber" label="graverobber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="673" end="679" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361026" start="751" end="767" title="William Beckford (novelist)" label="William Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q42865" start="775" end="786" title="Orientalism" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q54548" start="799" end="805" title="Vathek" label="Vathek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557491" start="920" end="955" title="Ghouls in popular culture" label="ghouls appearing in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="1237" end="1247" title="cemeteries" label="cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q390104" start="1733" end="1739" title="Glamour (presentation)" label="glamor"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="2068" end="2074" title="Syrian" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846818" start="2244" end="2284" title="Britannica&amp;#x27;s Tales Around the World" label="Britannica&amp;#x27;s Tales Around the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="3383" end="3394" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3399" end="3403" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q42046" start="3407" end="3412" title="hyena" label="hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="3437" end="3442" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918778" start="3569" end="3580" title="Al-Dimashqi (geographer)" label="Al-Dimashqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319399" start="3740" end="3755" title="Antoine Galland" label="Antoine Galland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8258" start="3773" end="3800" title="One Thousand and One Nights" label="One Thousand and One Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3812" end="3818" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="4030" end="4041" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656706" start="4086" end="4091" title="Gallu" label="Gallu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="4199" end="4206" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="4219" end="4228" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q549619" start="4305" end="4312" title="Dumuzid" label="Dumuzid"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="4317" end="4323" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4383" end="4387" title="jinn#Pre-Islamic era" label="jinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q126052735" start="4400" end="4425" title="Pre-Islamic Arabic poetry" label="pre-Islamic Arabic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4472" end="4493" title="Ta&amp;#x27;abbata Sharra" label="Ta&amp;#x27;abbata Sharra"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="4567" end="4584" title="Mu&amp;#x27;tazilism" label="Mu&amp;#x27;tazilites"/>
<link wikidata="Q293497" start="4609" end="4617" title="Al-Jahiz" label="Al-Jahiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="4728" end="4733" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="4758" end="4764" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="4772" end="4781" title="Al-Masudi" label="Al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="4813" end="4818" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="4820" end="4824" title="Umar" label="Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165494" start="4964" end="4969" title="adhan" label="adhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996414" start="5021" end="5037" title="convert to Islam" label="convert to Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q746747" start="5056" end="5068" title="Throne Verse" label="Throne Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q129048" start="5206" end="5239" title="History of the Prophets and Kings" label="History of the Prophets and Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q334813" start="5455" end="5474" title="Abu Ayyub al-Ansari" label="Abu Ayyub al-Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q746747" start="5530" end="5543" title="Ayat Al-Kursi" label="Ayat Al-Kursi"/>
<link wikidata="Q335414" start="5965" end="5971" title="tafsir" label="tafsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959257" start="6013" end="6021" title="shayatin" label="shayatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="6254" end="6262" title="Western_culture" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="6321" end="6336" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317316" start="6411" end="6431" title="Pickman&amp;#x27;s Model" label="Pickman&amp;#x27;s Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="6456" end="6471" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q555298" start="6912" end="6930" title="Clark Ashton-Smith" label="Clark Ashton-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q207640" start="6935" end="6951" title="Robert E. Howard" label="Robert E. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317161" start="7351" end="7384" title="The Dream Quest of Unknown Kadath" label="The Dream Quest of Unknown Kadath"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="8040" end="8051" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q912602" start="8053" end="8065" title="Brian Lumley" label="Brian Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q219124" start="8071" end="8089" title="Guillermo del Toro" label="Guillermo del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383080" start="8109" end="8137" title="Lists of legendary creatures" label="Lists of legendary creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q48673879" start="8149" end="8179" title="Ghoul (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Ghoul&amp;quot; (miniseries)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223333" wikidata="Q5045009" url="?curid=223333" title="Caroline Chariot-Dayez">
<text>Caroline Chariot-Dayez (born Brussels, 11 September 1958) is a Belgian hyperrealistic painter.

Although interested in painting from a very early age, she studied philosophy in order to understand what painting is. She was deeply influenced by the French phenomenologist Maurice Merleau-Ponty, who wrote extensively on perception, vision, embodiment, and painting.

Her life has been an ongoing interaction between philosophy, which she teaches, and painting. Until the age of forty, she was reluctant to show her paintings in public (with the exception of an appearance on the Belgian Broadcasting Corporation programme &quot;The Arts at Large&quot; in 1995).

She lives and works in Brussels.

==Exhibitions==
* March 1999 – Galerie Elian Lisart – Brussels
* November 2000 – Galerie Tempera – Brussels (Place Royale-Koningsplein)
* December 2000 – Linéart – Ghent
* February 2001 – Galerie Brûlée – Strasbourg
* March–August 2001 – Galerie Tempera – Brussels (Place Royale-Koningsplein)
* 2002 – Galerie Brulée, Strasbourg
* 2002 – Galerie Arcadia, Lille, 2002
* 2003 – Collins and Hastie Gallery, London
* 2005 – Galerie Visconti, Paris
* April 2006 – Lars Bolander, New York City &quot;The Fold&quot;
* 2007 – Tessenderloo Group, Brussels
* March–April 2009 – Cathedral of Brussels, Brussels

==Bibliography==
*&quot;Caroline Chariot-Dayez&quot;, Editions Art in Belgium, Lasne, 2005.

==References==
==External links==
*Home page
*Caroline Chariot-Dayez, &quot;Review Painting&quot;
*&quot;Caroline Chariot-Dayez&quot;, Daily Motion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5045009" start="0" end="22" title="Caroline Chariot-Dayez" label="Caroline Chariot-Dayez"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="29" end="37" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="63" end="70" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479785" start="71" end="85" title="hyperrealism" label="hyperrealistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="86" end="93" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q212639" start="271" end="292" title="Maurice Merleau-Ponty" label="Maurice Merleau-Ponty"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="685" end="693" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223338" wikidata="Q212989" url="?curid=223338" title="Swimsuit">
<text>A swimsuit is an item of clothing designed to be worn by people engaging in a water-based activity or water sports, such as swimming, diving and surfing, or sun-orientated activities, such as sun bathing. Different types and styles may be worn by men, women, and children. Swimsuits can be described by various names, some of which are used only in particular locations or for particular types of suit, including swimwear, bathing suit, bathing attire, swimming costume, bathing costume, swimming suit, swimmers, swimming togs, bathers, cossie (short for &quot;costume&quot;), or swimming trunks (swimwear that resembles shorts), besides others.

A swimsuit can be worn as an undergarment in sports that sometimes require a wetsuit or drysuit such as cold water swimming, water skiing, scuba diving, surfing, and wakeboarding. Swimsuits may also be worn to display the wearer&#x27;s physical attributes, as in the case of beauty pageants or bodybuilding contests, and glamour photography and magazines like the annual &quot;Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue&quot; featuring models and sports personalities in swimsuits.

There is a very wide range of styles of modern swimsuits available, which vary as to body coverage and materials. The choice of style may depend on community standards of modesty, as well as current fashions, and personal preferences. The choice will also consider the occasion, for example whether it is to be worn for a passive occasion such as sunbathing or for an activity such as surfing or swimsuit competition. Swimwear universally covers at least the wearer&#x27;s crotch area. According to international standards for social etiquette and swimming functionality, male swimwear usually leaves the upper body uncovered, while swimsuits for females usually cover the chest or at least the nipples.

==Materials==

Prior to the 1930s, swimsuits were typically made of wool; however, such suits did not hug the body and became heavy with water.

Rayon began to be used in the 1920s in the manufacture of tight-fitting swimsuits, but its durability, especially when wet, proved problematic, with jersey and silk also sometimes being used.

In the 1930s, new materials were being developed and used in swimwear, particularly latex and nylon. Swimsuits incorporating nylon dry more quickly then swimsuits made of common organic fibers, which can create a more comfortable experience for the wearer. Swimsuits gradually began hugging the body, especially women&#x27;s swimsuits.

In the 1960s, spandex (Lycra) began to be used in swimsuits, usually combined with nylon, to make them fit snugly to the body. However, spandex is not particularly strong or durable, especially in chlorinated water in swimming pools and hot tubs.

Polyester is becoming more common as a durable, lightweight fabric for swimsuits, although it is not as stretchy as spandex.

Some companies have started to focus on recycled materials for their swimwear. They are working with companies that transform fishnets, nylon waste, and recovered plastic from shorelines, waterways and coastal communities into textile components.

==Swimsuit styles==

In Western culture, men&#x27;s swimsuit styles include boardshorts, jammers, swim trunks, briefs (also known as &quot;Speedos&quot;), thongs, and g-strings, in order of decreasing lower body coverage, and women&#x27;s swimsuits include one-piece, bikinis, or thongs. While they go through many trends in color, pattern, length, and cut, there is not much modification to the original variety of suit. 

A recent innovation is the burqini, favored by some Muslim women, which covers the whole body and head (but not face) in a manner similar to a diver&#x27;s wetsuit. These are an updated version of full-body swimwear, which has been available for centuries, but conforms with Islam&#x27;s traditional emphasis on modest dress. In Egypt, the term &quot;Sharia swimsuit&quot; is used to describe full-body swimwear.

Swimsuit color affects swimmers&#x27; safety. A blue, white, or gray swimsuit may be nearly invisible when the swimmer is underwater, which can make it more difficult for a lifeguard to spot a drowning swimmer. The most visible swimsuits underwater have large, solid blocks of bright neon colors, such as neon pink or neon orange. Solid neon colors are more visible than red or multi-colored swimsuits.

===Unisex styles===
===Women&#x27;s swimsuits===
===Men&#x27;s swimsuits===
==Body coverage==

Swimsuits can be skin-tight or loose-fitting. They are often lined with another layer of fabric if the outer fabric becomes transparent when wet.

Swimsuits range from designs that almost completely cover the body to designs that expose almost all of the body. The choice of swimsuit primarily depends on the activity of the wearer, from tight briefs for men for competitive diving and water polo to boardshorts for surfing; although ironically female competitive divers usually wear full one-piece suits while female competitive surfers often wear bikinis. Secondary considerations are personal and community standards of modesty depending on the location and social setting, how much sun protection is desired, and prevailing fashions. Almost all swimsuits cover intimate body parts including genitals and pubic hair, while most except thongs or g-strings (also called Brazilians) cover much or all of the buttocks.

Most swimsuits in western culture leave at least the head, shoulders, arms, and lower part of the leg (below the knee) exposed. Women&#x27;s swimsuits generally cover at least the areola and bottom half of the breasts.
Both men and women may sometimes wear swimsuits covering more of the body when swimming in cold water (see also wetsuit and dry suit). In colder temperatures, swimsuits are needed to conserve body heat and protect the body core from hypothermia.

==Competitive swimwear==

==Swimwear and hygiene==
Germs, bacteria, and mold can grow very quickly on wet bathing suits. Medical professionals warn that wearing damp swimwear for long periods of time can cause a number of infections and rashes in children and adults, and warn against sharing bathing suits with others. They suggest that changing out of a wet bathing suit right away can help prevent vaginal infections, itching and/or jock itch.

In public swimming pools in France for reasons of hygiene, it is only permitted to wear closer fitting styles of swimwear. Men, for instance, must wear &quot;Speedo&quot;-style bathing suits and not baggy shorts or trunks.

== History ==

===Pre-20th century===
In classical antiquity swimming and bathing were done naked. There are Roman murals which show women playing sports and exercising wearing two-piece suits covering the areas around their breasts and hips in a fashion remarkably similar to the present-day bikini. However, there is no evidence that they were used for swimming. All classical pictures of swimming show nude swimmers.

In various cultural traditions one swims, if not in the nude, in a version in suitable material of a garment or undergarment commonly worn on land, e.g. a loincloth such as the Japanese man&#x27;s .

In the United Kingdom, until the mid-19th century there was no law against nude swimming, and each town was free to make its own laws. For example, the Bath Corporation official bathing dress code of 1737 prescribed, for men:

It is Ordered Established and Decreed by this Corporation that no Male person above the age of ten years shall at any time hereafter go into any Bath or Baths within this City by day or by night without a Pair of Drawers and a Waistcoat on their bodies.

In rivers, lakes, streams and the sea, men swam in the nude, where the practice was common. Those who did not swim in the nude stripped to their underwear. The English practice of men swimming in the nude was banned in the United Kingdom in 1860. Drawers, or caleçons as they were called, came into use in the 1860s. Even then there were many who protested against them and wanted to remain in the nude. Francis Kilvert described men&#x27;s bathing suits coming into use in the 1870s as &quot;a pair of very short red and white striped drawers&quot;.

Female bathing costumes were derived from those worn at Bath and other spas. It would appear that until the 1670s, nude female bathing in the spas was the norm, and that after that time women bathed clothed. Celia Fiennes gave a detailed description of the standard ladies&#x27; bathing costume in 1687:

The Ladyes go into the bath with Garments made of a fine yellow canvas, which is stiff and made large with great sleeves like a parson&#x27;s gown; the water fills it up so that it is borne off that your shape is not seen, it does not cling close as other linning, which Lookes sadly in the poorer sort that go in their own linning. The Gentlemen have drawers and wastcoates of the same sort of canvas, this is the best linning, for the bath water will Change any other yellow.

The Bath Corporation official bathing dress code of 1737 prescribed, for women:

No Female person shall at any time hereafter go into a Bath or Baths within this City by day or by night without a decent Shift on their bodies.

&quot;The Expedition of Humphry Clinker&quot; was published in 1771 and its description of ladies&#x27; bathing costume is different from that of Celia Fiennes a hundred years earlier:

The ladies wear jackets and petticoats of brown linen, with chip hats, in which they fix their handkerchiefs to wipe the sweat from their faces; but, truly, whether it is owing to the steam that surrounds them, or the heat of the water, or the nature of the dress, or to all these causes together, they look so flushed, and so frightful, that I always turn my eyes another way.

Penelope Byrde points out that Smollett&#x27;s description may not be accurate, for he describes a two-piece costume, not the one piece shift or smock that most people describe and is depicted in contemporary prints. His description does, however, tally with Elizabeth Grant&#x27;s description of the guide&#x27;s costume at Ramsgate in 1811. The only difference is in the fabric the costumes are made of. Flannel, however, was a common fabric for sea bathing costumes as many believed the warmer fabric was necessary in cold water.

In the 18th century women wore &quot;bathing gowns&quot; in the water; these were long dresses of fabrics that would not become transparent when wet, with weights sewn into the hems so that they would not rise up in the water. The men&#x27;s swim suit, a rather form-fitting wool garment with long sleeves and legs similar to long underwear, was developed and would change little for a century.

In the 19th century, the woman&#x27;s double suit was common, comprising a gown from shoulder to knees plus a set of trousers with leggings going down to the ankles.

In the Victorian era, popular beach resorts were commonly equipped with bathing machines designed to avoid the exposure of people in swimsuits, especially to people of the opposite sex.

In the United States, beauty pageants of women in bathing costumes became popular from the 1880s. However, such events were not regarded as respectable. Beauty contests became more respectable with the first modern Miss America contest held in 1921, though less respectable beauty contests continued to be held. Miss America ended its swimsuit competition in 2018.

===20th century===

The 1907 Sydney bathing costume protests were carried out in Australia after an ordinance was proposed that would have required males to wear a skirt-like tunic. In 1935, a similar ordinance was proposed, requiring males to wear the Spooner bathing costume instead of the &#x27;disgraceful&#x27; swim trunks.

In 1907, the swimmer Annette Kellerman from Australia visited the United States as an &quot;underwater ballerina&quot;, a version of synchronized swimming involving diving into glass tanks. She was arrested for indecent exposure because her swimsuit showed arms, legs and the neck. Kellerman changed the suit to have long arms and legs and a collar, still keeping the close fit that revealed the shapes underneath. She later starred in several movies, including one about her life. She marketed a line of bathing suits and her style of one-piece suits came to be known as &quot;the Annette Kellerman&quot;. The Annette Kellerman was considered the most offensive style of swimsuit in the 1920s and became the focus of censorship efforts.

Despite opposition from some groups, the form-fitting style proved popular. It was not long before swimwear started to shrink further. At first arms were exposed and then legs up to mid-thigh. Necklines receded from around the neck down to around the top of the bosom. The development of new fabrics allowed for new varieties of more comfortable and practical swimwear.

Due to the figure-hugging nature of these garments, glamour photography since the 1940s and 1950s has often featured people wearing swimsuits. This type of glamour photography eventually evolved into swimsuit photography exemplified by the annual &quot;Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue&quot;. Beauty contests also required contestants to wear form-fitting swimsuits.

Louis Réard, a French automobile engineer and clothing designer, introduced the modern two-piece bikini on July 5, 1946. He introduced his design four days after the first test of a nuclear weapon at the Bikini Atoll. The newspapers were full of news about it and Reard hoped for the same with his design, hence the name. 

Through the 1950s, it was thought proper for the lower part of the bikini to come up high enough to cover the navel. From the 1960s on, the bikini shrank in all directions until it sometimes covered little more than the nipples and genitalia, although less revealing models giving more support to the breasts remained popular. 

In 1964, the monokini, also known as a &quot;topless bikini&quot; or &quot;unikini&quot;), was designed by Rudi Gernreich, consisting of only a brief, close-fitting bottom and two thin straps; it was the first women&#x27;s topless swimsuit. Gernreich&#x27;s revolutionary and controversial design included a bottom that &quot;extended from the midriff to the upper thigh&quot; and was &quot;held up by shoestring laces that make a halter around the neck.&quot; Some credit Gernreich&#x27;s design with initiating, or describe it as a symbol of, the sexual revolution. 

Anne Cole, later the inventor of the tankini (see below), designed several swimsuits for the Cole of California and Anne Cole Swimwear brand, including the “Scandal Suit,” a one-piece swimsuit with mesh inserts that became the first swimsuit to break $1 million in sales in 1964.

Also in 1964, Babette March became the first &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; Swimsuit Issue cover model. She was on the swimsuit issue cover of the January 20, 1964, issue.
In the 1980s the thong or &quot;tanga&quot; came out of Brazil, said to have been inspired by traditional garments of native tribes in the Amazon. However, the one-piece suit continued to be popular for its more modest approach.

Men&#x27;s swimsuits developed roughly in parallel to women&#x27;s during this period, with the shorts covering progressively less. Eventually racing-style &quot;speedo&quot; suits became popular—and not just for their speed advantages. Thong, g-string and bikini style suits are also worn. Typically these are more popular in more tropical regions; however, they may also be worn at public swimming pools and inland lakes. But in the 1990s, longer and baggier shorts became popular, with the hems often reaching to the knees. Often called boardshorts and swim trunks, these were often worn lower on the hips than regular shorts.

Anne Cole (1926–2017), the founder of the brand Anne Cole named after her, was the woman who invented the tankini in 1998.

Miss America ended its swimsuit competition in 2018.

==Alternatives to swimsuits==
Since the early twentieth century a naturist movement has developed in western countries that seeks to enjoy non-sexual nakedness when swimming and during other activities. Some women prefer to engage in water or sun activities with their torso uncovered. The practice is often described as &quot;toplessness&quot; or &quot;topfreedom&quot;. In some places around the world, nude beaches have been set aside for people who choose to engage in beach activities in the nude.

As an alternative to a swimsuit, some people wear trousers, underpants, or a T-shirt either as a makeshift swimsuit or because they prefer regular clothes over swimsuits. Using a T-shirt can also provide extra protection against sunburn. This practice may be more accepted at beaches than at swimming pools, which tend not to permit the use of regular clothes as swimwear because regular clothes are unlined, they may become translucent.

==Swimsuit outside the water==
Swimsuits can also be worn outside the water, for example as a fashion item, for sports, or while sunbathing.

==See also==
*1907 Sydney bathing costume protests
*Bikini in popular culture
*List of swimwear brands

==References==
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="2" end="10" title="Swimsuit" label="swimsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="25" end="33" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="102" end="114" title="List of water sports" label="water sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="124" end="132" title="swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="134" end="140" title="Diving (sport)" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="145" end="152" title="surfing" label="surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q321458" start="192" end="203" title="sun bathing" label="sun bathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="413" end="421" title="Swimsuit" label="swimwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="423" end="435" title="Swimsuit" label="bathing suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="437" end="451" title="Swimsuit" label="bathing attire"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="453" end="469" title="Swimsuit" label="swimming costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="471" end="486" title="Swimsuit" label="bathing costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="488" end="501" title="Swimsuit" label="swimming suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="503" end="511" title="Swimsuit" label="swimmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="513" end="526" title="Swimsuit" label="swimming togs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="528" end="535" title="Swimsuit" label="bathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="537" end="543" title="Swimsuit" label="cossie"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="580" end="595" title="Swimsuit" label="swimming trunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="676" end="688" title="undergarment" label="undergarment"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450283" start="724" end="731" title="wetsuit" label="wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="735" end="742" title="drysuit" label="drysuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="772" end="784" title="water skiing" label="water skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="786" end="798" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="800" end="807" title="surfing" label="surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q376040" start="813" end="825" title="wakeboarding" label="wakeboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q758234" start="883" end="902" title="physical attractiveness" label="physical attributes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658935" start="922" end="936" title="beauty pageant" label="beauty pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100" start="941" end="953" title="bodybuilding" label="bodybuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010947" start="968" end="987" title="glamour photography" label="glamour photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734667" start="1024" end="1057" title="Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue" label="Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11199149" start="1292" end="1299" title="modesty" label="modesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="1320" end="1328" title="fashions" label="fashions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907414" start="1517" end="1537" title="swimsuit competition" label="swimsuit competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084917" start="1594" end="1600" title="crotch" label="crotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="1894" end="1898" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q910194" start="1971" end="1976" title="Rayon" label="Rayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348773" start="2120" end="2126" title="Jersey (fabric)" label="jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="2131" end="2135" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q244680" start="2248" end="2253" title="latex" label="latex"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="2258" end="2263" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q330262" start="2515" end="2522" title="spandex" label="spandex"/>
<link wikidata="Q888529" start="2698" end="2709" title="chlorinated" label="chlorinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="2749" end="2758" title="Polyester" label="Polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706052" start="3199" end="3210" title="boardshorts" label="boardshorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156360" start="3212" end="3219" title="jammer (swimwear)" label="jammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895873" start="3221" end="3232" title="Trunks (clothing)" label="swim trunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010326" start="3234" end="3240" title="swim briefs" label="briefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010326" start="3262" end="3269" title="Speedo (suit style)" label="Speedos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955949" start="3278" end="3283" title="thong" label="thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426205" start="3290" end="3298" title="g-string" label="g-string"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736850" start="3380" end="3389" title="one-piece swimsuit" label="one-piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q14090" start="3391" end="3397" title="bikini" label="bikini"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955949" start="3403" end="3408" title="thong" label="thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q936034" start="3574" end="3581" title="burqini" label="burqini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450283" start="3703" end="3710" title="wetsuit" label="wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132965" start="3779" end="3802" title="sea bathing" label="available for centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3822" end="3827" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="3876" end="3881" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="3898" end="3904" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130379" start="3984" end="4005" title="Water safety" label="swimmers&amp;#x27; safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q259327" start="4134" end="4143" title="lifeguard" label="lifeguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="4154" end="4162" title="drowning" label="drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="4245" end="4256" title="Neon color" label="neon colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564437" start="4477" end="4487" title="skin-tight clothing" label="skin-tight"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="4584" end="4595" title="transparency (optics)" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11199149" start="5083" end="5090" title="modesty" label="modesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638720" start="5146" end="5160" title="Sun protective clothing" label="sun protection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5188" end="5195" title="Fashion#Clothing fashions" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084952" start="5225" end="5244" title="Intimate part" label="intimate body parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="5255" end="5263" title="genitals" label="genitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q54795" start="5268" end="5278" title="pubic hair" label="pubic hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955949" start="5298" end="5303" title="thong" label="thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426205" start="5308" end="5316" title="g-string" label="g-string"/>
<link wikidata="Q42165" start="5368" end="5376" title="buttocks" label="buttocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="5397" end="5412" title="western culture" label="western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q843533" start="5559" end="5565" title="areola" label="areola"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="5589" end="5595" title="breast" label="breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450283" start="5710" end="5717" title="wetsuit" label="wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="5722" end="5730" title="dry suit" label="dry suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="6558" end="6577" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="6609" end="6614" title="naked" label="naked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130359" start="7093" end="7102" title="loincloth" label="loincloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179394" start="7213" end="7226" title="nude swimming" label="nude swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="7290" end="7294" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="7578" end="7585" title="Undergarment" label="Drawers"/>
<link wikidata="Q958210" start="7592" end="7601" title="Waistcoat" label="Waistcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q895612" start="7879" end="7886" title="caleçon" label="caleçon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397712" start="8024" end="8039" title="Francis Kilvert" label="Francis Kilvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052902" start="8380" end="8393" title="Celia Fiennes" label="Celia Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604733" start="9159" end="9164" title="Chemise" label="Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052902" start="9329" end="9342" title="Celia Fiennes" label="Celia Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="10613" end="10622" title="underwear" label="underwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="10852" end="10865" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q644886" start="10917" end="10932" title="bathing machine" label="bathing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658935" start="11054" end="11068" title="beauty pageant" label="beauty pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q859497" start="11247" end="11259" title="Miss America" label="Miss America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314964" start="11422" end="11458" title="1907 Sydney bathing costume protests" label="1907 Sydney bathing costume protests"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11651" end="11674" title="Eric Spooner#Spooner bathing costume" label="Spooner bathing costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895873" start="11714" end="11725" title="swim trunks" label="swim trunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q274172" start="11749" end="11766" title="Annette Kellerman" label="Annette Kellerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11772" end="11781" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180692" start="11861" end="11882" title="synchronized swimming" label="synchronized swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q43426" start="11939" end="11956" title="indecent exposure" label="indecent exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="12172" end="12178" title="film" label="movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010947" start="12890" end="12909" title="glamour photography" label="glamour photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734667" start="13091" end="13124" title="Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue" label="Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q152116" start="13207" end="13218" title="Louis Réard" label="Louis Réard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14090" start="13304" end="13310" title="bikini" label="bikini"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="13411" end="13423" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q43801" start="13641" end="13646" title="navel" label="navel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14090" start="13913" end="13919" title="bikini" label="bikini"/>
<link wikidata="Q114041" start="13967" end="13981" title="Rudi Gernreich" label="Rudi Gernreich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14083" end="14099" title="Toplessness#Topless swimwear" label="topless swimsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="14409" end="14426" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706305" start="14467" end="14474" title="tankini" label="tankini"/>
<link wikidata="Q113561642" start="14523" end="14541" title="Cole of California" label="Cole of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837813" start="14725" end="14738" title="Babette March" label="Babette March"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734667" start="14756" end="14801" title="Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue" label="&amp;quot;Sports Illustrated&amp;quot; Swimsuit Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179199" start="14802" end="14813" title="cover model" label="cover model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598066" start="14830" end="14850" title="List of Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue cover models" label="swimsuit issue cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955949" start="14900" end="14905" title="thong" label="thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="14939" end="14945" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955949" start="15350" end="15355" title="Thong" label="Thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426205" start="15357" end="15365" title="g-string" label="g-string"/>
<link wikidata="Q14090" start="15370" end="15376" title="bikini" label="bikini"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="15445" end="15453" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="15504" end="15518" title="swimming pools" label="swimming pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q111972889" start="15792" end="15801" title="Anne Cole" label="Anne Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706305" start="15850" end="15857" title="tankini" label="tankini"/>
<link wikidata="Q859497" start="15868" end="15880" title="Miss America" label="Miss America"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="15988" end="15996" title="naturist" label="naturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83772" start="16249" end="16260" title="toplessness" label="toplessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084807" start="16276" end="16286" title="topfreedom" label="topfreedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q847935" start="16327" end="16337" title="nude beach" label="nude beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q39908" start="16476" end="16484" title="trousers" label="trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863403" start="16486" end="16496" title="underpants" label="underpants"/>
<link wikidata="Q131151" start="16503" end="16510" title="T-shirt" label="T-shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="16959" end="16966" title="fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q321458" start="16994" end="17004" title="sunbathing" label="sunbathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314964" start="17021" end="17057" title="1907 Sydney bathing costume protests" label="1907 Sydney bathing costume protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907412" start="17059" end="17084" title="Bikini in popular culture" label="Bikini in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642018" start="17086" end="17109" title="List of swimwear brands" label="List of swimwear brands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223339" wikidata="Q131671" url="?curid=223339" title="Xenophanes">
<text>Xenophanes of Colophon ( ; ; – c. 478 BC) was a Greek philosopher, theologian, poet, and critic of Homer from Ionia who travelled throughout the Greek-speaking world in early classical antiquity.

As a poet, Xenophanes was known for his critical style, writing poems that are considered among the first satires. He composed elegiac couplets that criticised his society&#x27;s traditional values of wealth, excesses, and athletic victories. He criticised Homer and the other poets in his works for representing the gods as foolish or morally weak. His poems have not survived intact; only fragments of some of his work survive in quotations by later philosophers and literary critics.

Xenophanes is seen as one of the most important pre-Socratic philosophers. A highly original thinker, Xenophanes sought explanations for physical phenomena such as clouds or rainbows without references to divine or mythological explanations, but instead based on first principles. He distinguished between different forms of knowledge and belief, an early instance of epistemology. Later philosophers such as the Eleatics and the Pyrrhonists saw Xenophanes as the founder of their doctrines, and interpreted his work in terms of those doctrines, although modern scholarship disputes these claims.

==Life==
The ancient biographer Diogenes Laertius reports that Xenophanes was born in Colophon, a city that once existed in Ionia, in present-day Turkey. Laertius stated that Xenophanes is said to have flourished during the 60th Olympiad (540–537 BC), and modern scholars generally place his birth some time around 570–560 BC. His surviving work refers to Thales, Epimenides, and Pythagoras, and he himself is mentioned in the writings of Heraclitus and Epicharmus.

By his own surviving account, he was an itinerant poet who left his native land at the age of 25 and lived 67 years in other Greek lands, dying at or after the age of 92. Although ancient testimony notes that he buried his sons, there is little other biographical information about him or his family that can be reliably ascertained.

It is considered likely Xenophanes&#x27; physical theories were influenced by the Milesians. For instance, his theory that the rainbow is clouds is on one interpretation seen as a response to Anaximenes&#x27;s theory that the rainbow is light reflected off of clouds.

==Poems==

Knowledge of Xenophanes&#x27; views comes from fragments of his poetry that survive as quotations by later Greek writers. Unlike other pre-Socratic philosophers such as Heraclitus or Parmenides, who only wrote one work, Xenophanes wrote a variety of poems, and no two of the fragments can positively be identified as belonging to the same text. According to Diogenes Laertius, Xenophanes wrote a poem on the foundation of Colophon and Elea, which ran to approximately 2000 lines. Later testimony suggests that his collection of satires was assembled in at least five books. Although many later sources attribute a poem titled &quot;On Nature&quot; to Xenophanes, modern scholars doubt this label, as it was likely a name given by scholars at the Library of Alexandria to works written by philosophers that Aristotle had identified as &quot;&quot; who studied nature.

=== Satires ===
The satires are called &quot;Silloi&quot;, and this name may go back to Xenophanes himself, but it may originate that the Pyrrhonist philosopher Timon of Phlius, the &quot;sillographer&quot; (3rd century BC), put much of his own satire upon other philosophers into the mouth of Xenophanes, one of the few philosophers Timon praises in his work.

Xenophanes&#x27; surviving writings display a skepticism that became more commonly expressed during the fourth century BC. Several of the philosophical fragments are derived from commentators on Homer. He aimed his critique at the polytheistic religious views of earlier Greek poets and of his own contemporaries.

To judge from these later accounts, his elegiac and iambic poetry criticized and satirized a wide range of ideas, including Homer and Hesiod, the belief in the pantheon of anthropomorphic gods and the Greeks&#x27; veneration of .

=== &quot;On Nature&quot; ===
There is no good authority that says that Xenophanes specifically wrote a philosophical poem. John Burnet says that &quot;The oldest reference to a poem Περὶ φύσεως is in the Geneva scholium on &quot;Iliad&quot; xxi. 196, and this goes back to Crates of Mallus. We must remember that such titles are of later date, and Xenophanes had been given a place among philosophers long before the time of Crates. All we can say, therefore, is that the Pergamene librarians gave the title Περὶ φύσεως to some poem of Xenophanes.&quot; However, even if Xenophanes never wrote a specific poem title &quot;On Nature&quot;, many of the surviving fragments deal with topics in natural philosophy such as clouds or rainbows, and it is thus likely that the philosophical remarks of Xenophanes were expressed incidentally in his satires.

==Philosophy==
Although Xenophanes has traditionally been interpreted in terms of the Eleatics and Skeptics who were influenced by him and saw him as their predecessor and founder, modern scholarship consider him to be a highly original and distinct philosopher whose philosophy extends well beyond the influence he had on later philosophical schools. As a social critic, Xenophanes composed poems on proper behavior at a symposium and criticized the cultural glorification of athletes. Xenophanes sought to reform the understanding of divine nature by casting doubt on Greek mythology as relayed by Hesiod and Homer, in order to make it more consistent with notions of piety from Ancient Greek religion. He composed natural explanations for phenomena such as the formation of clouds and rainbows rather than myths, satirizing traditional religious views of his time as human projections. As an early thinker in epistemology, he drew distinctions between the ideas of knowledge and belief as opposed to truth, which he believed was only possible for the gods.

=== Social criticism ===
Xenophanes wrote a number of elegiac poems on proper conduct at a symposium, the Ancient Greek drinking parties that were held to commemorate athletic or poetic victories, or to welcome young men into aristocratic society. The surviving fragments stress the importance of piety and honor to the gods, and they discourage drunkenness and intemperance, endorsing moderation and criticism of luxury and excess. Xenophanes rejected the value of athletic victories, stating that cultivating wisdom was more important.

=== Divine nature ===
Orphism and Pythagorean philosophy introduced into the Greek spirituality the notions of guilt and pureness, causing a dichotomic belief between the divine soul and the mortal body. This doctrine is in contrast with the traditional religions as espoused by Homer and Hesiod. God moves all things, but he is thought to be immobile, characterized by oneness and unicity, eternity, and a spiritual nature which is bodiless and is not anthropomorphic. He has a free will and is the Highest Good, he embodies the beauty of the moral perfection and of the absence of sin.

Xenophanes espoused a belief that &quot;God is one, supreme among gods and men, and not like mortals in body or in mind.&quot; He maintained that there was one greatest God. God is one eternal being, spherical in form, comprehending all things within himself, is the absolute mind and thought, therefore is intelligent, and moves all things, but bears no resemblance to human nature either in body or mind. While Xenophanes rejected Homeric theology, he did not question the presence of a divine entity; rather his philosophy was a critique on Ancient Greek writers and their conception of divinity. Regarding Xenophanes&#x27; positive theology five key concepts about God can be formed. God is: beyond human morality, does not resemble human form, cannot die or be born (God is divine thus eternal), no divine hierarchy exists, and God does not intervene in human affairs.

=== Natural philosophy ===

Xenophanes&#x27; understanding of divine nature as separate and uninvolved in human affairs motivated him to come up with naturalistic explanations for physical phenomena.

Xenophanes was likely the first philosopher to come up with an explanation for the manifestation of St. Elmo&#x27;s fire that appears on the masts of ships when they pass through clouds during a thunderstorm. Although the actual phenomenon behind St. Elmo&#x27;s fire would not be understood until the discovery of static electricity in the modern era, Xenophanes&#x27; explanation, which attempted to explain the glow as being caused by agitations of small droplets of clouds was unique in the ancient world.

In Xenophanes&#x27; cosmology, there is only one boundary to the universe, the one &quot;seen by our feet&quot;. Xenophanes believed that the earth extended infinitely far down, as well as infinitely far in every direction. A consequence of his belief in an infinitely extended earth was that rather than having the sun pass under the earth at sunset, Xenophanes believed that the sun and the moon traveled along a straight line westward, after which point a new sun or moon would be reconstituted after an eclipse. While this potentially infinite series of suns and moons traveling would likely be considered objectionable to modern scientists, this means that Xenophanes understood the sun and moon as a &quot;type&quot; of object that appeared in the sky, rather than a specific individual object that reappeared every new day.

Xenophanes concluded from his examination of fossils of sea creatures that were found above land that water once must have covered all of the Earth&#x27;s surface. He used this evidence to conclude that the &quot;arche&quot; or cosmic principle of the universe was a tide flowing in and out between wet and dry, or earth (γῆ) and water (ὕδωρ). These two extreme states would alternate between one another, and with the alternation human life would become extinct, then regenerate (or vice versa depending on the dominant form). The argument can be considered a rebuke to Anaximenes&#x27; air theory. The idea of alternating states and human life perishing and coming back suggests he believed in the principle of causation, another distinguishing step that Xenophanes takes away from Ancient philosophical traditions to ones based more on scientific observation. This use of evidence was an important step in advancing from simply stating an idea to backing it up by evidence and observation.

=== Epistemology ===
Xenophanes is one of the first philosophers to show interest in epistemological questions as well as metaphysical ones. He held that there actually exists an objective truth in reality, but that as mere mortals, humans are unable to know it. He is credited with being one of the first philosophers to distinguish between true belief and knowledge, as well as acknowledge the prospect that one can think he knows something but not really know it.

His verses on skepticism are quoted by Sextus Empiricus as follows:
&lt;poem&gt;
Yet, with regard to the gods and what I declare about all things:
No man has seen what is clear nor will any man ever know it.
Nay, for even should he chance to affirm what is really existent,
He himself knoweth it not; for all is swayed by opining.&lt;/poem&gt;
Due to the lack of whole works by Xenophanes, his views are difficult to interpret, so that the implication of knowing being something deeper (&quot;a clearer truth&quot;) may have special implications, or it may mean that you cannot know something just by looking at it. It is known that the most and widest variety of evidence was considered by Xenophanes to be the surest way to prove a theory.

== Legacy and influence ==
Xenophanes&#x27;s influence has been interpreted variously as &quot;the founder of epistemology, a poet and rhapsode and not a philosopher at all, the first skeptic, the first empiricist, a rationalist theologian, a reformer of religion, and more besides.&quot; Karl Popper read Xenophanes as an early precursor of critical rationalism, saying that it is possible to act only on the basis of working hypotheses—we may act as if we knew the truth, as long as we know that this is extremely unlikely.

=== Influence on Eleatics ===
Many later ancient accounts associate Xenophanes with the Greek colony in the Italian city of Elea, either as the author of a poem on the founding of that city, or as the founder of the Eleatic school of philosophy, or as the teacher of Parmenides of Elea. Others associate him with Pythagoreanism. However, modern scholars generally believe that there is little historical or philosophical justification for these associations between Pythagoras, Xenophanes, and Parmenides as is oft alleged in succession of the so-called &quot;Italian school&quot;. It had similarly been common since antiquity to see Xenophanes as the teacher of Zeno of Elea, the colleague of Parmenides, but common opinion today is likewise that this is false.

=== Influence on Pyrrhonism ===
Xenophanes is sometimes considered the first skeptic in Western philosophy. Xenophanes&#x27;s alleged skepticism can also be seen as a precursor to Pyrrhonism. Sextus quotes Pyrrho&#x27;s follower Timon as praising Xenophanes and dedicating his satires to him, and giving him as an example of somebody who is not a perfect skeptic (like Pyrrho), but who is forgivably close to it.

Eusebius quoting Aristocles of Messene says that Xenophanes was the founder of a line of philosophy that culminated in Pyrrhonism. This line begins with Xenophanes and goes through Parmenides, Melissus of Samos, Zeno of Elea, Leucippus, Democritus, Protagoras, Nessos of Chios, Metrodorus of Chios, Diogenes of Smyrna, Anaxarchus, and finally Pyrrho.

=== Pantheism ===
Because of his development of the concept of a &quot;one god greatest among gods and men,&quot; Xenophanes is often seen as one of the first monotheists in Western philosophy of religion. However, the same referenced quotation refers to multiple &quot;gods&quot; who the supreme God is greater than. This god &quot;shakes all things&quot; by the power of his thought alone. Differently from the human creatures, God has the power to give &quot;immediate execution&quot; (in Greek: &quot;to phren&quot;) and make effective his cognitive faculty (in Greek: &quot;nous&quot;).

The thought of Xenophanes was summarized as monolatrous and pantheistic by the ancient doxographies of Aristotle, Cicero, Diogenes Laertius, Sextus Empiricus, and Plutarch. More particularly, Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Metaphysics&quot; summarized his view as &quot;the All is God.&quot; The pseudo-Aristotlelian treatise &quot;On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias&quot; also contains a significant testimony of his teachings. Pierre Bayle considered Xenophanes views similar to Spinoza. Physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein specifically identified Xenophanes as one of the earliest pandeists.

Xenophanes&#x27;s view of an impersonal god seemed to influence the pre-Socratic Empedocles, who viewed god as an incorporeal mind. However, Empedocles called Xenophanes&#x27;s view that Earth is flat and extends downward forever to be foolishness.

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Bibliography==
=== Ancient primary sources ===

In the Diels-Kranz numbering for testimony and fragments of Pre-Socratic philosophy, Xenophanes is catalogued as number 21.

The most recent edition of this catalogue is . 
==== Biography ====

*A1. 
*A2. 
*A3. 
*A4. 
*A5. 
*A6. 
*A7. 
*A8. 
*A9. 
*A10. 
==== Apothegems ====

*A11. 
*A12. 
*A13. 
*A14. 
*A15. 
*A16. 
*A17. 
==== Descriptions of poems ====

*A18. 
*A19. 
*A20. 
*A21. 
*A22. 
*A23. 
*A24. 
*A25. 
*A26. 
*A27. 
==== Doctrines ====

*A28. 
*A29. 
*A30. 
*A31. 
*A32. 
*A33. 
*A34. 
*A35. 
*A36-46. 
*A47. 
*A48. 
*A49. 
*A50. 
*A51. 
*A52. 
==== Fragments, elegies ====

*B1. 
*B2. 
*B3. 
*B4. 
*B5. 
*B6. 
*B7. 
*B8. 
*B9. 
==== Fragments, silloi ====

*B10. 
*B11. 
*B12. 
*B13. 
* B14-15. 
* B16. 
*B17. 
*B18. 
*B19. 
*B20. 
*B21. 
*B21a. 
*B22. 
==== Fragments, &quot;On Nature&quot; ====

*B23. 
*B24. 
*B25. 
*B26. 
*B27. 
*B28. 
*B29. 
*B30. 
*B31. 
*B32. 
*B33. 
*B34. 
*B35. 
*B36. 
*B37. 
*B38. 
*B39. 
*B40. 
*B41. 
*B42. 
*B45. 
==== Imitation ====

*C1. 
*C2 
=== Modern criticism ===

=== Modern scholarship ===
==== Translations of the fragments with commentary ====
* 
* 
*
* 
==== Extended studies and reviews ====
* 
* 
*
*
*
*
== Further reading ==
* Classen, C. J. 1989. &quot;Xenophanes and the Tradition of Epic Poetry&quot;. In &quot;Ionian Philosophy&quot;. Edited by K. Boudouris, 91–103. Athens, Greece: International Association for Greek Philosophy.

==External links==

* Xenophanes of Colophon by Giannis Stamatellos
* Xenophanes of Colophon - Primary and secondary resources (link broken, June 9, 2019, archived page)
* J. Lesher, &quot;Presocratic Contributions to the Theory of Knowledge&quot;, 1998</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="0" end="22" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes of Colophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="48" end="53" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="54" end="65" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="67" end="77" title="theologian" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="79" end="83" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430706" start="89" end="95" title="critic" label="critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="99" end="104" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="110" end="115" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="175" end="194" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="303" end="310" title="satires" label="satires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082412" start="324" end="340" title="elegiac couplets" label="elegiac couplets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="454" end="459" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178540" start="733" end="758" title="Pre-Socratic philosophy" label="pre-Socratic philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="948" end="964" title="arche" label="first principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="1053" end="1065" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q214577" start="1098" end="1106" title="Eleatics" label="Eleatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192313" start="1115" end="1126" title="Pyrrhonists" label="Pyrrhonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="1315" end="1332" title="Diogenes Laertius" label="Diogenes Laertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142488" start="1369" end="1377" title="Colophon (city)" label="Colophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221956" start="1512" end="1520" title="Olympiad" label="Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="1639" end="1645" title="Thales" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q319406" start="1647" end="1657" title="Epimenides" label="Epimenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="1663" end="1673" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q41155" start="1722" end="1732" title="Heraclitus" label="Heraclitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312410" start="1737" end="1747" title="Epicharmus" label="Epicharmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294550" start="2167" end="2176" title="Milesian school" label="Milesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q80612" start="2277" end="2294" title="Anaximenes of Miletus" label="Anaximenes&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q41155" start="2534" end="2544" title="Heraclitus" label="Heraclitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="2548" end="2558" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="3111" end="3132" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q280872" start="3278" end="3284" title="Silloi" label="Silloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126340" start="3371" end="3381" title="Pyrrhonism" label="Pyrrhonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q280872" start="3394" end="3409" title="Timon of Phlius" label="Timon of Phlius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358685" start="3950" end="3957" title="elegiac" label="elegiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q207686" start="3962" end="3968" title="Iamb (foot)" label="iambic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="3991" end="4000" title="satire" label="satirized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="4034" end="4039" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="4044" end="4050" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="4070" end="4078" title="pantheon (gods)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="4082" end="4097" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="4098" end="4102" title="deity" label="gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q503075" start="4415" end="4431" title="Crates of Mallus" label="Crates of Mallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214577" start="5078" end="5086" title="Eleatics" label="Eleatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="5091" end="5099" title="Skeptics" label="Skeptics"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="5414" end="5423" title="symposium" label="symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="5528" end="5541" title="divinity" label="divine nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="5592" end="5598" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="5603" end="5608" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="5673" end="5695" title="Ancient Greek religion" label="Ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="5769" end="5775" title="clouds" label="clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052" start="5780" end="5788" title="rainbows" label="rainbows"/>
<link wikidata="Q608353" start="5868" end="5879" title="Psychological projection" label="projections"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="5904" end="5916" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="5995" end="6000" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="6144" end="6153" title="symposium" label="symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q242517" start="6614" end="6621" title="Orphism (religion)" label="Orphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="6626" end="6648" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagorean philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="6871" end="6876" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="6881" end="6887" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="7221" end="7224" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q835041" start="7457" end="7461" title="Nous" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390326" start="7808" end="7825" title="kataphasis" label="positive theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q120688" start="8357" end="8377" title="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s fire" label="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="9645" end="9651" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="9813" end="9818" title="arche" label="arche"/>
<link wikidata="Q80612" start="10171" end="10181" title="Anaximenes of Miletus" label="Anaximenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="10475" end="10483" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="10679" end="10694" title="Epistemology" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="10783" end="10788" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="10792" end="10799" title="reality" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720959" start="10838" end="10855" title="acatalepsy" label="unable to know it"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610517" start="10936" end="10947" title="justified true belief" label="true belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="10952" end="10961" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q236594" start="11101" end="11117" title="Sextus Empiricus" label="Sextus Empiricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="12094" end="12105" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q868608" start="12147" end="12167" title="critical rationalism" label="critical rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="12232" end="12242" title="hypotheses" label="hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q272968" start="12456" end="12460" title="Velia" label="Elea"/>
<link wikidata="Q214577" start="12548" end="12555" title="Eleatic" label="Eleatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="12599" end="12617" title="Parmenides of Elea" label="Parmenides of Elea"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="12645" end="12659" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagoreanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102534959" start="12892" end="12906" title="Italian school (philosophy)" label="Italian school"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="12949" end="12958" title="Ancient history" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132157" start="12995" end="13007" title="Zeno of Elea" label="Zeno of Elea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="13173" end="13180" title="Philosophical skepticism" label="skeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126340" start="13276" end="13286" title="Pyrrhonism" label="Pyrrhonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="13510" end="13518" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q666667" start="13527" end="13548" title="Aristocles of Messene" label="Aristocles of Messene"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="13691" end="13701" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q233711" start="13703" end="13720" title="Melissus of Samos" label="Melissus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q132157" start="13722" end="13734" title="Zeno of Elea" label="Zeno of Elea"/>
<link wikidata="Q165589" start="13736" end="13745" title="Leucippus" label="Leucippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="13747" end="13757" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169243" start="13759" end="13769" title="Protagoras" label="Protagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q12901192" start="13771" end="13786" title="Nessos of Chios" label="Nessos of Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q535769" start="13788" end="13807" title="Metrodorus of Chios" label="Metrodorus of Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q366031" start="13829" end="13839" title="Anaxarchus" label="Anaxarchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192313" start="13853" end="13859" title="Pyrrho" label="Pyrrho"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="13937" end="13940" title="god" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="14021" end="14032" title="Monotheism" label="monotheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="14036" end="14043" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q209295" start="14044" end="14066" title="philosophy of religion" label="philosophy of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q956859" start="14499" end="14510" title="monolatry" label="monolatrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="14515" end="14526" title="pantheism" label="pantheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253496" start="14542" end="14554" title="doxography" label="doxographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="14558" end="14567" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="14569" end="14575" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="14577" end="14594" title="Diogenes Laertius" label="Diogenes Laertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q236594" start="14596" end="14612" title="Sextus Empiricus" label="Sextus Empiricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="14618" end="14626" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q661655" start="14664" end="14687" title="Metaphysics (Aristotle)" label="&amp;quot;Metaphysics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480133" start="14779" end="14815" title="On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias" label="On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias"/>
<link wikidata="Q214816" start="14878" end="14890" title="Pierre Bayle" label="Pierre Bayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="14930" end="14937" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298673" start="14965" end="14987" title="Max Bernhard Weinstein" label="Max Bernhard Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620224" start="15046" end="15054" title="pandeist" label="pandeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q660936" start="15245" end="15258" title="Flat Earth" label="Earth is flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881242" start="15271" end="15287" title="turtles all the way down" label="downward forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065338" start="15394" end="15415" title="Diels-Kranz numbering" label="Diels-Kranz numbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q178540" start="15447" end="15470" title="Pre-Socratic philosophy" label="Pre-Socratic philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223352" wikidata="Q58430" url="?curid=223352" title="Alternator">
<text>An alternator (or synchronous generator) is an electrical generator that converts mechanical energy to electrical energy in the form of alternating current. For reasons of cost and simplicity, most alternators use a rotating magnetic field with a stationary armature. Occasionally, a linear alternator or a rotating armature with a stationary magnetic field is used. In principle, any AC electrical generator can be called an alternator, but usually, the term refers to small rotating machines driven by automotive and other internal combustion engines.

An alternator that uses a permanent magnet for its magnetic field is called a magneto. Alternators in power stations driven by steam turbines are called turbo-alternators. Large 50 or 60 Hz three-phase alternators in power plants generate most of the world&#x27;s electric power, which is distributed by electric power grids.

==History==
Alternating current generating systems were known in simple forms from the discovery of the magnetic induction of electric current in the 1830s. Rotating generators naturally produced alternating current, but since there was little use for it, it was normally converted into direct current via the addition of a commutator in the generator. The early machines were developed by pioneers such as Michael Faraday and Hippolyte Pixii. Faraday developed the &quot;rotating rectangle&quot;, whose operation was &quot;heteropolar&quot; – each active conductor passed successively through regions where the magnetic field was in opposite directions. Lord Kelvin and Sebastian Ferranti also developed early alternators, producing frequencies between 100 and 300 Hz.

The late 1870s saw the introduction of the first large-scale electrical systems with central generation stations to power Arc lamps, used to light whole streets, factory yards, or the interior of large warehouses. Some, such as Yablochkov arc lamps introduced in 1878, ran better on alternating current, and the development of these early AC generating systems was accompanied by the first use of the word &quot;alternator&quot;. Supplying the proper amount of voltage from generating stations in these early systems was left up to the engineer&#x27;s skill in &quot;riding the load&quot;. In 1883 the Ganz Works invented the constant voltage generator that could produce a stated output voltage, regardless of the value of the actual load. The introduction of transformers in the mid-1880s led to the widespread use of alternating current and the use of alternators needed to produce it. After 1891, polyphase alternators were introduced to supply currents of multiple differing phases. Later alternators were designed for various alternating current frequencies between sixteen and about one hundred hertz for use with arc lighting, incandescent lighting, and electric motors. Specialized radio frequency alternators like the Alexanderson alternator were developed as longwave radio transmitters around World War 1 and used in a few high power wireless telegraphy stations before vacuum tube transmitters replaced them.

==Principle of operation==
A conductor moving relative to a magnetic field develops an electromotive force (EMF) in it (Faraday&#x27;s Law). This EMF reverses its polarity when it moves under magnetic poles of opposite polarity. Typically, a rotating magnet, called the rotor, turns within a stationary set of conductors, called the stator, wound in coils on an iron core. The field cuts across the conductors, generating an induced EMF (electromotive force), as the mechanical input causes the rotor to turn.

The rotating magnetic field induces an AC voltage in the stator windings. Since the currents in the stator windings vary in step with the position of the rotor, an alternator is a synchronous generator.

The rotor&#x27;s magnetic field may be produced by permanent magnets or by a field coil electromagnet. Automotive alternators use a rotor winding, which allows control of the alternator&#x27;s generated voltage by varying the current in the rotor field winding. Permanent magnet machines avoid the loss due to magnetizing current in the rotor, but are restricted in size due to the cost of the magnet material. Since the permanent magnet field is constant, the terminal voltage varies directly with the speed of the generator. Brushless AC generators are usually larger than those used in automotive applications.

An automatic voltage control device controls the field current to keep the output voltage constant. If the output voltage from the stationary armature coils drops due to an increase in demand, more current is fed into the rotating field coils through the voltage regulator (VR). This increases the magnetic field around the field coils, which induces a greater voltage in the armature coils. Thus, the output voltage is brought back up to its original value.

Alternators used in central power stations also control the field current to regulate reactive power and to help stabilize the power system against the effects of momentary faults. Often, there are three sets of stator windings, physically offset so that the rotating magnetic field produces a three phase current, displaced by one-third of a period with respect to each other.

==Synchronous speeds==
One cycle of alternating current is produced each time a pair of field poles passes over a point on the stationary winding. The relation between speed and frequency is formula_1, where formula_2 is the frequency in Hz (cycles per second). formula_3 is the number of poles (2, 4, 6, …), and formula_4 is the rotational speed in revolutions per minute (r/min). Old descriptions of alternating current systems sometimes give the frequency in terms of alternations per minute, counting each half-cycle as one &quot;alternation&quot;; so 12,000 alternations per minute corresponds to 100 Hz.

An alternator&#x27;s output frequency depends on the number of poles and the rotational speed. The speed corresponding to a particular frequency is called the &quot;synchronous speed&quot;. This table gives some examples:

== Classifications ==
Alternators may be classified by the method of excitation, number of phases, the type of rotation, cooling method, and their application.

=== By excitation ===
There are two main ways to produce the magnetic field used in the alternators: by using permanent magnets, which create their persistent magnetic field, or by using field coils. The alternators that use permanent magnets are specifically called magnetos.
In other alternators, wound field coils form an electromagnet to produce the rotating magnetic field.

A device that uses permanent magnets to produce alternating current is called a permanent magnet alternator (PMA). A permanent magnet generator (PMG) may produce either alternating current or direct current if it has a commutator.

==== Direct-connected direct-current (DC) generator ====
This method of excitation consists of a smaller direct-current (DC) generator fixed on the same shaft as the alternator. The DC generator generates a small amount of electricity, just enough to &quot;excite&quot; the field coils of the connected alternator to generate electricity. A variation of this system is a type of alternator that uses direct current from a battery for initial excitation upon start-up, after which the alternator becomes self-excited.

==== Direct-connected alternating-current (AC) generator ====

This method of excitation consists of a smaller alternating-current (AC) generator fixed on the same shaft as the alternator. The AC stator generates a small amount of field coil excitation current, which is induced in the rotor and rectified to DC by a bridge rectifier built in to the windings where it excites the field coils of the larger connected alternator to generate electricity. This system has the advantage of not requiring brushes, which increases service life, although with a slightly lower overall efficiency. A variation of this system is a type of alternator that uses direct current from a battery for initial excitation upon start-up, after which the alternator becomes self-excited.

==== Transformation and rectification ====
This method depends on residual magnetism retained in the iron core to generate a weak magnetic field, which would allow a weak voltage to be generated. This voltage is used to excite the field coils so the alternator can generate stronger voltage as part of its &quot;build up&quot; process. After the initial AC voltage buildup, the field is supplied with rectified voltage from the alternator.

==== Brushless alternators ====
A brushless alternator is composed of two alternators built end-to-end on one shaft. Until 1966, alternators used brushes with rotating field. With the advancement in semiconductor technology, brushless alternators are possible. Smaller brushless alternators may look like one unit, but the two parts are readily identifiable in the large versions. The main alternator is the larger of the two sections, and the smaller one is the exciter. The exciter has stationary field coils and a rotating armature (power coils). The main alternator uses the opposite configuration with a rotating field and stationary armature. A bridge rectifier, called the rotating rectifier assembly, is mounted on the rotor. Neither brushes nor slip rings are used, which reduces the number of wearing parts. The main alternator has a rotating field and a stationary armature (power generation windings).

Varying the amount of current through the stationary exciter field coils varies the 3-phase output from the exciter. This output is rectified by a rotating rectifier assembly mounted on the rotor, and the resultant DC supplies the rotating field of the main alternator and hence alternator output. The result is that a small DC exciter current indirectly controls the output of the main alternator.

=== By number of phases ===

Another way to classify alternators is by the number of phases of their output voltage. The output can be single phase or polyphase. Three-phase alternators are the most common, but polyphase alternators can be two-phase, six-phase, or more.

=== By rotating part ===
The revolving part of alternators can be the armature or the magnetic field. The revolving armature type has the armature wound on the rotor, where the winding moves through a stationary magnetic field. The revolving armature type is not often used. The revolving field type has a magnetic field on the rotor to rotate through a stationary armature winding. The advantage is that then the rotor circuit carries much less power than the armature circuit, making the slip ring connections smaller and less costly; only two contacts are needed for the direct-current rotor, whereas often a rotor winding has three phases, and multiple sections which would each require a slip-ring connection. The stationary armature can be wound for any convenient medium voltage level, up to tens of thousands of volts; manufacture of slip ring connections for more than a few thousand volts is costly and inconvenient.

===Cooling methods===
Many alternators are cooled by ambient air, forced through the enclosure by an attached fan on the shaft that drives the alternator. In vehicles such as transit buses, a heavy demand on the electrical system may require a large alternator to be oil-cooled. In marine applications water-cooling is also used. Expensive automobiles may use water-cooled alternators to meet high electrical system demands.

==Specific applications==
===Synchronous generators===
Most power generation stations use synchronous machines as their generators. The connection of these generators to the utility grid requires synchronization conditions to be met.

===Automotive alternators===
Alternators are used in modern internal combustion engine automobiles to charge the battery and to power the electrical system when its engine is running.

Until the 1960s, automobiles used DC dynamo generators with commutators. With the availability of affordable silicon-diode rectifiers, alternators were used instead.

=== Diesel-electric locomotive alternators ===
In later diesel-electric locomotives and diesel electric multiple units, the prime mover turns an alternator which provides electricity for the traction motors (AC or DC).

The traction alternator usually incorporates integral silicon diode rectifiers to provide the traction motors with up to 1,200 volts DC.

The first diesel electric locomotives, and many of those still in service, use DC generators as, before silicon power electronics, it was easier to control the speed of DC traction motors. Most of these had two generators: one to generate the excitation current for a larger main generator.

Optionally, the generator also supplies head-end power (HEP) or power for electric train heating. The HEP option requires a constant engine speed, typically 900 r/min for a 480 V 60 Hz HEP application, even when the locomotive is not moving.

=== Marine alternators ===
Marine alternators used in yachts are similar to automotive alternators, with appropriate adaptations to the salt-water environment. Marine alternators are designed to be explosion proof (ignition protected) so that brush sparking will not ignite explosive gas mixtures in an engine room environment. Depending on the type of system installed, they may be 12 or 24 volts. Larger marine diesels may have two or more alternators to cope with the heavy electrical demand of a modern yacht. On single alternator circuits, the power may be split between the engine starting battery and the domestic or house battery (or batteries) by use of a split-charge diode (battery isolator) or a voltage-sensitive relay. Due to the high cost of large house battery banks, Marine alternators generally use external regulators. Multistep regulators control the field current to maximize the charging effectiveness (time to charge) and battery life. Multistep regulators can be programmed for different battery types. Two temperature sensors can be added: one for the battery to adjust the charging voltage and an over-temperature sensor on the actual alternator to protect it from overheating.

=== Aviation ===
=== Radio alternators ===
High-frequency alternators of the variable-reluctance type were applied commercially to radio transmission in low-frequency radio bands. These were used for transmitting Morse code and, experimentally, for transmitting voice and music. In the Alexanderson alternator, both the field winding and armature winding are stationary, and current is induced in the armature by the changing magnetic reluctance of the rotor (which has no windings or current-carrying parts). Such machines were made to produce radio frequency current for radio transmissions, although the efficiency was low.

== See also ==

* Bottle dynamo
* Dynamo
* Electric generator
* Engine-generator
* Flux switching alternator
* Folsom Powerhouse State Historic Park
* Hub dynamo
* Induction generator
* Jedlik&#x27;s dynamo
* Linear alternator
* Magneto
* Polyphase coil
* Revolving armature alternator
* Single-phase generator
* Synchronverter

==References==
==External links==

* White, Thomas H.,&quot;Alternator-Transmitter Development (1891–1920)&quot;. EarlyRadioHistory.us.
* Alternators at Integrated Publishing (TPub.com)
* Wooden Low-RPM Alternator, ForceField, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA
* Understanding 3 phase alternators at WindStuffNow
* Alternator, Arc and Spark. The first Wireless Transmitters (G0UTY homepage)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58430" start="3" end="13" title="Alternator" label="alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q58430" start="18" end="39" title="Alternator" label="synchronous generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="47" end="67" title="Generator (device)" label="electrical generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q184550" start="82" end="99" title="mechanical energy" label="mechanical energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206799" start="103" end="120" title="electrical energy" label="electrical energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="136" end="155" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="225" end="239" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q557042" start="258" end="266" title="Armature (electrical engineering)" label="armature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826468" start="284" end="301" title="linear alternator" label="linear alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="385" end="387" title="alternating current" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="388" end="408" title="electrical generator" label="electrical generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="504" end="514" title="Car" label="automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="581" end="597" title="magnet" label="permanent magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="606" end="620" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307177" start="633" end="640" title="magneto" label="magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="657" end="670" title="power station" label="power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q189859" start="682" end="695" title="steam turbine" label="steam turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q471846" start="745" end="756" title="three-phase" label="three-phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="772" end="784" title="power plants" label="power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="859" end="878" title="electric power grid" label="electric power grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q988780" start="986" end="1024" title="electromagnetic induction" label="magnetic induction of electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="1169" end="1183" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q840916" start="1206" end="1216" title="commutator (electric)" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="1289" end="1304" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q976658" start="1309" end="1324" title="Hippolyte Pixii" label="Hippolyte Pixii"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="1537" end="1548" title="Lord Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348214" start="1553" end="1571" title="Sebastian Ziani de Ferranti" label="Sebastian Ferranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="1648" end="1650" title="hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q841282" start="1775" end="1783" title="Arc lamp" label="Arc lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676882" start="1881" end="1901" title="Yablochkov candle" label="Yablochkov arc lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q369524" start="2255" end="2265" title="Ganz Works" label="Ganz Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="2414" end="2425" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q391639" start="2554" end="2563" title="Polyphase system" label="polyphase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494346" start="2881" end="2904" title="Alexanderson alternator" label="Alexanderson alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082861" start="2923" end="2931" title="longwave" label="longwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="2932" end="2949" title="radio transmitter" label="radio transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="2999" end="3018" title="wireless telegraphy" label="wireless telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185329" start="3163" end="3182" title="electromotive force" label="electromotive force"/>
<link wikidata="Q181465" start="3196" end="3214" title="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law of induction" label="Faraday&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q193466" start="3346" end="3351" title="Rotor (electric)" label="rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190312" start="3409" end="3415" title="stator" label="stator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256476" start="3591" end="3614" title="rotating magnetic field" label="rotating magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="3626" end="3636" title="alternating current" label="AC voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446978" start="4455" end="4468" title="field current" label="field current"/>
<link wikidata="Q851210" start="4661" end="4678" title="voltage regulator" label="voltage regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="4894" end="4907" title="power station" label="power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q111954952" start="4952" end="4966" title="reactive power" label="reactive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438148" start="5039" end="5045" title="fault (power engineering)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q471846" start="5160" end="5171" title="three phase" label="three phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="5595" end="5617" title="revolutions per minute" label="revolutions per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="5647" end="5666" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="5884" end="5893" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="6350" end="6366" title="permanent magnet" label="permanent magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446978" start="6427" end="6437" title="field coil" label="field coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307177" start="6507" end="6515" title="Magneto (generator)" label="magnetos"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="6565" end="6578" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q840916" start="6839" end="6849" title="Commutator (electric)" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="6957" end="6971" title="direct current" label="direct-current"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="7481" end="7500" title="alternating current" label="alternating-current"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="8539" end="8556" title="rectifier" label="rectified voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146554" start="9230" end="9246" title="bridge rectifier" label="bridge rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q557042" start="10236" end="10244" title="Armature (electrical engineering)" label="armature"/>
<link wikidata="Q624619" start="10656" end="10665" title="slip ring" label="slip ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="11815" end="11841" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="11842" end="11852" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q902054" start="11868" end="11875" title="Automotive battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q719861" start="11977" end="11983" title="dynamo" label="dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q840916" start="12000" end="12010" title="commutator (electric)" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="12049" end="12062" title="diode" label="silicon-diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="12163" end="12189" title="diesel-electric locomotive" label="diesel-electric locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567915" start="12195" end="12224" title="diesel electric multiple unit" label="diesel electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304552" start="12231" end="12242" title="prime mover (locomotive)" label="prime mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392476" start="12298" end="12312" title="traction motor" label="traction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689297" start="12797" end="12811" title="head-end power" label="head-end power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689297" start="12831" end="12853" title="electric train heating" label="electric train heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921139" start="13198" end="13213" title="explosion proof" label="explosion proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578598" start="13665" end="13683" title="split-charge diode" label="split-charge diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q810936" start="13685" end="13701" title="battery isolator" label="battery isolator"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="14418" end="14428" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494346" start="14491" end="14514" title="Alexanderson alternator" label="Alexanderson alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q366843" start="14851" end="14864" title="Bottle dynamo" label="Bottle dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q719861" start="14867" end="14873" title="Dynamo" label="Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="14876" end="14894" title="Electric generator" label="Electric generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254365" start="14897" end="14913" title="Engine-generator" label="Engine-generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840401" start="14916" end="14941" title="Flux switching alternator" label="Flux switching alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464868" start="14944" end="14981" title="Folsom Powerhouse State Historic Park" label="Folsom Powerhouse State Historic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363068" start="14984" end="14994" title="Hub dynamo" label="Hub dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q752750" start="14997" end="15016" title="Induction generator" label="Induction generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q252142" start="15019" end="15039" title="Jedlik&amp;#x27;s dynamo" label="Jedlik&amp;#x27;s dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826468" start="15042" end="15059" title="Linear alternator" label="Linear alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307177" start="15062" end="15069" title="Magneto" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226734" start="15072" end="15086" title="Polyphase coil" label="Polyphase coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q58430" start="15089" end="15118" title="Revolving armature alternator" label="Revolving armature alternator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17162682" start="15121" end="15143" title="Single-phase generator" label="Single-phase generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456921" start="15146" end="15160" title="Synchronverter" label="Synchronverter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223356" wikidata="Q324963" url="?curid=223356" title="Power inverter">
<text>A power inverter, inverter, or invertor is a power electronic device or circuitry that changes direct current (DC) to alternating current (AC). The resulting AC frequency obtained depends on the particular device employed. Inverters do the opposite of rectifiers which were originally large electromechanical devices converting AC to DC.
The input voltage, output voltage and frequency, and overall power handling depend on the design of the specific device or circuitry. The inverter does not produce any power; the power is provided by the DC source.

A power inverter can be entirely electronic or maybe a combination of mechanical effects (such as a rotary apparatus) and electronic circuitry.
Static inverters do not use moving parts in the conversion process.

Power inverters are primarily used in electrical power applications where high currents and voltages are present; circuits that perform the same function for electronic signals, which usually have very low currents and voltages, are called oscillators.

==Input and output==

===Input voltage===

A typical power inverter device or circuit requires a stable DC power source capable of supplying enough current for the intended power demands of the system. The input voltage depends on the design and purpose of the inverter. Examples include:
* 12 V DC, for smaller consumer and commercial inverters that typically run from a rechargeable 12 V lead acid battery or automotive electrical outlet.
* 24, 36, and 48 V DC, which are common standards for home energy systems.
* 200 to 400 V DC, when power is from photovoltaic solar panels. 
* 300 to 450 V DC, when power is from electric vehicle battery packs in vehicle-to-grid systems.
* Hundreds of thousands of volts, where the inverter is part of a high-voltage direct current power transmission system.

===Output waveform===

An inverter may produce a square wave, sine wave, modified sine wave, pulsed sine wave, or near-sine pulse-width modulated wave (PWM) depending on circuit design. Common types of inverters produce square waves or quasi-square waves. One measure of the purity of a sine wave is the total harmonic distortion (THD). Technical standards for commercial power distribution grids require less than 3% THD in the wave shape at the customer&#x27;s point of connection. IEEE Standard 519 recommends less than 5% THD for systems connecting to a power grid.

There are two basic designs for producing household plug-in voltage from a lower-voltage DC source, the first of which uses a switching boost converter to produce a higher-voltage DC and then converts to AC. The second method converts DC to AC at battery level and uses a line-frequency transformer to create the output voltage.

====Square wave====
A 50% duty cycle square wave is one of the simplest waveforms an inverter design can produce, but adds ~48.3% THD to its fundamental sine wave. Thus, a square wave output can produce undesired &quot;humming&quot; noises when connected to audio equipment and is better suited to low-sensitivity applications such as lighting and heating.

====Sine wave====
A power inverter device that produces a multiple step sinusoidal AC waveform is referred to as a &quot;sine wave inverter&quot;. To more clearly distinguish the inverters with outputs of much less distortion than the &quot;modified sine wave&quot; (three-step) inverter designs, the manufacturers often use the phrase &quot;pure sine wave inverter&quot;. Almost all consumer grade inverters that are sold as a &quot;pure sine wave inverter&quot; do not produce a smooth sine wave output at all, just a less choppy output than the square wave (two-step) and modified sine wave (three-step) inverters. However, this is not critical for most electronics as they deal with the output quite well.

Where power inverter devices substitute for standard line power, a sine wave output is desirable because many electrical products are engineered to work best with a sine wave AC power source. The standard electric utility provides a sine wave, typically with minor imperfections but sometimes with significant distortion.
Sine wave inverters with more than three steps in the wave output are more complex and have significantly higher cost than a modified sine wave, with only three steps, or square wave (one step) types of the same power handling. Switched-mode power supply (SMPS) devices, such as personal computers or DVD players, function on modified sine wave power. AC motors directly operated on non-sinusoidal power may produce extra heat, may have different speed-torque characteristics, or may produce more audible noise than when running on sinusoidal power.

====Modified sine wave====

The modified sine wave is the sum of two square waves, one of which is delayed one-quarter of the period with respect to the other. The result is a repeated voltage step sequence of zero, peak positive, zero, peak negative, and again zero. The resultant voltage waveform better approximates the shape of a sinusoidal voltage waveform than a single square wave. Most inexpensive consumer power inverters produce a modified sine wave rather than a pure sine wave.

If the waveform is chosen to have its peak voltage values for half of the cycle time, the peak voltage to RMS voltage ratio is the same as for a sine wave. The DC bus voltage may be actively regulated, or the &quot;on&quot; and &quot;off&quot; times can be modified to maintain the same RMS value output up to the DC bus voltage to compensate for DC bus voltage variations. By changing the pulse width, the harmonic spectrum can be changed. The lowest THD for a three-step modified sine wave is 30% when the pulses are at 130 degrees width of each electrical cycle. This is slightly lower than for a square wave.

The ratio of on to off time can be adjusted to vary the RMS voltage while maintaining a constant frequency with a technique called pulse-width modulation (PWM). The generated gate pulses are given to each switch in accordance with the developed pattern to obtain the desired output. The harmonic spectrum in the output depends on the width of the pulses and the modulation frequency. It can be shown that the minimum distortion of a three-level waveform is reached when the pulses extend over 130 degrees of the waveform, but the resulting voltage will still have about 30% THD, higher than commercial standards for grid-connected power sources. When operating induction motors, voltage harmonics are usually not of concern; however, harmonic distortion in the current waveform introduces additional heating and can produce pulsating torques.

Numerous items of electric equipment will operate quite well on modified sine wave power inverter devices, especially loads that are resistive in nature such as traditional incandescent light bulbs. Items with a switched-mode power supply operate almost entirely without problems, but if the item has a mains transformer, this can overheat depending on how marginally it is rated.

However, the load may operate less efficiently owing to the harmonics associated with a modified sine wave and produce a humming noise during operation. This also affects the efficiency of the system as a whole, since the manufacturer&#x27;s nominal conversion efficiency does not account for harmonics. Therefore, pure sine wave inverters may provide significantly higher efficiency than modified sine wave inverters.

Most AC motors will run on MSW inverters with an efficiency reduction of about 20% owing to the harmonic content. However, they may be quite noisy. A series LC filter tuned to the fundamental frequency may help.

A common modified sine wave inverter topology found in consumer power inverters is as follows:
An onboard microcontroller rapidly switches on and off power MOSFETs at high frequency like ~50 kHz. The MOSFETs directly pull from a low voltage DC source (such as a battery). This signal then goes through step-up transformers (generally many smaller transformers are placed in parallel to reduce the overall size of the inverter) to produce a higher voltage signal. The output of the step-up transformers then gets filtered by capacitors to produce a high voltage DC supply. Finally, this DC supply is pulsed with additional power MOSFETs by the microcontroller to produce the final modified sine wave signal.

More complex inverters use more than two voltages to form a multiple-stepped approximation to a sine wave. These can further reduce voltage and current harmonics and THD compared to an inverter using only alternating positive and negative pulses; but such inverters require additional switching components, increasing cost.

====Near sine wave PWM====
Some inverters use PWM to create a waveform that can be low pass filtered to re-create the sine wave. These only require one DC supply, in the manner of the MSN designs, but the switching takes place at a far faster rate, typically many kHz, so that the varying width of the pulses can be smoothed to create the sine wave. If a microprocessor is used to generate the switching timing, the harmonic content and efficiency can be closely controlled.

===Output frequency===
The AC output frequency of a power inverter device is usually the same as standard power line frequency, 50 or 60 hertz. The exception is in designs for motor driving, where a variable frequency results in a variable speed control.

Also, if the output of the device or circuit is to be further conditioned (for example stepped up) then the frequency may be much higher for good transformer efficiency.

===Output voltage===

The AC output voltage of a power inverter is often regulated to be the same as the grid line voltage, typically 120 or 240 VAC at the distribution level, even when there are changes in the load that the inverter is driving. This allows the inverter to power numerous devices designed for standard line power.

Some inverters also allow selectable or continuously variable output voltages.

===Output power===
A power inverter will often have an overall power rating expressed in watts or kilowatts. This describes the power that will be available to the device the inverter is driving and, indirectly, the power that will be needed from the DC source. Smaller popular consumer and commercial devices designed to mimic line power typically range from 150 to 3000 watts.

Not all inverter applications are solely or primarily concerned with power delivery; in some cases the frequency and or waveform properties are used by the follow-on circuit or device.

==Batteries==

The runtime of an inverter powered by batteries is dependent on the battery power and the amount of power being drawn from the inverter at a given time. As the amount of equipment using the inverter increases, the runtime will decrease. In order to prolong the runtime of an inverter, additional batteries can be added to the inverter.

Formula to calculate inverter battery capacity:&quot;Battery Capacity (Ah) = Total Load (In Watts) × Usage Time (in hours) / Input Voltage (V)&quot;When attempting to add more batteries to an inverter, there are two basic options for installation:
;Series configuration:If the goal is to increase the overall input voltage to the inverter, one can daisy chain batteries in a series configuration. In a series configuration, if a single battery dies, the other batteries will not be able to power the load.
;Parallel configuration: If the goal is to increase capacity and prolong the runtime of the inverter, batteries can be connected in parallel. This increases the overall ampere hour (Ah) rating of the battery set. If a single battery is discharged though, the other batteries will then discharge through it. This can lead to rapid discharge of the entire pack, or even an overcurrent and possible fire. To avoid this, large paralleled batteries may be connected via diodes or intelligent monitoring with automatic switching to isolate an under-voltage battery from the others.

==Applications==

===DC power source usage===
An inverter converts the DC electricity from sources such as batteries or fuel cells to AC electricity. The electricity can be at any required voltage; in particular it can operate AC equipment designed for mains operation, or rectified to produce DC at any desired voltage.

===Uninterruptible power supplies===
An uninterruptible power supply (UPS) uses batteries and an inverter to supply AC power when mains power is not available. When mains power is restored, a rectifier supplies DC power to recharge the batteries.

===Electric motor speed control===
Inverter circuits designed to produce a variable output voltage range are often used within motor speed controllers. The DC power for the inverter section can be derived from a normal AC wall outlet or some other source. Control and feedback circuitry is used to adjust the final output of the inverter section which will ultimately determine the speed of the motor operating under its mechanical load. Motor speed control needs are numerous and include things like: industrial motor driven equipment, electric vehicles, rail transport systems, and power tools.
(See related: variable-frequency drive)
Switching states are developed for positive, negative, and zero voltages as per the patterns given in the switching Table 1. The generated gate pulses are given to each switch in accordance with the developed pattern and thus the output is obtained.

====In refrigeration compressors====
An inverter can be used to control the speed of the compressor motor to drive variable refrigerant flow in a refrigeration or air conditioning system to regulate system performance. Such installations are known as inverter compressors. Traditional methods of refrigeration regulation use single-speed compressors switched on and off periodically; inverter-equipped systems have a variable-frequency drive that controls the speed of the motor and thus the compressor and cooling output. The variable-frequency AC from the inverter drives a brushless or induction motor, the speed of which is proportional to the frequency of the AC it is fed, so the compressor can be run at variable speeds—eliminating compressor stop-start cycles increases efficiency. A microcontroller typically monitors the temperature in the space to be cooled, and adjusts the speed of the compressor to maintain the desired temperature. The additional electronics and system hardware add cost to the equipment, but can result in substantial savings in operating costs. The first inverter air conditioners were released by Toshiba in 1981, in Japan.

===Power grid===
Grid-tied inverters are designed to feed into the electric power distribution system. They transfer synchronously with the line and have as little harmonic content as possible. They also need a means of detecting the presence of utility power for safety reasons, so as not to continue to dangerously feed power to the grid during a power outage.

Synchronverters are inverters that are designed to simulate a rotating generator, and can be used to help stabilize grids. They can be designed to react faster than normal generators to changes in grid frequency, and can give conventional generators a chance to respond to very sudden changes in demand or production.

Large inverters, rated at several hundred megawatts, are used to deliver power from high-voltage direct current transmission systems to alternating current distribution systems.

===Solar===

A solar inverter is a balance of system (BOS) component of a photovoltaic system and can be used for both grid-connected and off-grid (standalone) systems. Solar inverters have special functions adapted for use with photovoltaic arrays, including maximum power point tracking and anti-islanding protection.

Solar micro-inverters differ from conventional inverters, as an individual micro-inverter is attached to each solar panel. This can improve the overall efficiency of the system. The output from several micro-inverters is then combined and often fed to the electrical grid.

In other applications, a conventional inverter can be combined with a battery bank maintained by a solar charge controller. This combination of components is often referred to as a solar generator.

Solar inverters are also used in spacecraft photovoltaic systems.

===Induction heating===
Inverters convert low frequency main AC power to higher frequency for use in induction heating. To do this, AC power is first rectified to provide DC power. The inverter then changes the DC power to high frequency AC power. Due to the reduction in the number of DC sources employed, the structure becomes more reliable and the output voltage has higher resolution due to an increase in the number of steps so that the reference sinusoidal voltage can be better achieved. This configuration has recently become very popular in AC power supply and adjustable speed drive applications. This new inverter can avoid extra clamping diodes or voltage balancing capacitors.

There are three kinds of level shifted modulation techniques, namely:
* Phase opposition disposition (POD)
* Alternative phase opposition disposition (APOD)
* Phase disposition (PD)

===HVDC power transmission===
With HVDC power transmission, AC power is rectified and high voltage DC power is transmitted to another location. At the receiving location, an inverter in a HVDC converter station converts the power back into AC. The inverter must be synchronized with grid frequency and phase and minimize harmonic generation.

===Electroshock weapons===
Electroshock weapons and tasers have a DC/AC inverter to generate several tens of thousands of V AC out of a small 9 V DC battery. First the 9 V DC is converted to 400–2000 V AC with a compact high frequency transformer, which is then rectified and temporarily stored in a high voltage capacitor until a pre-set threshold voltage is reached. When the threshold (set by way of an airgap or TRIAC) is reached, the capacitor dumps its entire load into a pulse transformer which then steps it up to its final output voltage of 20–60 kV. A variant of the principle is also used in electronic flash and bug zappers, though they rely on a capacitor-based voltage multiplier to achieve their high voltage.

===Miscellaneous===
Typical applications for power inverters include:
* Portable consumer devices that allow the user to connect a battery, or set of batteries, to the device to produce AC power to run various electrical items such as lights, televisions, kitchen appliances, and power tools.
* Use in power generation systems such as electric utility companies or solar generating systems to convert DC power to AC power.
* Use within any larger electronic system where an engineering need exists for deriving an AC source from a DC source. For example, a DC-powered electronic device may contain a small inverter to power an electroluminescent or fluorescent backlight, which requires high-frequency AC, 
* Utility frequency conversion - if a user in (say) a 50 Hz country needs a 60 Hz supply to power equipment that is frequency-specific, such as a small motor or some electronics, it is possible to convert the frequency by running an inverter with a 60 Hz output from a DC source such as a 12V power supply running from the 50 Hz mains.

==Circuit description==

===Basic design===
In one simple inverter circuit, DC power is connected to a transformer through the center tap of the primary winding. A relay switch is rapidly switched back and forth to allow current to flow back to the DC source following two alternate paths through one end of the primary winding and then the other. The alternation of the direction of current in the primary winding of the transformer produces alternating current (AC) in the secondary circuit.

The electromechanical version of the switching device includes two stationary contacts and a spring supported moving contact. The spring holds the movable contact against one of the stationary contacts and an electromagnet pulls the movable contact to the opposite stationary contact. The current in the electromagnet is interrupted by the action of the switch so that the switch continually switches rapidly back and forth. This type of electromechanical inverter switch, called a vibrator or buzzer, was once used in vacuum tube automobile radios. A similar mechanism has been used in door bells, buzzers, and tattoo machines.

As they became available with adequate power ratings, transistors, and various other types of semiconductor switches have been incorporated into inverter circuit designs. Certain ratings, especially for large systems (many kilowatts) use thyristors (SCR). SCRs provide large power handling capability in a semiconductor device, and can readily be controlled over a variable firing range.

The switch in the simple inverter described above, when not coupled to an output transformer, produces a square voltage waveform due to its simple off and on nature as opposed to the sinusoidal waveform that is the usual waveform of an AC power supply. Using Fourier analysis, periodic waveforms are represented as the sum of an infinite series of sine waves. The sine wave that has the same frequency as the original waveform is called the fundamental component. The other sine waves, called &quot;harmonics&quot;, that are included in the series have frequencies that are integral multiples of the fundamental frequency.

Fourier analysis can be used to calculate the total harmonic distortion (THD). The total harmonic distortion (THD) is the square root of the sum of the squares of the harmonic voltages divided by the fundamental voltage:

: formula_1

===Advanced designs===

There are many different power circuit topologies and control strategies used in inverter designs. Different design approaches address various issues that may be more or less important depending on the way that the inverter is intended to be used. For example, an electric motor in a car that is moving can turn into a source of energy and can, with the right inverter topology (full H-bridge) charge the car battery when decelerating or braking. In a similar manner, the right topology (full H-bridge) can invert the roles of &quot;source&quot; and &quot;load&quot;, that is, if for example the voltage is higher on the AC &quot;load&quot; side (by adding a solar inverter, similar to a gen-set, but solid state), energy can flow back into the DC &quot;source&quot; or battery.

Based on the basic H-bridge topology, there are two different fundamental control strategies called basic frequency-variable bridge converter and PWM control. Here, in the left image of H-bridge circuit, the top left switch is named as &quot;S1&quot;, and others are named as &quot;S2, S3, S4&quot; in counterclockwise order.

For the basic frequency-variable bridge converter, the switches can be operated at the same frequency as the AC in the electric grid. However, it is the rate at which the switches open and close that determines the AC frequency. When S1 and S4 are on and the other two are off, the load is provided with positive voltage and vice versa. We could control the on-off states of the switches to adjust the AC magnitude and phase. We could also control the switches to eliminate certain harmonics. This includes controlling the switches to create notches, or 0-state regions, in the output waveform or adding the outputs of two or more converters in parallel that are phase shifted in respect to one another.

Another method that can be used is PWM. Unlike the basic frequency-variable bridge converter, in the PWM controlling strategy, only two switches S3, S4 can operate at the frequency of the AC side or at any low frequency. The other two would switch much faster (typically 100 kHz) to create square voltages of the same magnitude but for different time duration, which behaves like a voltage with changing magnitude in a larger time-scale.

These two strategies create different harmonics. For the first one, through Fourier Analysis, the magnitude of harmonics would be 4/(pi*k) (k is the order of harmonics). So the majority of the harmonics energy is concentrated in the lower order harmonics. Meanwhile, for the PWM strategy, the energy of the harmonics lie in higher-frequencies because of the fast switching. Their different characteristics of harmonics leads to different THD and harmonics elimination requirements. Similar to &quot;THD&quot;, the conception &quot;waveform quality&quot; represents the level of distortion caused by harmonics. The waveform quality of AC produced directly by H-bridge mentioned above would be not as good as we want.

The issue of waveform quality can be addressed in many ways. Capacitors and inductors can be used to filter the waveform. If the design includes a transformer, filtering can be applied to the primary or the secondary side of the transformer or to both sides. Low-pass filters are applied to allow the fundamental component of the waveform to pass to the output while limiting the passage of the harmonic components. If the inverter is designed to provide power at a fixed frequency, a resonant filter can be used. For an adjustable frequency inverter, the filter must be tuned to a frequency that is above the maximum fundamental frequency.

Since most loads contain inductance, feedback rectifiers or antiparallel diodes are often connected across each semiconductor switch to provide a path for the peak inductive load current when the switch is turned off. The antiparallel diodes are somewhat similar to the &quot;freewheeling diodes&quot; used in AC/DC converter circuits.


Fourier analysis reveals that a waveform, like a square wave, that is anti-symmetrical about the 180 degree point contains only odd harmonics, the 3rd, 5th, 7th, etc. Waveforms that have steps of certain widths and heights can attenuate certain lower harmonics at the expense of amplifying higher harmonics. For example, by inserting a zero-voltage step between the positive and negative sections of the square-wave, all of the harmonics that are divisible by three (3rd, 9th, etc.) can be eliminated. That leaves only the 5th, 7th, 11th, 13th, etc. The required width of the steps is one third of the period for each of the positive and negative steps and one sixth of the period for each of the zero-voltage steps.

Changing the square wave as described above is an example of pulse-width modulation. Modulating, or regulating the width of a square-wave pulse is often used as a method of regulating or adjusting an inverter&#x27;s output voltage. When voltage control is not required, a fixed pulse width can be selected to reduce or eliminate selected harmonics. Harmonic elimination techniques are generally applied to the lowest harmonics because filtering is much more practical at high frequencies, where the filter components can be much smaller and less expensive. &quot;Multiple pulse-width&quot; or &quot;carrier based&quot; PWM control schemes produce waveforms that are composed of many narrow pulses. The frequency represented by the number of narrow pulses per second is called the &quot;switching frequency&quot; or &quot;carrier frequency&quot;. These control schemes are often used in variable-frequency motor control inverters because they allow a wide range of output voltage and frequency adjustment while also improving the quality of the waveform.

Multilevel inverters provide another approach to harmonic cancellation. Multilevel inverters provide an output waveform that exhibits multiple steps at several voltage levels. For example, it is possible to produce a more sinusoidal wave by having split-rail direct current inputs at two voltages, or positive and negative inputs with a central ground. By connecting the inverter output terminals in sequence between the positive rail and ground, the positive rail and the negative rail, the ground rail and the negative rail, then both to the ground rail, a stepped waveform is generated at the inverter output. This is an example of a three-level inverter: the two voltages and ground.

===More on achieving a sine wave===
Resonant inverters produce sine waves with LC circuits to remove the harmonics from a simple square wave. Typically there are several series- and parallel-resonant LC circuits, each tuned to a different harmonic of the power line frequency. This simplifies the electronics, but the inductors and capacitors tend to be large and heavy. Its high efficiency makes this approach popular in large uninterruptible power supplies in data centers that run the inverter continuously in an &quot;online&quot; mode to avoid any switchover transient when power is lost.
(See related: Resonant inverter)

A closely related approach uses a ferroresonant transformer, also known as a constant-voltage transformer, to remove harmonics and to store enough energy to sustain the load for a few AC cycles. This property makes them useful in standby power supplies to eliminate the switchover transient that otherwise occurs during a power failure while the normally idle inverter starts and the mechanical relays are switching to its output.

====Enhanced quantization====
A proposal suggested in &quot;Power Electronics&quot; magazine utilizes two voltages as an improvement over the common commercialized technology, which can only apply DC bus voltage in either direction or turn it off. The proposal adds intermediate voltages to the common design. Each cycle sees the following sequence of delivered voltages: v1, v2, v1, 0, −v1, −v2, −v1, 0.

===Three-phase inverters===
Three-phase inverters are used for variable-frequency drive applications and for high power applications such as HVDC power transmission. A basic three-phase inverter consists of three single-phase inverter switches each connected to one of the three load terminals. For the most basic control scheme, the operation of the three switches is coordinated so that one switch operates at each 60 degree point of the fundamental output waveform. This creates a line-to-line output waveform that has six steps. The six-step waveform has a zero-voltage step between the positive and negative sections of the square-wave such that the harmonics that are multiples of three are eliminated as described above. When carrier-based PWM techniques are applied to six-step waveforms, the basic overall shape, or &quot;envelope&quot;, of the waveform is retained so that the 3rd harmonic and its multiples are cancelled.


To construct inverters with higher power ratings, two six-step three-phase inverters can be connected in parallel for a higher current rating or in series for a higher voltage rating. In either case, the output waveforms are phase shifted to obtain a 12-step waveform. If additional inverters are combined, an 18-step inverter is obtained with three inverters etc. Although inverters are usually combined for the purpose of achieving increased voltage or current ratings, the quality of the waveform is improved as well.

==Size==
Compared to other household electric devices, inverters are large in size and volume. In 2014, Google together with IEEE started an open competition named Little Box Challenge, with a prize money of $1,000,000, to build a (much) smaller power inverter.

==History==

===Early inverters===
From the late nineteenth century through the middle of the twentieth century, DC-to-AC power conversion was accomplished using rotary converters or motor-generator sets (M-G sets). In the early twentieth century, vacuum tubes and gas-filled tubes began to be used as switches in inverter circuits. The most widely used type of tube was the thyratron.

The origins of electromechanical inverters explain the source of the term &quot;inverter&quot;. Early AC-to-DC converters used an induction or synchronous AC motor direct-connected to a generator (dynamo) so that the generator&#x27;s commutator reversed its connections at exactly the right moments to produce DC. A later development is the synchronous converter, in which the motor and generator windings are combined into one armature, with slip rings at one end and a commutator at the other and only one field frame. The result with either is AC-in, DC-out. With an M-G set, the DC can be considered to be separately generated from the AC; with a synchronous converter, in a certain sense it can be considered to be &quot;mechanically rectified AC&quot;. Given the right auxiliary and control equipment, an M-G set or rotary converter can be &quot;run backwards&quot;, converting DC to AC. Hence an inverter is an inverted converter.

===Controlled rectifier inverters===
Since early transistors were not available with sufficient voltage and current ratings for most inverter applications, it was the 1957 introduction of the thyristor or silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR) that initiated the transition to solid-state inverter circuits.

The &quot;commutation&quot; requirements of SCRs are a key consideration in SCR circuit designs. SCRs do not turn off or &quot;commutate&quot; automatically when the gate control signal is shut off. They only turn off when the forward current is reduced to below the minimum holding current, which varies with each kind of SCR, through some external process. For SCRs connected to an AC power source, commutation occurs naturally every time the polarity of the source voltage reverses. SCRs connected to a DC power source usually require a means of forced commutation that forces the current to zero when commutation is required. The least complicated SCR circuits employ natural commutation rather than forced commutation. With the addition of forced commutation circuits, SCRs have been used in the types of inverter circuits described above.

In applications where inverters transfer power from a DC power source to an AC power source, it is possible to use AC-to-DC controlled rectifier circuits operating in the inversion mode. In the inversion mode, a controlled rectifier circuit operates as a line commutated inverter. This type of operation can be used in HVDC power transmission systems and in regenerative braking operation of motor control systems.

Another type of SCR inverter circuit is the current source input (CSI) inverter. A CSI inverter is the dual of a six-step voltage source inverter. With a current-source inverter, the DC power supply is configured as a current source rather than a voltage source. The inverter SCRs are switched in a six-step sequence to direct the current to a three-phase AC load as a stepped current waveform. CSI inverter commutation methods include load commutation and parallel capacitor commutation. With both methods, the input current regulation assists the commutation. With load commutation, the load is a synchronous motor operated at a leading power factor.

As they have become available in higher voltage and current ratings, semiconductors such as transistors or IGBTs that can be turned off by means of control signals have become the preferred switching components for use in inverter circuits.

===Rectifier and inverter pulse numbers===
Rectifier circuits are often classified by the number of current pulses that flow to the DC side of the rectifier per cycle of AC input voltage. A single-phase half-wave rectifier is a one-pulse circuit and a single-phase full-wave rectifier is a two-pulse circuit. A three-phase half-wave rectifier is a three-pulse circuit and a three-phase full-wave rectifier is a six-pulse circuit.

With three-phase rectifiers, two or more rectifiers are sometimes connected in series or parallel to obtain higher voltage or current ratings. The rectifier inputs are supplied from special transformers that provide phase shifted outputs. This has the effect of phase multiplication. Six phases are obtained from two transformers, twelve phases from three transformers, and so on. The associated rectifier circuits are 12-pulse rectifiers, 18-pulse rectifiers, and so on...

When controlled rectifier circuits are operated in the inversion mode, they would be classified by pulse number also. Rectifier circuits that have a higher pulse number have reduced harmonic content in the AC input current and reduced ripple in the DC output voltage. In the inversion mode, circuits that have a higher pulse number have lower harmonic content in the AC output voltage waveform.

===Other notes===
The large switching devices for power transmission applications installed until 1970 predominantly used mercury-arc valves.
Modern inverters are usually solid state (static inverters). A modern design method features components arranged in an Hbridge configuration. 
This design is also quite popular with smaller-scale consumer devices.

==See also==
* Distributed inverter architecture
* Electric power conversion
* Electronic oscillator
* Power electronics#DC/AC converters (inverters)
* Push–pull converter
* Solid-state transformer
* Space vector modulation
* Switched-mode power supply (SMPS)
* Synchronverter
* Uninterruptible power supply
* Variable-frequency drive
* Z-source inverter

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Ulrich Nicolai, Tobias Reimann, Jürgen Petzoldt, Josef Lutz: &quot;Application Handbook: IGBT and MOSFET Power Modules&quot;, 1. Edition, ISLE Verlag, 1998, PDF-Version
* &quot;Application Manual: Power Semiconductors&quot;, Arendt Wintrich, Ulrich Nicolai, Werner Tursky, Tobias Reimann. SEMIKRON International GmbH. 2011. .

==External links==

* Three-level PWM Floating H-bridge Sinewave Power Inverter for High-voltage and High-efficiency Applications, Vratislav MICHAL, September 2015 IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 1(6):885–8993 DOI:10.1109/TPEL.2015.2477246 (example of a three-level PWM single-phase full-bridge power inverter design)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324963" start="2" end="16" title="Power inverter" label="power inverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q324963" start="18" end="26" title="Power inverter" label="inverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q324963" start="31" end="39" title="Power inverter" label="invertor"/>
<link wikidata="Q593143" start="45" end="61" title="power electronics" label="power electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="95" end="109" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="118" end="137" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="252" end="261" title="rectifier" label="rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="348" end="355" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="399" end="404" title="electrical power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q324963" start="698" end="714" title="Power inverter" label="Static inverters"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="1007" end="1018" title="electronic oscillator" label="oscillators"/>
<link wikidata="Q370607" start="1766" end="1793" title="high-voltage direct current" label="high-voltage direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136640" start="1871" end="1882" title="square wave" label="square wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="1884" end="1893" title="sine wave" label="sine wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q585184" start="1946" end="1967" title="pulse-width modulation" label="pulse-width modulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q162641" start="2126" end="2151" title="total harmonic distortion" label="total harmonic distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q760134" start="2529" end="2544" title="boost converter" label="boost converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361387" start="2665" end="2679" title="utility frequency" label="line-frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="2680" end="2691" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q557120" start="2749" end="2759" title="duty cycle" label="duty cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="2864" end="2875" title="Fundamental frequency" label="fundamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="4342" end="4368" title="Switched-mode power supply" label="Switched-mode power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136640" start="4734" end="4745" title="square wave" label="square wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q223323" start="5262" end="5265" title="root mean square" label="RMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q585184" start="5901" end="5923" title="pulse-width modulation" label="pulse-width modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="6826" end="6852" title="switched-mode power supply" label="switched-mode power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="7785" end="7791" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q585184" start="8708" end="8711" title="pulse-width modulation" label="PWM"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="9275" end="9280" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="10066" end="10070" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157702" start="11243" end="11254" title="daisy chain (electrical engineering)" label="daisy chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55738334" start="11530" end="11541" title="parallel circuit" label="in parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212120" start="11570" end="11581" title="ampere hour" label="ampere hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="12085" end="12094" title="battery (electrical)" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="12098" end="12107" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q207696" start="12340" end="12368" title="uninterruptible power supply" label="uninterruptible power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="12492" end="12501" title="rectifier" label="rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451709" start="13159" end="13183" title="variable-frequency drive" label="variable-frequency drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q178898" start="13525" end="13535" title="gas compressor" label="compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915729" start="13551" end="13576" title="variable refrigerant flow" label="variable refrigerant flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="13582" end="13595" title="refrigeration" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="13599" end="13615" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q13667273" start="13687" end="13706" title="inverter compressor" label="inverter compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451709" start="13853" end="13877" title="variable-frequency drive" label="variable-frequency drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q734949" start="14012" end="14021" title="brushless motor" label="brushless"/>
<link wikidata="Q207450" start="14025" end="14040" title="induction motor" label="induction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="14228" end="14243" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9291636" start="14613" end="14632" title="Grid-tie inverter" label="Grid-tied inverters"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456921" start="14960" end="14974" title="Synchronverter" label="Synchronverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q370607" start="15363" end="15390" title="high-voltage direct current" label="high-voltage direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q129316" start="15473" end="15487" title="solar inverter" label="solar inverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633205" start="15493" end="15510" title="balance of system" label="balance of system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="15532" end="15551" title="photovoltaic system" label="photovoltaic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="15577" end="15591" title="Grid-connected photovoltaic power system" label="grid-connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="15687" end="15699" title="photovoltaic" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052007" start="15718" end="15746" title="maximum power point tracking" label="maximum power point tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308552" start="15756" end="15765" title="islanding" label="islanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="16035" end="16050" title="electrical grid" label="electrical grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556726" start="16285" end="16315" title="solar panels on spacecraft" label="spacecraft photovoltaic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155653" start="16420" end="16437" title="induction heating" label="induction heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q370607" start="17228" end="17232" title="high-voltage direct current" label="HVDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356943" start="17381" end="17403" title="HVDC converter station" label="HVDC converter station"/>
<link wikidata="Q870114" start="17563" end="17582" title="Electroshock weapon" label="Electroshock weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137247" start="17588" end="17593" title="taser" label="taser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834127" start="18014" end="18031" title="pulse transformer" label="pulse transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221836" start="18139" end="18155" title="electronic flash" label="electronic flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326541" start="18160" end="18170" title="bug zapper" label="bug zapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559714" start="18211" end="18229" title="voltage multiplier" label="voltage multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="18393" end="18400" title="battery (electrical)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q215803" start="18889" end="18907" title="electroluminescent" label="electroluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="18911" end="18922" title="Cold-cathode fluorescent lamp" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q574291" start="18923" end="18932" title="backlight" label="backlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361387" start="18971" end="18988" title="Utility frequency" label="Utility frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="19409" end="19420" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="19470" end="19475" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981904" start="19626" end="19633" title="winding" label="winding"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="19749" end="19768" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110501" start="20283" end="20291" title="vibrator (electronic)" label="vibrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="20320" end="20331" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708032" start="20413" end="20427" title="tattoo machine" label="tattoo machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="20485" end="20495" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="20525" end="20538" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180805" start="20669" end="20678" title="thyristor" label="thyristor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165717" start="20940" end="20948" title="waveform" label="waveform"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="21003" end="21013" title="Sine wave" label="sinusoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365258" start="21079" end="21095" title="Fourier analysis" label="Fourier analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="21097" end="21105" title="periodic function" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="21212" end="21221" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q162641" start="21490" end="21515" title="total harmonic distortion" label="total harmonic distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825049" start="21734" end="21752" title="circuit topology (electrical)" label="circuit topologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q959968" start="21757" end="21775" title="control system" label="control strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545300" start="22502" end="22510" title="H-bridge" label="H-bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="24732" end="24741" title="Capacitor" label="Capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325" start="24747" end="24755" title="inductor" label="inductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q327754" start="24772" end="24778" title="electronic filter" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="24818" end="24829" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="24930" end="24945" title="Low-pass filter" label="Low-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="25156" end="25164" title="resonance" label="resonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="25359" end="25368" title="rectifier" label="rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618751" start="25373" end="25385" title="antiparallel (electronics)" label="antiparallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="25386" end="25391" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="25425" end="25438" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q888791" start="25589" end="25608" title="flyback diode" label="freewheeling diodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="27683" end="27697" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501125" start="27769" end="27775" title="ground (electricity)" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q552311" start="28149" end="28157" title="Electrical resonance" label="Resonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q732473" start="28192" end="28202" title="LC circuit" label="LC circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q207696" start="28541" end="28571" title="uninterruptible power supply" label="uninterruptible power supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315747" start="28721" end="28738" title="Resonant inverter" label="Resonant inverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q851210" start="28818" end="28846" title="constant-voltage transformer" label="constant-voltage transformer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28971" end="28993" title="uninterruptible power supply#Offline/standby" label="standby power supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q471846" start="29607" end="29618" title="Three-phase electric power" label="Three-phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451709" start="29642" end="29666" title="variable-frequency drive" label="variable-frequency drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q370607" start="29720" end="29724" title="high-voltage direct current" label="HVDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="31140" end="31146" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="31161" end="31165" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104101" start="31200" end="31220" title="Little Box Challenge" label="Little Box Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301500" start="31421" end="31437" title="electric power conversion" label="power conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370264" start="31461" end="31477" title="rotary converter" label="rotary converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784738" start="31482" end="31497" title="motor-generator" label="motor-generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="31547" end="31558" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159201" start="31564" end="31579" title="gas-filled tube" label="gas-filled tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q176121" start="31674" end="31683" title="thyratron" label="thyratron"/>
<link wikidata="Q180805" start="32817" end="32826" title="thyristor" label="thyristor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629214" start="32830" end="32858" title="silicon-controlled rectifier" label="silicon-controlled rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="32898" end="32909" title="solid state electronics" label="solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q580078" start="34134" end="34154" title="regenerative brake" label="regenerative braking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974048" start="34295" end="34299" title="dual (electronics)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163768" start="34410" end="34424" title="current source" label="current source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161128" start="34439" end="34453" title="voltage source" label="voltage source"/>
<link wikidata="Q176110" start="34953" end="34957" title="IGBT" label="IGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="35278" end="35310" title="half-wave rectification" label="single-phase half-wave rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="35340" end="35372" title="full-wave rectifier" label="single-phase full-wave rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q972168" start="36512" end="36529" title="mercury-arc valve" label="mercury-arc valve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36651" end="36658" title="Hbridge" label="Hbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q129316" start="36762" end="36795" title="Distributed inverter architecture" label="Distributed inverter architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301500" start="36798" end="36823" title="Electric power conversion" label="Electric power conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="36826" end="36847" title="Electronic oscillator" label="Electronic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36850" end="36896" title="Power electronics#DC/AC converters (inverters)" label="Power electronics#DC/AC converters (inverters)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137922" start="36899" end="36918" title="Push–pull converter" label="Push–pull converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633457" start="36921" end="36944" title="Solid-state transformer" label="Solid-state transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603102" start="36947" end="36970" title="Space vector modulation" label="Space vector modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="36973" end="36999" title="Switched-mode power supply" label="Switched-mode power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456921" start="37009" end="37023" title="Synchronverter" label="Synchronverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207696" start="37026" end="37054" title="Uninterruptible power supply" label="Uninterruptible power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451709" start="37057" end="37081" title="Variable-frequency drive" label="Variable-frequency drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390591" start="37084" end="37101" title="Z-source inverter" label="Z-source inverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15761497" start="37634" end="37672" title="IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics" label="IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223361" wikidata="Q3092713" url="?curid=223361" title="Linear regulator">
<text>In electronics, a linear regulator is a voltage regulator used to maintain a steady voltage. The resistance of the regulator varies in accordance with both the input voltage and the load, resulting in a constant voltage output. The regulating circuit varies its resistance, continuously adjusting a voltage divider network to maintain a constant output voltage and continually dissipating the difference between the input and regulated voltages as waste heat. By contrast, a &quot;switching regulator&quot; uses an active device that switches on and off to maintain an average value of output. Because the regulated voltage of a linear regulator must always be lower than input voltage, efficiency is limited and the input voltage must be high enough to always allow the active device to reduce the voltage by some amount.

Linear regulators may place the regulating device in parallel with the load (shunt regulator) or may place the regulating device between the source and the regulated load (a series regulator). Simple linear regulators may only contain as little as a Zener diode and a series resistor; more complicated regulators include separate stages of voltage reference, error amplifier and power pass element. Because a linear voltage regulator is a common element of many devices, single-chip regulators ICs are very common. Linear regulators may also be made up of assemblies of discrete solid-state or vacuum tube components.

Despite their name, linear regulators are non-linear circuits because they contain non-linear components (such as Zener diodes, as shown below in the simple shunt regulator) and because the output voltage is ideally constant (and a circuit with a constant output that does not depend on its input is a non-linear circuit).

==Overview==
The transistor (or other device) is used as one half of a voltage divider to establish the regulated output voltage. The output voltage is compared to a reference voltage to produce a control signal to the transistor which will drive its gate or base. With negative feedback and good choice of compensation, the output voltage is kept reasonably constant. Linear regulators are often inefficient: since the transistor is acting like a resistor, it will waste electrical energy by converting it to heat. In fact, the power loss due to heating in the transistor is the current multiplied by the voltage difference between input and output voltage. The same function can often be performed much more efficiently by a switched-mode power supply, but a linear regulator may be preferred for light loads or where the desired output voltage approaches the source voltage. In these cases, the linear regulator may dissipate less power than a switcher. The linear regulator also has the advantage of not requiring magnetic devices (inductors or transformers) which can be relatively expensive or bulky, being often of simpler design, and cause less electromagnetic interference. Some designs of linear regulators use only transistors, diodes and resistors, which are easier to fabricate into an integrated circuit, further reducing their weight, footprint on a PCB, and price.

All linear regulators require an input voltage at least some minimum amount higher than the desired output voltage. That minimum amount is called the dropout voltage. For example, a common regulator such as the 7805 has an output voltage of 5 V, but can only maintain this if the input voltage remains above about 7 V, before the output voltage begins sagging below the rated output. Its dropout voltage is therefore 7 V − 5 V = 2 V. When the supply voltage is less than about 2 V above the desired output voltage, as is the case in low-voltage microprocessor power supplies, so-called low dropout regulators (LDOs) must be used.

When the output regulated voltage must be higher than the available input voltage, no linear regulator will work (not even a low dropout regulator). In this situation, a boost converter or a charge pump must be used. Most linear regulators will continue to provide some output voltage approximately the dropout voltage below the input voltage for inputs below the nominal output voltage until the input voltage drops significantly.

Linear regulators exist in two basic forms: shunt regulators and series regulators. Most linear regulators have a maximum rated output current. This is generally limited by either power dissipation capability, or by the current carrying capability of the output transistor. 

=== Shunt regulators ===
The shunt regulator works by providing a path from the supply voltage to ground through a variable resistance (the main transistor is in the &quot;bottom half&quot; of the voltage divider). The current through the shunt regulator is diverted away from the load and flows directly to ground, making this form usually less efficient than the series regulator. It is, however, simpler, sometimes consisting of just a voltage-reference diode, and is used in very low-powered circuits where the wasted current is too small to be of concern. This form is very common for voltage reference circuits. A shunt regulator can usually only sink (absorb) current.

=== Series regulators ===
Series regulators are the more common form; they are more efficient than shunt designs. The series regulator works by providing a path from the supply voltage to the load through a variable resistance, usually a transistor (in this role it is usually termed the series pass transistor); it is in the &quot;top half&quot; of the voltage divider - the bottom half being the load. The power dissipated by the regulating device is equal to the power supply output current times the &quot;voltage drop&quot; in the regulating device. For efficiency and reduced stress on the pass transistor, designers try to minimize the voltage drop but not all circuits regulate well once the input (unregulated) voltage comes close to the required output voltage; those that do are termed low dropout regulators, A series regulator can usually only source (supply) current, unlike shunt regulators.

==Simple shunt regulator==

The image shows a simple shunt voltage regulator that operates by way of the Zener diode&#x27;s action of maintaining a constant voltage across itself when the current through it is sufficient to take it into the Zener breakdown region. The resistor &quot;R&quot;1 supplies the Zener current formula_1 as well as the load current &quot;I&quot;R2 (&quot;R&quot;2 is the load). &quot;R&quot;1 can be calculated as formula_2, where formula_3 is the Zener voltage, and &quot;I&quot;R2 is the required load current.

This regulator is used for very simple low-power applications where the currents involved are very small and the load is permanently connected across the Zener diode (such as voltage reference or voltage source circuits). Once &quot;R&quot;1 has been calculated, removing &quot;R&quot;2 will allow the full load current (plus the Zener current) through the diode and may exceed the diode&#x27;s maximum current rating, thereby damaging it. The regulation of this circuit is also not very good because the Zener current (and hence the Zener voltage) will vary depending on formula_4 and inversely depending on the load current. In some designs, the Zener diode may be replaced with another similarly functioning device, especially in an ultra-low-voltage scenario, like (under forward bias) several normal diodes or LEDs in series.

==Simple series regulator==

Adding an emitter follower stage to the simple shunt regulator forms a simple series voltage regulator and substantially improves the regulation of the circuit. Here, the load current IR2 is supplied by the transistor whose base is now connected to the Zener diode. Thus the transistor&#x27;s base current (IB) forms the load current for the Zener diode and is much smaller than the current through &quot;R&quot;2. This regulator is classified as &quot;series&quot; because the regulating element, viz., the transistor, appears in series with the load.
&quot;R&quot;1 sets the Zener current (IZ) and is determined as formula_5 where, VZ is the Zener voltage, IB is the transistor&#x27;s base current, K = 1.2 to 2 (to ensure that &quot;R&quot;1 is low enough for adequate IB) and formula_6 where, IR2 is the required load current and is also the transistor&#x27;s emitter current (assumed to be equal to the collector current) and hFE(min) is the minimum acceptable DC current gain for the transistor.

This circuit has much better regulation than the simple shunt regulator, since the base current of the transistor forms a very light load on the Zener, thereby minimising variation in Zener voltage due to variation in the load. Note that the output voltage will always be about 0.65 V less than the Zener due to the transistor&#x27;s &quot;V&quot;BE drop. Although this circuit has good regulation, it is still sensitive to the load and supply variation. This can be resolved by incorporating negative feedback circuitry into it. This regulator is often used as a &quot;pre-regulator&quot; in more advanced series voltage regulator circuits.

The circuit is readily made adjustable by adding a potentiometer across the Zener, moving the transistor base connection from the top of the Zener to the pot wiper. It may be made step adjustable by switching in different Zeners. Finally, it is occasionally made microadjustable by adding a low value pot in series with the Zener; this allows a little voltage adjustment, but degrades regulation (see also capacitance multiplier).

==Fixed regulators==

Three-terminal linear regulators, used for generating &quot;fixed&quot; voltages, are readily available. They can generate plus or minus 3.3 V, 5 V, 6 V, 9 V, 12 V, or 15 V, with their performance generally peaking around a load of 1.5 Amperes.

The &quot;78xx&quot; series (7805, 7812, etc.) regulate positive voltages while the &quot;79xx&quot; series (7905, 7912, etc.) regulate negative voltages. Often, the last two digits of the device number are the output voltage (e.g., a 7805 is a +5 V regulator, while a 7915 is a −15 V regulator). There are variants on the 78xx series ICs, such as 78L and 78S, some of which can supply up to 2 A.

===Adjusting fixed regulators===
By adding another circuit element to a fixed voltage IC regulator, it is possible to adjust the output voltage. Two example methods are:

# A Zener diode or resistor may be added between the IC&#x27;s ground terminal and ground. Resistors are acceptable where ground current is constant, but are ill-suited to regulators with varying ground current. By switching in different Zener diodes, diodes or resistors, the output voltage can be adjusted in a step-wise fashion.
# A potentiometer can be placed in series with the ground terminal to increase the output voltage variably. However, this method degrades regulation, and is not suitable for regulators with varying ground current.

==Variable regulators==
An adjustable regulator generates a fixed low nominal voltage between its output and its adjust terminal (equivalent to the ground terminal in a fixed regulator). This family of devices includes low power devices like LM723 and medium power devices like LM317 and L200. Some of the variable regulators are available in packages with more than three pins, including dual in-line packages. They offer the capability to adjust the output voltage by using external resistors of specific values.

For output voltages not provided by standard fixed regulators and load currents of less than 7 A, commonly available adjustable three-terminal linear regulators may be used. The LM317 series (+1.25 V) regulates positive voltages while the LM337 series (−1.25 V) regulates negative voltages. The adjustment is performed by constructing a potential divider with its ends between the regulator output and ground, and its centre-tap connected to the &#x27;adjust&#x27; terminal of the regulator. The ratio of resistances determines the output voltage using the same feedback mechanisms described earlier.

==Dual tracking regulators==

Single IC dual tracking adjustable regulators are available for applications such as op-amp circuits needing matched positive and negative DC supplies. Some have selectable current limiting as well. Some regulators require a minimum load.

One example of a single IC dual tracking adjustable regulator is the LM125, which is a precision, dual, tracking, monolithic voltage regulator. It provides separate positive and negative regulated outputs, simplifying dual power supply designs. Operation requires few or no external components, depending on the application. Internal settings provide fixed output voltages at ±15V 

==Protection==
Linear IC voltage regulators may include a variety of protection methods:
* Current limiting such as constant-current limiting or foldback
* Thermal shutdown
* Safe operating area protection

Sometimes external protection is used, such as crowbar protection.

==Using a linear regulator==
Linear regulators can be constructed using discrete components but are usually encountered in integrated circuit forms. The most common linear regulators are three-terminal integrated circuits in the TO-220 package.

Common voltage regulators are the LM78xx-series (for positive voltages) and LM79xx-series (for negative voltages). Robust automotive voltage regulators, such as LM2940 / MIC2940A / AZ2940, can handle reverse battery connections and brief +50/-50V transients too. Some Low-dropout regulator (LDO) alternatives, such as MCP1700 / MCP1711 / TPS7A05 / XC6206, have a very low quiescent current of less than 5 μA (approximately 1,000 times less than the LM78xx series) making them better suited for battery-powered devices.

Common fixed voltages are 1.8 V, 2.5 V, 3.3 V (for low-voltage CMOS logic circuits), 5 V (for transistor-transistor logic circuits) and 12 V (for communications circuits and peripheral devices such as disk drives). 

In fixed voltage regulators the reference pin is tied to ground, whereas in variable regulators the reference pin is connected to the centre point of a fixed or variable voltage divider fed by the regulator&#x27;s output. A variable voltage divider such as a potentiometer allows the user to adjust the regulated voltage.

==See also==

* Brokaw bandgap reference
* List of LM-series integrated circuits
* Low-dropout regulator
* Voltage regulator

== References ==
==External links==
* ECE 327: Procedures for Voltage Regulators Lab — Gives schematics, explanations, and analyses for Zener shunt regulator, series regulator, feedback series regulator, feedback series regulator with current limiting, and feedback series regulator with current foldback. Also discusses the proper use of the LM317 integrated circuit bandgap voltage reference and bypass capacitors.
* ECE 327: Report Strategies for Voltage Regulators Lab — Gives more-detailed quantitative analysis of behavior of several shunt and series regulators in and out of normal operating ranges.
* ECE 327: LM317 Bandgap Voltage Reference Example — Brief explanation of the temperature-independent bandgap reference circuit within the LM317.
* &quot;Zener regulator&quot; at &quot;Hyperphysics&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="3" end="14" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092713" start="18" end="34" title="Linear regulator" label="linear regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q851210" start="40" end="57" title="voltage regulator" label="voltage regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="262" end="272" title="Electrical resistance and conductance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q466758" start="299" end="314" title="voltage divider" label="voltage divider"/>
<link wikidata="Q288706" start="448" end="458" title="waste heat" label="waste heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q851210" start="481" end="500" title="switching regulator" label="switching regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047957" start="901" end="906" title="Shunt (electrical)" label="shunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180586" start="1074" end="1085" title="Zener diode" label="Zener diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q851210" start="1240" end="1257" title="voltage regulator" label="voltage regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="1318" end="1321" title="integrated circuit" label="ICs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="1418" end="1429" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1485" end="1504" title="Linear_circuit#Linear_and_nonlinear_components" label="non-linear circuits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1593" end="1615" title="#Simple_shunt_regulator" label="simple shunt regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q466758" start="1838" end="1853" title="voltage divider" label="voltage divider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455581" start="2074" end="2086" title="Frequency compensation" label="compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="2347" end="2354" title="current (electricity)" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="2373" end="2380" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="2494" end="2520" title="switched-mode power supply" label="switched-mode power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="2920" end="2948" title="electromagnetic interference" label="electromagnetic interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q851210" start="3299" end="3314" title="dropout voltage" label="dropout voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665687" start="3360" end="3364" title="78xx" label="7805"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="3694" end="3708" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692746" start="3735" end="3756" title="low dropout regulator" label="low dropout regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q760134" start="3950" end="3965" title="boost converter" label="boost converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q440704" start="3971" end="3982" title="charge pump" label="charge pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="4946" end="4951" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692774" start="4973" end="4982" title="Low-power electronics" label="low-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q180586" start="6179" end="6190" title="Zener diode" label="Zener diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q189497" start="6315" end="6330" title="Zener breakdown" label="Zener breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="6343" end="6351" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465532" start="6789" end="6806" title="voltage reference" label="voltage reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161128" start="6810" end="6824" title="voltage source" label="voltage source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799522" start="7485" end="7501" title="Common collector" label="emitter follower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728359" start="9527" end="9549" title="capacitance multiplier" label="capacitance multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665687" start="9831" end="9835" title="78xx" label="78xx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665687" start="9911" end="9915" title="79xx" label="79xx"/>
<link wikidata="Q632918" start="11215" end="11220" title="LM317" label="LM317"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141665" start="11326" end="11346" title="dual in-line package" label="dual in-line package"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856134" start="12799" end="12815" title="Current limiting" label="Current limiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163768" start="12824" end="12840" title="current source" label="constant-current"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856134" start="12853" end="12861" title="Foldback (power supply design)" label="foldback"/>
<link wikidata="Q233523" start="12883" end="12902" title="Safe operating area" label="Safe operating area"/>
<link wikidata="Q478637" start="12962" end="12980" title="Crowbar (circuit)" label="crowbar protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="13106" end="13124" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="13185" end="13203" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q630252" start="13212" end="13218" title="TO-220" label="TO-220"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665687" start="13265" end="13269" title="78xx" label="78xx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692746" start="13497" end="13518" title="Low-dropout regulator" label="Low-dropout regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="13812" end="13822" title="CMOS logic" label="CMOS logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173451" start="13843" end="13870" title="transistor-transistor logic" label="transistor-transistor logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="13950" end="13960" title="disk drive" label="disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501125" start="14023" end="14029" title="ground (electricity)" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="14225" end="14238" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973263" start="14305" end="14329" title="Brokaw bandgap reference" label="Brokaw bandgap reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098527" start="14332" end="14369" title="List of LM-series integrated circuits" label="List of LM-series integrated circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692746" start="14372" end="14393" title="Low-dropout regulator" label="Low-dropout regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q851210" start="14396" end="14413" title="Voltage regulator" label="Voltage regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q632918" start="14758" end="14763" title="LM317" label="LM317"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="14764" end="14782" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48635" start="14783" end="14808" title="bandgap voltage reference" label="bandgap voltage reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="14820" end="14829" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223364" wikidata="Q7491072" url="?curid=223364" title="Shave">
<text>Shave may refer to:
*&quot;to shave&quot; refers to the act of shaving
*Shave (surname)
*&quot;Shave&quot; (magazine), a periodical magazine
*&quot;Shave&quot;, a song by Enon from their 2003 album &quot;Hocus Pocus&quot;
* Severe Hazards Analysis and Verification Experiment, a database of storm impact based on telephone surveys </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q369570" start="63" end="70" title="shaving" label="shaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878636" start="72" end="87" title="Shave (surname)" label="Shave (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491073" start="89" end="117" title="Shave (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Shave&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875866" start="204" end="215" title="Hocus Pocus (Enon album)" label="Hocus Pocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656840" start="224" end="275" title="Severe Hazards Analysis and Verification Experiment" label="Severe Hazards Analysis and Verification Experiment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223366" wikidata="Q1849855" url="?curid=223366" title="Parametric statistics">
<text>Parametric statistics is a branch of statistics which leverages models based on a fixed (finite) set of parameters. Conversely nonparametric statistics does not assume explicit (finite-parametric) mathematical forms for distributions when modeling data. However, it may make some assumptions about that distribution, such as continuity or symmetry, or even an explicit mathematical shape but have a model for a distributional parameter that is not itself finite-parametric.

Most well-known statistical methods are parametric. Regarding nonparametric (and semiparametric) models, Sir David Cox has said, &quot;These typically involve fewer assumptions of structure and distributional form but usually contain strong assumptions about independencies&quot;.

==Example==
The normal family of distributions all have the same general shape and are &quot;parameterized&quot; by mean and standard deviation. That means that if the mean and standard deviation are known and if the distribution is normal, the probability of any future observation lying in a given range is known. 

Suppose that we have a sample of 99 test scores with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 1. If we assume all 99 test scores are random observations from a normal distribution, then we predict there is a 1% chance that the 100th test score will be higher than 102.33 (that is, the mean plus 2.33 standard deviations), assuming that the 100th test score comes from the same distribution as the others. Parametric statistical methods are used to compute the 2.33 value above, given 99 independent observations from the same normal distribution.

A non-parametric estimate of the same thing is the maximum of the first 99 scores. We don&#x27;t need to assume anything about the distribution of test scores to reason that before we gave the test it was equally likely that the highest score would be any of the first 100. Thus there is a 1% chance that the 100th score is higher than any of the 99 that preceded it.

== History ==
Parametric statistics was mentioned by R. A. Fisher in his work &quot;Statistical Methods for Research Workers&quot; in 1925, which created the foundation for modern statistics.

==See also==

* Aggregated distribution
* All models are wrong
* Inverse problem
* Parametric model
* Sufficient statistic

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1849855" start="0" end="21" title="Parametric statistics" label="Parametric statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776487" start="104" end="114" title="Statistical parameter" label="parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097688" start="127" end="151" title="nonparametric statistics" label="nonparametric statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q464935" start="580" end="593" title="David Cox (statistician)" label="Sir David Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="773" end="803" title="normal distribution" label="normal family of distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="873" end="877" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="882" end="900" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="1563" end="1574" title="Independence (probability theory)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097688" start="1626" end="1640" title="Non-parametric statistics" label="non-parametric"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="2046" end="2058" title="Ronald Fisher" label="R. A. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604373" start="2077" end="2117" title="Statistical Methods for Research Workers" label="Statistical Methods for Research Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20072560" start="2202" end="2225" title="Aggregated distribution" label="Aggregated distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570783" start="2228" end="2248" title="All models are wrong" label="All models are wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567213" start="2251" end="2266" title="Inverse problem" label="Inverse problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135228" start="2269" end="2285" title="Parametric model" label="Parametric model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099110" start="2288" end="2308" title="Sufficient statistic" label="Sufficient statistic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223369" wikidata="Q1097688" url="?curid=223369" title="Nonparametric statistics">
<text>Nonparametric statistics is a type of statistical analysis that makes minimal assumptions about the underlying distribution of the data being studied. Often these models are infinite-dimensional, rather than finite dimensional, as in parametric statistics. Nonparametric statistics can be used for descriptive statistics or statistical inference. Nonparametric tests are often used when the assumptions of parametric tests are evidently violated.

==Definitions==

The term &quot;nonparametric statistics&quot; has been defined imprecisely in the following two ways, among others:

The first meaning of &quot;nonparametric&quot; involves techniques that do not rely on data belonging to any particular parametric family of probability distributions. 
These include, among others:
* Methods which are &quot;distribution-free&quot;, which do not rely on assumptions that the data are drawn from a given parametric family of probability distributions. 
* Statistics defined to be a function on a sample, without dependency on a parameter. 
An example is Order statistics, which are based on ordinal ranking of observations.

The discussion following is taken from &quot;Kendall&#x27;s Advanced Theory of Statistics&quot;.
Statistical hypotheses concern the behavior of observable random variables... For example, the hypothesis (a) that a normal distribution has a specified mean and variance is statistical; so is the hypothesis (b) that it has a given mean but unspecified variance; so is the hypothesis (c) that a distribution is of normal form with both mean and variance unspecified; finally, so is the hypothesis (d) that two unspecified continuous distributions are identical.

It will have been noticed that in the examples (a) and (b) the distribution underlying the observations was taken to be of a certain form (the normal) and the hypothesis was concerned entirely with the value of one or both of its parameters. Such a hypothesis, for obvious reasons, is called &quot;parametric&quot;.

Hypothesis (c) was of a different nature, as no parameter values are specified in the statement of the hypothesis; we might reasonably call such a hypothesis &quot;non-parametric&quot;. Hypothesis (d) is also non-parametric but, in addition, it does not even specify the underlying form of the distribution and may now be reasonably termed &quot;distribution-free&quot;. Notwithstanding these distinctions, the statistical literature now commonly applies the label &quot;non-parametric&quot; to test procedures that we have just termed &quot;distribution-free&quot;, thereby losing a useful classification.
The second meaning of &quot;non-parametric&quot; involves techniques that do not assume that the &quot;structure&quot; of a model is fixed. Typically, the model grows in size to accommodate the complexity of the data. In these techniques, individual variables &quot;are&quot; typically assumed to belong to parametric distributions, and assumptions about the types of associations among variables are also made. These techniques include, among others:
* &quot;non-parametric regression&quot;, which is modeling whereby the structure of the relationship between variables is treated non-parametrically, but where nevertheless there may be parametric assumptions about the distribution of model residuals.
* &quot;non-parametric hierarchical Bayesian models&quot;, such as models based on the Dirichlet process, which allow the number of latent variables to grow as necessary to fit the data, but where individual variables still follow parametric distributions and even the process controlling the rate of growth of latent variables follows a parametric distribution.

==Applications and purpose==
Non-parametric methods are widely used for studying populations that have a ranked order (such as movie reviews receiving one to five &quot;stars&quot;). The use of non-parametric methods may be necessary when data have a ranking but no clear numerical interpretation, such as when assessing preferences. In terms of levels of measurement, non-parametric methods result in ordinal data.

As non-parametric methods make fewer assumptions, their applicability is much more general than the corresponding parametric methods. In particular, they may be applied in situations where less is known about the application in question. Also, due to the reliance on fewer assumptions, non-parametric methods are more robust.

Non-parametric methods are sometimes considered simpler to use and more robust than parametric methods, even when the assumptions of parametric methods are justified. This is due to their more general nature, which may make them less susceptible to misuse and misunderstanding. Non-parametric methods can be considered a conservative choice, as they will work even when their assumptions are not met, whereas parametric methods can produce misleading results when their assumptions are violated.

The wider applicability and increased robustness of non-parametric tests comes at a cost: in cases where a parametric test&#x27;s assumptions are met, non-parametric tests have less statistical power. In other words, a larger sample size can be required to draw conclusions with the same degree of confidence.

==Non-parametric models==
&quot;Non-parametric models&quot; differ from parametric models in that the model structure is not specified &quot;a priori&quot; but is instead determined from data. The term &quot;non-parametric&quot; is not meant to imply that such models completely lack parameters but that the number and nature of the parameters are flexible and not fixed in advance.
* A histogram is a simple nonparametric estimate of a probability distribution.
* Kernel density estimation is another method to estimate a probability distribution.
* Nonparametric regression and semiparametric regression methods have been developed based on kernels, splines, and wavelets.
* Data envelopment analysis provides efficiency coefficients similar to those obtained by multivariate analysis without any distributional assumption.
* KNNs classify the unseen instance based on the K points in the training set which are nearest to it.
* A support vector machine (with a Gaussian kernel) is a nonparametric large-margin classifier.
* The method of moments with polynomial probability distributions.

==Methods==
Non-parametric (or distribution-free) inferential statistical methods are mathematical procedures for statistical hypothesis testing which, unlike parametric statistics, make no assumptions about the probability distributions of the variables being assessed. The most frequently used tests include
* Analysis of similarities
* Anderson–Darling test: tests whether a sample is drawn from a given distribution
* Statistical bootstrap methods: estimates the accuracy/sampling distribution of a statistic
* Cochran&#x27;s Q: tests whether &quot;k&quot; treatments in randomized block designs with 0/1 outcomes have identical effects
* Cohen&#x27;s kappa: measures inter-rater agreement for categorical items
* Friedman two-way analysis of variance (Repeated Measures) by ranks: tests whether &quot;k&quot; treatments in randomized block designs have identical effects
* Empirical likelihood
* Kaplan–Meier: estimates the survival function from lifetime data, modeling censoring
* Kendall&#x27;s tau: measures statistical dependence between two variables
* Kendall&#x27;s W: a measure between 0 and 1 of inter-rater agreement.
* Kolmogorov–Smirnov test: tests whether a sample is drawn from a given distribution, or whether two samples are drawn from the same distribution.
* Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance by ranks: tests whether &gt; 2 independent samples are drawn from the same distribution.
* Kuiper&#x27;s test: tests whether a sample is drawn from a given distribution, sensitive to cyclic variations such as day of the week.
* Logrank test: compares survival distributions of two right-skewed, censored samples.
* Mann–Whitney U or Wilcoxon rank sum test: tests whether two samples are drawn from the same distribution, as compared to a given alternative hypothesis.
* McNemar&#x27;s test: tests whether, in 2 × 2 contingency tables with a dichotomous trait and matched pairs of subjects, row and column marginal frequencies are equal.
* Median test: tests whether two samples are drawn from distributions with equal medians.
* Pitman&#x27;s permutation test: a statistical significance test that yields exact &quot;p&quot; values by examining all possible rearrangements of labels.
* Rank products: detects differentially expressed genes in replicated microarray experiments.
* Siegel–Tukey test: tests for differences in scale between two groups.
* Sign test: tests whether matched pair samples are drawn from distributions with equal medians.
* Spearman&#x27;s rank correlation coefficient: measures statistical dependence between two variables using a monotonic function.
* Squared ranks test: tests equality of variances in two or more samples.
* Tukey–Duckworth test: tests equality of two distributions by using ranks.
* Wald–Wolfowitz runs test: tests whether the elements of a sequence are mutually independent/random.
* Wilcoxon signed-rank test: tests whether matched pair samples are drawn from populations with different mean ranks.
* Universal Linear Fit Identification: A Method Independent of Data, Outliers and Noise Distribution Model and Free of Missing or Removed Data Imputation.

==History==
Early nonparametric statistics include the median (13th century or earlier, use in estimation by Edward Wright, 1599; see ) and the sign test by John Arbuthnot (1710) in analyzing the human sex ratio at birth (see ).

==See also==
* CDF-based nonparametric confidence interval
* Parametric statistics
* Resampling (statistics)
* Semiparametric model

==Notes==
==General references==
* Bagdonavicius, V., Kruopis, J., Nikulin, M.S. (2011). &quot;Non-parametric tests for complete data&quot;, ISTE &amp; WILEY: London &amp; Hoboken. .
* Gibbons, Jean Dickinson; Chakraborti, Subhabrata (2003). &quot;Nonparametric Statistical Inference&quot;, 4th Ed. CRC Press. .
* also .
* Hollander M., Wolfe D.A., Chicken E. (2014). &quot;Nonparametric Statistical Methods&quot;, John Wiley &amp; Sons.
* Sheskin, David J. (2003) &quot;Handbook of Parametric and Nonparametric Statistical Procedures&quot;. CRC Press. 
* Wasserman, Larry (2007). &quot;All of Nonparametric Statistics&quot;, Springer. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1097688" start="0" end="24" title="Nonparametric statistics" label="Nonparametric statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q865811" start="111" end="123" title="Distribution (mathematics)" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849855" start="234" end="255" title="parametric statistics" label="parametric statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q380344" start="298" end="320" title="descriptive statistics" label="descriptive statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="324" end="345" title="statistical inference" label="statistical inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="922" end="947" title="probability distributions" label="probability distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="1025" end="1034" title="parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767128" start="1051" end="1066" title="Order statistic" label="Order statistic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1088" end="1103" title="Ranking#Ordinal ranking (&amp;quot;1234&amp;quot; ranking)" label="ordinal ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455886" start="3066" end="3091" title="nonparametric regression" label="non-parametric regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280766" start="3397" end="3414" title="Dirichlet process" label="Dirichlet process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422623" start="3442" end="3458" title="latent variables" label="latent variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q526719" start="3925" end="3932" title="ranking" label="ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="3946" end="3955" title="Number" label="numerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q908656" start="3995" end="4006" title="preferences" label="preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q951437" start="4020" end="4041" title="level of measurement" label="levels of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100785" start="4076" end="4088" title="ordinal data" label="ordinal data"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4409" end="4415" title="Robust statistics#Introduction" label="robust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665389" start="4953" end="4963" title="Robust statistics" label="robustness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199823" start="5097" end="5114" title="statistical power" label="statistical power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849855" start="5298" end="5308" title="parametric statistics" label="parametric"/>
<link wikidata="Q185020" start="5613" end="5622" title="histogram" label="histogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q458825" start="5691" end="5716" title="Kernel density estimation" label="Kernel density estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455886" start="5777" end="5801" title="Nonparametric regression" label="Nonparametric regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449609" start="5806" end="5831" title="semiparametric regression" label="semiparametric regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345662" start="5869" end="5876" title="kernel (statistics)" label="kernels"/>
<link wikidata="Q735256" start="5878" end="5885" title="Spline (mathematics)" label="splines"/>
<link wikidata="Q831390" start="5891" end="5898" title="wavelet" label="wavelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q647974" start="5903" end="5928" title="Data envelopment analysis" label="Data envelopment analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952580" start="5991" end="6012" title="multivariate analysis" label="multivariate analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071612" start="6054" end="6058" title="k-nearest neighbors algorithm" label="KNNs"/>
<link wikidata="Q282453" start="6159" end="6181" title="support vector machine" label="support vector machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925212" start="6257" end="6274" title="method of moments (statistics)" label="method of moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849855" start="6478" end="6499" title="parametric statistics" label="parametric statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="6531" end="6555" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579012" start="6631" end="6655" title="Analysis of similarities" label="Analysis of similarities"/>
<link wikidata="Q491401" start="6658" end="6679" title="Anderson–Darling test" label="Anderson–Darling test"/>
<link wikidata="Q301990" start="6741" end="6770" title="Bootstrapping (statistics)" label="Statistical bootstrap methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405387" start="6834" end="6850" title="Cochran&amp;#x27;s Q test" label="Cochran&amp;#x27;s Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107106" start="6962" end="6980" title="Cohen&amp;#x27;s kappa" label="Cohen&amp;#x27;s kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457633" start="7037" end="7094" title="Friedman test" label="Friedman two-way analysis of variance (Repeated Measures)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374245" start="7197" end="7217" title="Empirical likelihood" label="Empirical likelihood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432420" start="7220" end="7232" title="Kaplan–Meier estimator" label="Kaplan–Meier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268404" start="7307" end="7325" title="Kendall tau rank correlation coefficient" label="Kendall&amp;#x27;s tau"/>
<link wikidata="Q669273" start="7383" end="7399" title="Kendall&amp;#x27;s W" label="Kendall&amp;#x27;s W"/>
<link wikidata="Q575766" start="7455" end="7478" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790302" start="7602" end="7645" title="Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance" label="Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052704" start="7737" end="7755" title="Kuiper&amp;#x27;s test" label="Kuiper&amp;#x27;s test"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089397" start="7874" end="7886" title="Logrank test" label="Logrank test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424533" start="7961" end="7975" title="Mann–Whitney U" label="Mann–Whitney U"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434261" start="8116" end="8135" title="McNemar&amp;#x27;s test" label="McNemar&amp;#x27;s test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817650" start="8285" end="8296" title="Median test" label="Median test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170431" start="8375" end="8405" title="Pitman permutation test" label="Pitman&amp;#x27;s permutation test"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051866" start="8532" end="8544" title="Rank product" label="Rank product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985059" start="8626" end="8643" title="Siegel–Tukey test" label="Siegel–Tukey test"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301904" start="8698" end="8707" title="Sign test" label="Sign test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126730" start="8795" end="8839" title="Spearman&amp;#x27;s rank correlation coefficient" label="Spearman&amp;#x27;s rank correlation coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455288" start="8925" end="8943" title="Squared ranks test" label="Squared ranks test"/>
<link wikidata="Q21795340" start="8999" end="9019" title="Tukey–Duckworth test" label="Tukey–Duckworth test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467631" start="9075" end="9099" title="Wald–Wolfowitz runs test" label="Wald–Wolfowitz runs test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751970" start="9177" end="9202" title="Wilcoxon signed-rank test" label="Wilcoxon signed-rank test"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="9504" end="9510" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294162" start="9558" end="9571" title="Edward Wright (mathematician)" label="Edward Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301904" start="9593" end="9602" title="sign test" label="sign test"/>
<link wikidata="Q435816" start="9606" end="9620" title="John Arbuthnot" label="John Arbuthnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861780" start="9645" end="9660" title="human sex ratio" label="human sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009921" start="9694" end="9737" title="CDF-based nonparametric confidence interval" label="CDF-based nonparametric confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849855" start="9740" end="9761" title="Parametric statistics" label="Parametric statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170431" start="9764" end="9787" title="Resampling (statistics)" label="Resampling (statistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449607" start="9790" end="9810" title="Semiparametric model" label="Semiparametric model"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305722" start="9997" end="10020" title="Jean D. Gibbons" label="Gibbons, Jean Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489856" start="10368" end="10384" title="Larry A. Wasserman" label="Wasserman, Larry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223373" wikidata="Q3024155" url="?curid=223373" title="National Labor Relations Board">
<text>The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) is an independent agency of the federal government of the United States that enforces U.S. labor law in relation to collective bargaining and unfair labor practices. Under the National Labor Relations Act of 1935, the NLRB has the authority to supervise elections for labor union representation and to investigate and remedy unfair labor practices. Unfair labor practices may involve union-related situations or instances of protected concerted activity.

The NLRB is governed by a five-person board and a general counsel, all of whom are appointed by the president with the consent of the Senate. Board members are appointed for five-year terms and the general counsel is appointed for a four-year term. The general counsel acts as a prosecutor and the board acts as an appellate quasi-judicial body from decisions of 36 administrative law judges, as of November 2023. The NLRB is headquartered at 1015 Half St. SE, Washington, D.C., and it has over 30 regional, sub-regional, and residential offices throughout the United States.

==History==
===1933–1935: First collective bargaining organization National Labor Board===
The history of the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) can be traced to enactment of the National Industrial Recovery Act in 1933. Section 7(a) of the act protected collective bargaining rights for unions, but was difficult to enforce. The NLRB was not given monitoring powers. A massive wave of union organizing was punctuated by employer and union violence, general strikes, and recognition strikes. The National Industrial Recovery Act was administered by the National Recovery Administration (NRA). At the outset, NRA Administrator Hugh S. Johnson believed that Section 7(a) would be self-enforcing, but the tremendous labor unrest proved him wrong. On August 5, 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt announced the establishment of the National Labor Board, under the auspices of the NRA, to implement the collective bargaining provisions of Section 7(a).

The National Labor Board (NLB) established a system of 20 regional boards to handle the immense caseload. Each regional board had a representative designated by local labor unions, local employers, and a &quot;public&quot; representative. All were unpaid. The public representative acted as the chair. The regional boards could hold hearings and propose settlements to disputes. Initially, they lacked authority to order representation elections, but this changed after Roosevelt issued additional executive orders on February 1 and February 23, 1934.

The NLB, too, proved ineffective. Congress passed Public Resolution No. 44 on June 19, 1934, which empowered the president to appoint a new labor board with authority to issue subpoenas, hold elections, and mediate labor disputes. On June 29, President Roosevelt abolished the NLB and in Executive Order 6763 established a new, three-member National Labor Relations Board.

Lloyd K. Garrison was the first chairman of the National Labor Relations Board (often referred to by scholars the &quot;First NLRB&quot; or &quot;Old NLRB&quot;). The &quot;First NLRB&quot; established organizational structures which continue at the NLRB in the 21st century. This includes the regional structure of the board; the use of administrative law judges and regional hearing officers to initially rule on cases; an appeal process to the national board; and the use of expert staff, organized into various divisions, at the national level. Formally, Garrison established the:
* Executive Office, which handled administrative activities of the national and regional boards, field staff, and Legal Division. It was overseen by an Executive Secretary.
* Examining Division, national staff which conducted field investigations and assisted the regional boards with adjudications, hearings, and representative elections.
* Information Division, which provided the press and public with news.
* Legal Division, which assisted the Department of Justice in seeking compliance with board decisions in the courts, or in responding to suits brought about by board decisions.
* Research Division, which studied decisions of the regional boards so that a comprehensive labor law might be developed, and studied the economics of each case.

Within a year, however, most of the jurisdiction of the &quot;First NLRB&quot; was stripped away. Its decisions in the automobile, newspaper, textile, and steel industries proved so volatile that Roosevelt himself often removed these cases from the board&#x27;s jurisdiction. Several federal court decisions further limited the board&#x27;s power. Senator Robert F. Wagner (D – NY) subsequently pushed legislation through Congress to give a statutory basis to federal labor policy that survived court scrutiny. On July 5, 1935, a new law—the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA, also known as the Wagner Act)—superseded the NIRA and established a new, long-lasting federal labor policy. The NLRA designated the National Labor Relations Board as the implementing agency.

===1935–1939: Constitutionality, communism, and organizational changes===

The first chairman of the &quot;new&quot; NLRB was J. Warren Madden, professor of the University of Pittsburgh School of Law. Madden largely confirmed the previous structure of the &quot;first NLRB&quot; by formally establishing five divisions within the agency:
* Administrative Division: Oversaw all administrative activities of national and regional boards and their finances; led by Secretary
* Economic Division: Analyzed economic evidence in cases; made studies of economics of labor relations for use by board and courts; supervised by Chief Industrial Economist; also known as the Technical Service Division
* Legal Division: Handled NLRB either decisions appealed to courts or cases in which NLRB sought enforcement of its decisions; overseen by general counsel (hired by NLRB board); comprised two subdivisions:
** Litigation Section: Advised national and regional boards, prepared briefs, worked with Justice Department
** Review Section: Analyzed regional hearings and decisions; issued interpretations of law; prepared forms; drafted regulations
* Publications Division: Handled all press and public inquiries; published decisions of national and regional boards and their rules and regulations; overseen by Director of Publications
* Trial Examining Division: Held hearings before the national board; overseen by Chief Trial Examiner
Benedict Wolf served as first Secretary of the NLRB, Charles H. Fahy the first general counsel, and David J. Saposs the first Chief Industrial Economist. Wolf resigned in mid-1937, and Nathan Witt, an attorney in the Legal Division, was named Secretary in October.

The Economic Division was a critical one for the NLRB. Cause-and-effect was one of the fundamental assumptions of the National Labor Relations Act, and for the causes of labor unrest to be understood economic analysis was needed. From the start, the Economic Division undertook three important tasks: 1) Gather economic data in support of cases before the courts; 2) Conduct general studies of labor relations to guide the board in formulating decisions and policies; and 3) Research the history of labor relations (the history of written agreements, whether certain issues were historically part of collective bargaining, how unions functioned internally, trends in employer activities, trends in collective bargaining, whether certain employer actions led to labor disputes, etc.) so that the board could educate itself, the courts, Congress, and the public about labor relations. The first function proved critical to the survival of the NLRB. It was the Economic Division&#x27;s data and analysis, more than then NLRB&#x27;s legal reasoning, which proved critical in persuading the Supreme Court to sustain the Wagner Act in &quot;NLRB v. Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel&quot;. The Court even cited several Economic Division studies in its decision. In the wake of &quot;Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel&quot;, many labor relations experts outside the agency concluded that economic analysis was &quot;an accepted fact&quot; essential to the proper functioning of the agency. The Economic Division did, too. It asked Madden to pair an economist with an attorney in every important case, and prepared outline of the economic data needed to support each case in case it went before the courts.

During his time on the NLRB, Madden was often opposed by the American Federation of Labor (AFL), which believed that Madden was using the NLRA and the procedures and staff of the NLRB to favor the AFL&#x27;s primary competitor, the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO). The NLRB and NLRA were also under intense pressure from employers, the press, congressional Republicans, and conservative Democrats.

The NLRB&#x27;s Economic Division proved critical in pushing for a congressional investigation into employer anti-union activities, and ensuring that investigation was a success. The Economic Division was deeply aware of employer use of labor spies, violence, and company unions to thwart union organizing, and quietly pressed for a congressional investigation into these and other tactics. Senator Robert M. La Follette Jr. took up the suggestion, on June 6, 1936, the Senate Committee on Education and Labor established a Subcommittee Investigating Violations of Free Speech and the Rights of Labor chaired by La Follette. Better known as the &quot;La Follette Committee&quot;, the subcommittee held extensive hearings for five years and published numerous reports. The committee uncovered extensive evidence of millions of company dollars used to pay for spies and fifth columnists within unions, exposed the culpability of local law enforcement in acts of violence and murder against union supporters (particularly in the Harlan County War), revealed the wide extent of illegal blacklisting of union members, and exposed the use of armed strikebreakers and widespread stockpiling of tear gas, vomit gas, machine guns, mortars, and armor by corporations to use against strikers. Some of the evidence the committee used was provided by the Economic Division, and the investigation proved critical for a time in defending the agency from business and congressional attack.

The biggest issue the NLRB faced was constitutional. The Justice Department and NLRB legal staff wanted the Supreme Court to rule as quickly as possible on the constitutionality of the NLRA. But the board and Justice Department also realized that the Court&#x27;s &quot;Lochner&quot; era legal philosophy made it unlikely for the Court to uphold the Act. Subsequently, Madden strove to resolve minor cases before they could become court challenges, and worked to delay appeals as long as possible until the best possible case could be brought to the Court. This legal strategy paid off. The Supreme Court upheld the NLRA in &quot;National Labor Relations Board v. Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel Corporation&quot;, 301 U.S. 1 (1937). Afterward, Madden continued to strategically guide the NLRB&#x27;s legal efforts to strengthen the federal courts&#x27; view of the NLRA and the board&#x27;s actions. Because of the efforts of Madden and NLRB General Counsel Charles H. Fahy, the Supreme Court reviewed only 27 cases between August 1935 and March 1941, even though the board had processed nearly 5,000 cases since its inception. The Supreme Court enforced the NLRB&#x27;s rulings in 19 cases without modifying them, enforced them with modification in six more, and denied enforcement in two cases. Additionally, the board won all 30 injunction and all 16 representation cases before the lower courts, a rate of success unequalled by any other federal agency.

AFL opposition to the &quot;Madden Board&quot; grew after decisions in &quot;Shipowners&#x27; Ass&#x27;n of the Pacific Coast&quot;, 7 NLRB 1002 (1938), &quot;enf&#x27;d&quot; &quot;American Federation of Labor v. National Labor Relations Board&quot;, 308 U.S. 401 (1940) (awarding a longshoremen&#x27;s unit to the CIO rather than the AFL), and &quot;American Can Co&quot;., 13 NLRB 1252 (1939) (unit&#x27;s history of collective bargaining outweighs desire of workers to form craft-only unit).

The AFL began pushing for an investigation into the NLRB, and this investigation led to allegations of communist influence within the agency. In June 1938, the House Un-American Activities Committee (led by Chairman Martin Dies Jr. [D-TX]) heard testimony from AFL leader John P. Frey, who accused Madden of staffing the NLRB with communists. The allegations were true, in at least one case: Nathan Witt, the NLRB&#x27;s executive secretary and the man to whom Madden had delegated most administrative functions, was a member of the Communist Party of the United States. These allegations and discoveries significantly damaged the agency&#x27;s support in Congress and with the public.

A second investigation into the NLRB led to organizational changes at the board. On July 20, 1939, Republicans and conservative Democrats formed a coalition to push through the House of Representatives a resolution establishing a Special Committee to Investigate the National Labor Relations Board (the &quot;Smith Committee&quot;), chaired by conservative, anti-labor Rep. Howard W. Smith (D-VA). On March 7, 1940, the Smith Committee proposed legislation to abolish the NLRB, reconstitute it, and radically amend the NLRA. President Roosevelt opposed the bill, although he conceded that perhaps the board&#x27;s membership should be expanded to five from three. The Smith bill won several early tests in the House, which also voted to substantially cut the NLRB&#x27;s budget. Smith won a vote in the House Rules Committee permitting him to bring his bill to the floor for a vote. In an attempt to defuse the legislative crisis, Madden fired 53 staff and forced another five to resign, and decentralized the NLRB&#x27;s trial process to give regional directors and field agents more authority. But the House still passed the Smith bill by a vote of 258 to 129 on June 7, 1940. To protect the NLRB, Roosevelt convinced Senator Elbert D. Thomas, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Education and Labor, to hold no hearings or votes on the bill, and the legislation died.

The Smith Committee investigation had a lasting effect on labor law in the U.S., and was the basis for the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947. Madden&#x27;s term on the NLRB came to an end after just four years. On November 15, 1940, President Roosevelt nominated Harry A. Millis to the NLRB and named him chairman, and nominated Madden to a seat on the U.S. Court of Claims.

===1940–1945: Economics Division and World War II===
Another major structural change occurred at the same time that Madden left the NLRB. The Smith committee&#x27;s anti-communist drive also targeted David J. Saposs, the NLRB Chief Industrial Economist. Saposs had been surreptitiously assessed by members of the Communist Party USA for membership, and rejected as a prospect. But Smith and others attacked Saposs as a communist, and Congress defunded his division and his job on October 11, 1940. Although the Smith committee&#x27;s investigation proved critical, the disestablishment of the Economic Division was due to many reasons—both internal and external to the NLRB, and only some of which involved allegations of communist infiltration. As historian James A. Gross observed:.
The Division was eliminated for all kinds of reasons which had nothing to do with the merits and importance of its work: political pressures and maneuverings, jealousy and empire building between and among lawyers and economists inside the Board, opposition to leftist ideologies, a personal attack on the Chief Economist, David Saposs, and a mighty hostility to the administrative process.

The loss of the Economic Division was a major blow to the NLRB. It had a major tactical impact: Economic data helped the NLRB fulfill its adjudicatorial and prosecutorial work in areas such as unfair labor practices (ULPs), representation elections, and in determining remedial actions (such as reinstatement, back pay awards, and fines). Economic data also undermined employer resistance to the agency by linking that opposition to employer ULPs. The loss also left the board dependent on the biased information offered by the parties in dispute before it, leading to poor decision-making and far less success in the courts. It also had a major strategic impact: It left the board unable to determine whether its administration of the law was effective or not. Nor could the board determine whether labor unrest was a serious threat to the economy or not. As labor historian Josiah Bartlett Lambert put it: &quot;Without the Economic Research Division, the NLRB could not undertake empirical studies to determine the actual impact of secondary boycotts, jurisdictional strikes, national emergency strikes, and the like.&quot; The Economic Division was critical to a long-range NLRB process to lead to the long-term evolution of industrial labor relations in the U.S., but that goal had to be abandoned. Most importantly, however, the evisceration of the Economic Division struck at the fundamental purpose of federal labor law, which was to allow experts to adjudicate labor disputes rather than use a legal process. With this data and analysis, widespread skepticism about the board&#x27;s expertise quickly spread through Congress and the courts. It also left the board largely unable to engage in rulemaking, forcing it to make labor law on an inefficient, time-consuming case-by-case basis. As of 1981, NLRB was still the only federal agency forbidden to seek economic information about the impact of its activities.

The second chairman of the NLRB, Harry A. Millis, led the board in a much more moderate direction. Lacking an economic division to give it ammunition to fight with Millis deliberately made the NLRB dependent on Congress and the executive branch for its survival. Millis made a large number of organizational changes. He stripped the office of Secretary of its power, set up an Administrative Division to supervise the 22 regional offices, initiated a study of the board&#x27;s administrative procedures, and genuinely delegated power to the regional offices. He removed casehandling and regional office communication from the jurisdiction of the Office of the Secretary and created a Field Division. He also adopted procedures requiring the board made its decisions based solely on the trial examiner&#x27;s report, authorized NLRB review attorneys to review trial examiner report, required decisions to be drafted ahead of time and distributed for review, authorized review attorneys to revise drafts before a final decision was issued, required trial examiners to emphasize findings of fact and to address points of law, and began holding board meetings when there were differences of opinion over decisions.

Millis eliminated the Review Division&#x27;s decisive role in cases, which had been established under Madden and Witt. Madden and Witt had adopted a highly centralized board structure so that (generally speaking) only the cases most favorable to the board made it to the courts. The centralized structure meant that only the strongest cases made it to national board, so that the board could apply all its economic and legal powers to crafting the best decision possible. This strategy enabled the NLRB to defend itself very well before the Supreme Court. But Madden and Witt had held on to the centralized strategy too long, and made political enemies in the process. Millis substituted a decentralized process in which the board was less a decision-maker and more a provider of services to the regions. Many of the changes Millis instituted were designed to mimic requirements placed on other agencies by the Administrative Procedure Act.

American entry into World War II on December 8, 1941, significantly changed the NLRB. On January 12, 1942, President Roosevelt created the National War Labor Board (NWLB), which displaced the NLRB as the main focus of federal labor relations for the duration of the war. The NWLB was given the authority to &quot;finally determine&quot; any labor dispute which threatened to interrupt war production, and to stabilize union wages and benefits during the war. Although Roosevelt instructed the NWLB not to intrude on jurisdiction exercised by the NLRB, the War Labor Board refused to honor this request. From 1942 to 1945, Millis tried to secure a jurisdictional agreement with NWLB Chairman George W. Taylor. But these discussions proved fruitless, and Millis broke them off in June 1945. The NWLB also heavily raided the NLRB for staff, significantly hindering NLRB operations.

Additional changes came with the passage of the War Labor Disputes Act (WLDA) on June 25, 1943. Enacted over Roosevelt&#x27;s veto after 400,000 coal miners, their wages significantly lower due to high wartime inflation, struck for a $2-a-day wage increase, the legislation (in part) required the NLRB to issue a ballot outlining all the collective bargaining proposals and counter-proposals, wait 30 days, and then hold a strike vote. The War Labor Disputes Act proved very burdensome. The NLRB processed 2,000 WLDA cases from 1943 to the end of 1945, of which 500 were strike votes. The act&#x27;s strike vote procedures did little to stop strikes, however, and Millis feared unions were using the referendums to whip up pro-strike feelings among their members. Millis also believed the law&#x27;s strike vote process permitted more strikes to occur than the NLRB would have allowed under its old procedures. There were so many strike vote filings in the six months after the war ended that NLRB actually shut down its long-distance telephone lines, cancelled all out of town travel, suspended all public hearings, and suspended all other business to accommodate the workload. By early 1945, Millis was in ill health. He resigned from the NLRB on June 7, 1945, and Paul M. Herzog was named his successor.

===1947–1965: Taft–Hartley===
A major turning point in the history of the NLRB came in 1947 with passage of the Taft–Hartley Act. Disruptions caused by strikes during World War II as well as the huge wave of strikes that followed the end of the war fueled a growing movement in 1946 and 1947 to amend the NLRA to correct what critics saw as a pro-labor tilt in federal law. Drafted by the powerful Republican Senator Robert A. Taft and the strongly anti-union Representative Fred A. Hartley Jr., the Taft–Hartley Act banned jurisdictional strikes, wildcat strikes, political strikes, secondary boycotts, secondary picketing, mass picketing, union campaign donations made from dues money, the closed shop, and unions of supervisors. The act also enumerated new employer rights, defined union-committed ULPs, gave states the right to opt out of federal labor law through right-to-work laws, required unions to give an 80-days&#x27; strike notice in all cases, established procedures for the president to end a strike in a national emergency, and required all union officials to sign an anti-Communist oath. Organizationally, the act made the general counsel a presidential appointee, independent of the board itself, and gave the general counsel limited powers to seek injunctions without referring to the Justice Department. It also banned the NLRB from engaging in any mediation or conciliation, and formally enshrined in law the ban on hiring personnel to do economic data collection or analysis.

In August 1947, Robert N. Denham became the NLRB&#x27;s general counsel. He held &quot;conservative views&quot; and wielded &quot;considerable influence&quot; on labor-management relations and interpretations of the newly passed Taft–Hartley Act. In 1950, US President Harry S. Truman fired Denham (&quot;The New York Times&quot;: &quot;left at the behest of the President&quot;). While NLRB general counsel, Denham received considerable news coverage as a &quot;quasi-Republican&quot;. Nominated by President Truman, Denham received unanimous approval by the US Senate Labor Committee. He received &quot;full and independent powers to investigate violations, file complaints and prosecute offenders before the board.&quot; In August 1947, he supported an &quot;Anti-Red Affidavit Rule&quot; and so sided with US Senator Robert A. Taft. In October 1947, the NLRB overruled him, which meant that top officers of the American Federation of Labor (AFL) and Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) would not have to sign an anti-Communist oath per the Taft–Hartley Act.

Herzog publicly admitted the need for some change in the NLRA, but privately he opposed the proposed Taft–Hartley amendments. He felt the communist oath provisions were unconstitutional, that the amendments would turn the NLRA into a management weapon, that creation of an independent general counsel would weaken the NLRB, and that the law&#x27;s dismantling of the agency&#x27;s economic analysis unit deprived the NLRB of essential expertise. Nonetheless, Congress overrode Truman&#x27;s veto of the Taft–Hartley Act on June 23, 1947, and the bill became law.

The Taft–Hartley Act fundamentally changed the nature of federal labor law, but it also seriously hindered the NLRB&#x27;s ability to enforce the law. The loss of the mediation function left the NLRB unable to become involved in labor disputes, a function it had engaged in since its inception as the National Labor Board in 1933. This hindered the agency&#x27;s efforts to study, analyze, and create bulwarks against bad-faith collective bargaining; reduced its ability to formulate national labor policy in this area; and left the agency making labor law on an ineffective, time-consuming case-by-case basis. The separation of the general counsel from supervision by the national board also had significant impact on the agency. This separation was enacted against the advice of the Justice Department, contradicted the policy Congress had enacted in the Administrative Procedure Act of 1946, and ignored Millis&#x27; extensive internal reforms. The change left the NLRB as the only federal agency unable to coordinate its decision-making and legal activities, and the only agency exempted in this manner under the Administrative Procedure Act. The separation of the general counsel was not discussed by the committee or by any witnesses during the legislation&#x27;s mark-up. Indeed, there was no basis for it at all in the public record. It was, in the words of sociologist Robin Stryker, &quot;little-noted&quot; and &quot;unprecedented&quot;.

The anti-communist oath provisions generated extensive public debate, and generated disputes before the Supreme Court several times. The Taft–Hartley oath first reached the court in &quot;American Communications Ass&#x27;n v. Douds&quot;, , in which the court held 5-to-1 that the oath did not violate the First Amendment, was not an &quot;ex post facto&quot; law or bill of attainder in violation of Article One, Section 10, and was not a &quot;test oath&quot; in violation of Article Six. The issue again came before the court in &quot;Garner v. Board of Public Works&quot;, , in which the court unanimously held that a municipal loyalty oath was not an &quot;ex post facto law&quot; or bill of attainder. It came before the court yet a third time in &quot;Wieman v. Updegraff&quot;, . This time, the outcome was radically different. The Supreme Court unanimously ruled that state loyalty oath legislation violated the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In 1965, the Supreme Court held 5-to-4 that the anti-communist oath was a bill of attainder in &quot;United States v. Brown&quot;, . The Supreme Court essentially overturned &quot;Douds&quot;, but did not formally do so.

In 1949, the NLRB instated the Joy Silk doctrine, which held that &quot;if a union provides evidence that a majority of workers want to unionize&quot;, the employer should recognize the union unless they have &quot;good faith doubt&quot; regarding that evidence. Further, &quot;if there&#x27;s an unfair labor practice, meaning the employer broke the law, then it is presumed that the workers wanted to join a union&quot;. The doctrine was replaced by the Gissel doctrine in 1969 following &quot;NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., Inc.&quot;

===1966–2007: Expansion of jurisdiction===
In 1974, Congress amended the National Labor Relations Act to protect employees of non-profit hospitals and allow the board to adjudicate their claims. The 1935 Wagner Act had protected non-profit hospital workers, but the Taft–Hartley Act removed those protections in 1947. Congress had expressed concern about the impact of potential labor strikes on patient care, but decided that the proposed legislation was an appropriate compromise.

In July 1987, the board began work on a comprehensive regulation for collective-bargaining units in health care organizations. The board held 14 days of hearings and considered testimony from 144 witnesses and over 1,800 public comments, and finally issued the rule in April 1989. The rule was challenged in court and ultimately reached the Supreme Court, which unanimously upheld the rule in April 1991.

===2007–2014: Lack of quorum and legal challenges===
From December 2007 to mid-July 2013, the agency never had all five members, and not once did it operate with three confirmed members, creating a legal controversy. Three members&#x27; terms expired in December 2007, leaving the NLRB with just two members—Chairman Wilma B. Liebman and Member Peter Schaumber. President George W. Bush refused to make some nominations to the board and Senate Democrats refused to confirm those which he did make.

On December 28, 2007, just before the board lost its quorum, the four members agreed to delegate their authority to a three-person panel per the National Labor Relations Act. Only Liebman and Schaumber remained on the board, but the board concluded that the two constituted a quorum of the three-person panel and thus could make decisions on behalf of the board. Liebman and Schaumber informally agreed to decide only those cases which were in their view noncontroversial and on which they could agree, and issued almost 400 decisions between January 2008 and September 2009.

In April 2009, President Obama nominated Craig Becker (associate general counsel of the Service Employees International Union), Mark Gaston Pearce (a member on the Industrial Board of Appeals, an agency of the New York State Department of Labor), and Brian Hayes (Republican Labor Policy Director for the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions) to fill the three empty seats on the NLRB.

The U.S. Courts of Appeals for the First, Second, and Seventh Circuits upheld the two-member NLRB&#x27;s authority to decide cases, while the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit rejected its authority. In September 2009, the Justice Department asked the U.S. Supreme Court to immediately hear its appeal from the Seventh Circuit&#x27;s decision in &quot;New Process Steel, L.P. v. NLRB&quot; and settle the dispute, given the high stakes involved. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in October and agreed to decide the issue.

Becker&#x27;s nomination appeared to fail on February 8, 2010, after Republican Senators (led by John McCain) threatened to filibuster his nomination. President Obama said he would consider making recess appointments to the NLRB due to the Senate&#x27;s failure to move on any of the three nominations. On March 27, 2010, Obama recess appointed Becker and Pearce.

On June 17, 2010, the Supreme Court ruled in &quot;New Process Steel, L. P. v. NLRB&quot; that the two-member Board had no authority to issue decisions, invalidating all rulings made by Liebman and Schaumber.

On June 22, 2010, a voice vote in the Senate confirmed Pearce to a full term, allowing him to serve until August 27, 2013. The same day, the Senate confirmed Republican nominee Brian Hayes of Massachusetts by voice vote. Effective August 28, 2011, Pearce was named chairman to replace Democrat Wilma Liebman, whose term had expired. Becker&#x27;s term, as a recess appointee, ended on December 31, 2011. Hayes&#x27; term ended on December 16, 2012.

On January 4, 2012, Obama announced recess appointments to three seats on the board: Sharon Block, Terence F. Flynn, and Richard Griffin. The appointments were criticized by Republicans, including the House Speaker John Boehner, as unconstitutional and &quot;a brazen attempt to undercut the role of the Senate to advise and consent the executive branch on appointments.&quot; Although made as recess appointments, critics questioned their legality, arguing that Congress had not officially been in recess as pro forma sessions had been held. Former U.S. attorney general Edwin Meese stated that in his opinion, since the appointments were made when the Senate was &quot;demonstrably not in recess&quot;, they represented &quot;a constitutional abuse of a high order.&quot; On January 12, 2012, the U.S. Justice Department released a memo stating that appointments made during pro forma sessions are supported by the Constitution and precedent.

On January 25, 2013, in &quot;Noel Canning v. NLRB&quot;, a panel of the D.C. Circuit ruled that President Obama&#x27;s recess appointments were invalid as they were not made during an intersession recess of the Senate, and the President moved to fill them during the same recess. On May 16, 2013, in &quot;National Labor Relations Board v. New Vista Nursing and Rehabilitation&quot;, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit became the second federal appellate court to rule that the recess appointments to the NLRB were unconstitutional. In a split decision, it also found that the March 27, 2010, recess appointment of Craig Becker was unconstitutional.

On July 14, 2013, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid threatened to exercise the &quot;nuclear option&quot; and allow a simple majority (rather than a supermajority) of the Senate to end a filibuster. This threat to end the filibuster&#x27;s privileged position in the Senate was intended to end Republican filibustering of NLRB nominees. On July 16, 2013, President Obama and Senate Republicans reached an agreement to end the impasse over NLRB appointees. Obama withdrew the pending nominations of Block and Griffin, and submit two new nominees: Nancy Schiffer, associate general counsel at the AFL-CIO, and Kent Hirozawa, chief counsel to NLRB Chairman Mark Gaston Pearce. Republicans agreed not to oppose a fourth nominee, to be submitted in 2014.

On July 30, 2013, the Senate confirmed all five of Obama&#x27;s nominees for the NLRB: Kent Hirozawa, Harry I. Johnson III, Philip A. Miscimarra, Mark Gaston Pearce and Nancy Schiffer. Johnson and Miscimarra represented the Republican nominees for the board. Pearce was confirmed for a second five-year term.

On June 26, 2014, in &quot;National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning,&quot; the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously ruled that President Obama&#x27;s recess appointments to the NLRB in 2013 were unconstitutional, affirming the D.C. Circuit&#x27;s decision in &quot;Noel Canning v. NLRB&quot;.

Nancy Schiffer&#x27;s term ended on December 15, 2014. She was succeeded by Lauren McFerran on December 16, 2014. Harry I. Johnson III&#x27;s term ended on August 27, 2015.

===Since 2015 until 2025===
Graduate students&#x27; right to unionize: In August 2016, the NLRB ruled that graduate students who worked as teaching or research assistants at private universities had the right to unionize under federal labor law.

Change in leadership: In 2017, the NLRB&#x27;s leadership shifted when President Donald Trump nominated and the Senate confirmed new members, changing the board&#x27;s composition to a 3–2 Republican majority.

Boeing decision: In 2018, the NLRB issued a decision in The Boeing Company case, which made it easier for employers to justify policies that restrict employees&#x27; rights to engage in protected concerted activity.
Joint employer standard: In December 2017, the NLRB overturned an Obama-era decision that expanded the joint employer standard, which held employers liable for labor violations committed by their subcontractors or franchisees.

Independent contractor status: In January 2019, the NLRB issued a decision that clarified the test for determining whether workers are independent contractors or employees under the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA).

Joint employer standard reinstated: In 2020, the NLRB reinstated the joint employer standard that had been overturned in 2017, making it easier for employees to hold companies liable for labor violations committed by their subcontractors or franchisees.

In 2023, in response to the company Cemex having been found guilty of illegal labor practices by interfering with a union election, the NLRB instated a new policy meant to deter election interference. Under the new policy if a majority of workers demonstrate support for a union, the company must recognize them or ask the NLRB to conduct an election. However, if they commit unfair labor practices, the union will automatically be recognized, and the company will be required to bargain. This differs from the then-defunct Joy Silk standard, which had required employers to recognize a union unless they had a good-faith doubt that the union had majority employee support. Nonetheless, Cemex was noted as a significant strengthening of union protections and a partial revival of Joy Silk.

In 2024, SpaceX, Amazon, and Trader Joe&#x27;s argued in various court filings that the NLRB was unconstitutional by the theory that it violates separation of powers and due process.

In December 2024, in a constitutional challenge to the NLRB&#x27;s structure, the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ruled that the NLRB judges’ layered removal protections against being fired by the President violate the U.S. Constitution.

After taking office, Trump fired two NLRB officials, including board member Gwynne Wilcox, the first NLRB member to be fired in the 90 years of the agency&#x27; existence. This action not only caused the board to lose its quorum, but it may also have violated the National Labor Relations Act, as board members are only supposed to be removed by the president for &quot;neglect of duty or malfeasance in office&quot;. , the board had not said publicly when it intended to have a quorum again. All NLRB investigations, including 24 into Elon Musk&#x27;s companies cannot move forward until Trump nominates new members.

==Structure==

In 1947, the Taft–Hartley Act created a formal administrative distinction between the board and the general counsel of the NLRB. In broad terms, the general counsel is responsible for investigating and prosecuting unfair labor practice claims and for the general supervision of the NLRB field offices. The general counsel is appointed by the president to a four-year term and independent from the board; it has limited independence to argue for a change in the law in presenting cases to the board. The general counsel oversees four divisions: the Division of Operations Management, the Division of Administration, the Division of Advice, and the Division of Enforcement Litigation.

The board, on the other hand, is the adjudicative body that decides the unfair labor practice cases brought to it. Once the board has decided the issue, it is the general counsel&#x27;s responsibility to uphold the board&#x27;s decision, even if it is contrary to the position it advocated when presenting the case to the board. The board is also responsible for the administration of the Act&#x27;s provisions governing the holding of elections and resolution of jurisdictional disputes. It is a reactive and not a proactive power. The NLRB rarely promulgates administrative rules.

The board has more than thirty regional offices. The regional offices conduct elections, investigate unfair labor practice charges, and make the initial determination on those charges (whether to dismiss, settle, or issue complaints). The board has jurisdiction to hold elections and prosecute violations of the Act in Puerto Rico and American Samoa.

===Jurisdiction===
The board&#x27;s jurisdiction is limited to private sector employees and the United States Postal Service; other than Postal Service employees, it has no authority over labor relations disputes involving governmental, railroad and airline employees covered by the Adamson Railway Labor Act, or agricultural employees. On the other hand, in those parts of the private sector its jurisdictional standards are low enough to reach almost all employers whose business has any appreciable impact on interstate commerce.

===Processing of charges===
Charges are filed by parties against unions or employers with the appropriate regional office. The regional office will investigate the complaint. If a violation is believed to exist, the region will take the case before an Administrative Law Judge who will conduct a hearing. The decision of the Administrative Law Judge may be reviewed by the five member board. Board decisions are reviewable by United States Courts of Appeals. The board&#x27;s decisions are not self-executing: it must seek court enforcement in order to force a recalcitrant party to comply with its orders. (For greater detail on this process see the entry for unfair labor practice.)

==General counsel==
Lafe Solomon was named acting general counsel on June21, 2010. His nomination was sent to the Senate on January5, 2011. Solomon&#x27;s authority came into question on August13, 2013, when Judge Benjamin Settle for the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington denied a petition for injunctive relief, ruling that Solomon had not been properly appointed under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998 (FVRA). Although other district courts had enforced Solomon&#x27;s requests, Settle&#x27;s decision called into question all of Solomon&#x27;s activity since June21, 2010, focusing on subsections (a)(1) and (2) of the FVRA; some pundits claimed that Solomon&#x27;s appointment was allowed under subsection (a)(3). President Obama withdrew Solomon&#x27;s nomination.

On July31, 2013, President Obama nominated former NLRB nominee Richard Griffin as general counsel, calling Griffin &quot;a kind of prosecutor at the board&quot; who would fill &quot;one of the most critical roles at the agency.&quot; The Senate approved Griffin&#x27;s nomination on October29, 2013, by a vote of 55 to 44.

Peter B. Robb was nominated by President Donald J. Trump in September2017 and was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on November8, 2017. He was sworn in as general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board on November 17, 2017, for a four-year term. Immediately following President Joe Biden&#x27;s inauguration on January20, 2021, the White House sent a letter to Robb requesting his resignation. Just hours later, Robb refused. He was fired that evening. Unions had wished for Robb to be replaced so that previous agency procedure could be restored; supporters of the firing argued that it was legal, citing the recent Supreme Court decision in &quot;Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau&quot; (2020). The general counsel had never been fired previously.

On January 25, 2021, President Biden appointed Peter Sung Ohr, a veteran employee of the NLRB, to serve as acting general counsel. On February 17, 2021, Biden nominated Jennifer Abruzzo, a former acting general counsel of the NLRB, to serve as the new general counsel. Her nomination was confirmed by the Senate on July 21, 2021, in a 51–50 vote, with Vice President Kamala Harris breaking the tie in her favor. Her four-year team in office began on July 22, 2021.

==Board members==

===Current board members===
The current board members :
=== Recent appointments ===

====Donald Trump’s appointments====
On January 25, 2017, President Donald Trump appointed Philip Miscimarra the acting chairman of the NLRB. Miscimarra&#x27;s term expired on December 16, 2017. Marvin Kaplan succeeded him as NLRB Chairman on December 21, 2017. Kaplan was replaced as chairman in April 2018 by John F. Ring.

President Trump announced on March 2, 2020, that he would renominate Republican Marvin Kaplan and Democrat Lauren McGarity McFerran to seats on the board. On July 29, 2020, Kaplan was confirmed by the Senate by a vote of 52–46 to a second term of five years expiring August 27, 2025, and McFerran was confirmed by the Senate by a vote of 53–42 to a second term of five years expiring December 16, 2024.

====Joe Biden&#x27;s appointments====
On January 20, 2021, President Joe Biden appointed current Democratic member Lauren McFerran as chair of the NLRB.

Biden subsequently nominated Gwynne Wilcox to fill the then vacant Carmody seat on the board and David Prouty to replace William Emanuel as holder of the Smith seat when the latter&#x27;s term expires in August 2021. Both nominees have strong ties to organized labor and have represented unions. They received Senate confirmation on July 28, 2021. On September 6, 2023, Wilcox was confirmed by the Senate for a second 5-year term.

===Past board members===
Source:
===Chairpersons===

The president designates one member of the board to serve as chairman. Chairmen serve at the pleasure of the president, and the president can designate another member as chairman at any time.
The chairman&#x27;s powers are limited. The chairman, like other board members, has a chief legal counsel and a legal staff. Except for certain limited and purely administrative functions (such as being the recipient of appeals or Freedom of Information Act requests), one former NLRB Chairman has said &quot;the chairmanship—given the authority of the general counsel to appoint regional staff and recommend regional directors to the entire board (not just to the chairman)—is more like a bully pulpit than a position of authority.&quot; The chairman does, however, work with the Office of Management and Budget to craft the NLRB&#x27;s budget proposal to Congress, may propose to the board changes to NLRB procedures and guidance manuals, and may propose that the board engage in rulemaking.

From 1935 to 1953, it was customary for the chairman (like all members of the NLRB) to be a neutral career government employee rather than an advocate of either labor unions or management. President Dwight Eisenhower&#x27;s appointment of Guy Farmer in 1953 broke this two-decade-old tradition (Farmer was a management attorney). Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson both returned to the tradition of appointing neutral third parties to the position of board chairman, but President Richard M. Nixon appointed a management-side attorney. The board as a whole was under intense Congressional scrutiny from its inception until the 1960s. This ended in the 1960s and 1970s, but resumed in the 1980s. Subsequent appointments to the position of chairman have been heavily partisan and from either a strongly pro-union or pro-management position.
==See also==

* Federal Labor Relations Authority
* Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (United States)
* List of chairmen of the National Labor Relations Board
* NLRB election procedures
* Subpoena ad testificandum
* Subpoena duces tecum
* Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations
* Union organizer
* &quot;Blue Man Vegas, LLC v. NLRB&quot; (2008)

==Notes==
==References==
==General References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Fischer, Fredric H.; Brent, Garren; and Truesdale, John C., eds. &quot;How to Take A Case Before the NLRB.&quot; 8th ed. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of National Affairs, 2008.
* Gould IV, William B. &quot;Labored Relations: Law, Politics, and the NLRB.&quot; Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001.
==External links==
* 
* National Labor Relations Board in the Federal Register
* 29 CFR Chapter I of the Code of Federal Regulations from the LII
* 29 CFR Chapter I of the Code of Federal Regulations on FederalRegister.gov</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="4" end="34" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="36" end="40" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="NLRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752939" start="48" end="66" title="Independent agencies of the United States government" label="independent agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="74" end="113" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039782" start="128" end="142" title="United States labor law" label="U.S. labor law"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="158" end="179" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884306" start="184" end="205" title="unfair labor practice" label="unfair labor practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="218" end="254" title="National Labor Relations Act of 1935" label="National Labor Relations Act of 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="310" end="321" title="trade union" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884306" start="367" end="388" title="unfair labor practice" label="unfair labor practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251296" start="467" end="495" title="protected concerted activity" label="protected concerted activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q564612" start="548" end="563" title="General Counsel" label="general counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="598" end="607" title="President of the United States" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="617" end="624" title="Advice and consent" label="consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="632" end="638" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="813" end="822" title="appellate" label="appellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269458" start="823" end="842" title="quasi-judicial body" label="quasi-judicial body"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683585" start="864" end="888" title="administrative law judge" label="administrative law judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="959" end="975" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3141633" start="1257" end="1289" title="National Industrial Recovery Act" label="National Industrial Recovery Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886796" start="1512" end="1526" title="union violence" label="union violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49775" start="1528" end="1542" title="general strike" label="general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="1549" end="1567" title="recognition strike" label="recognition strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967656" start="1631" end="1663" title="National Recovery Administration" label="National Recovery Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389102" start="1704" end="1719" title="Hugh S. Johnson" label="Hugh S. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="1851" end="1872" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336902" start="1908" end="1928" title="National Labor Board" label="National Labor Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="2870" end="2885" title="Executive order (United States)" label="Executive Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662531" start="2956" end="2973" title="Lloyd K. Garrison" label="Lloyd K. Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683585" start="3294" end="3318" title="administrative law judge" label="administrative law judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="3989" end="4010" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4640" end="4647" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q213721" start="4648" end="4664" title="Robert F. Wagner" label="Robert F. Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4666" end="4667" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="4670" end="4672" title="New York (state)" label="NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="4834" end="4862" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107423" start="5188" end="5204" title="J. Warren Madden" label="J. Warren Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896136" start="5223" end="5261" title="University of Pittsburgh School of Law" label="University of Pittsburgh School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064661" start="6538" end="6553" title="Charles H. Fahy" label="Charles H. Fahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235489" start="6585" end="6600" title="David J. Saposs" label="David J. Saposs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969428" start="6670" end="6681" title="Nathan Witt" label="Nathan Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973935" start="7886" end="7920" title="NLRB v. Jones &amp;amp; Laughlin Steel Corp." label="NLRB v. Jones &amp;amp; Laughlin Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q464242" start="8498" end="8526" title="American Federation of Labor" label="American Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023739" start="8669" end="8705" title="Congress of Industrial Organizations" label="Congress of Industrial Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8805" end="8816" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="8835" end="8844" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467233" start="9084" end="9095" title="Labor spy" label="labor spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418259" start="9111" end="9124" title="company union" label="company union"/>
<link wikidata="Q377506" start="9246" end="9271" title="Robert M. La Follette Jr." label="Robert M. La Follette Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2495438" start="9317" end="9356" title="United States Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions" label="Senate Committee on Education and Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462580" start="9498" end="9519" title="La Follette Committee" label="La Follette Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="9715" end="9727" title="fifth column" label="fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658292" start="9873" end="9890" title="Harlan County War" label="Harlan County War"/>
<link wikidata="Q111658718" start="9929" end="9941" title="blacklisting" label="blacklisting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="9989" end="10002" title="strikebreaker" label="strikebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="10119" end="10127" title="Strike action" label="strikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="10379" end="10397" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="10430" end="10443" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577283" start="10586" end="10609" title="Lochner era" label="&amp;quot;Lochner&amp;quot; era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973935" start="10952" end="11024" title="National Labor Relations Board v. Jones &amp;amp; Laughlin Steel Corporation" label="National Labor Relations Board v. Jones &amp;amp; Laughlin Steel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="11650" end="11660" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="12434" end="12472" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903625" start="12490" end="12505" title="Martin Dies Jr." label="Martin Dies Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="12509" end="12511" title="Texas" label="TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251570" start="12546" end="12558" title="John P. Frey" label="John P. Frey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="12605" end="12615" title="Communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969428" start="12666" end="12677" title="Nathan Witt" label="Nathan Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="12807" end="12843" title="Communist Party of the United States" label="Communist Party of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="13138" end="13162" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13270" end="13285" title="J. Warren Madden#The Smith Committee" label="Smith Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631939" start="13335" end="13350" title="Howard W. Smith" label="Howard W. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="13354" end="13356" title="Virginia" label="VA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495353" start="13764" end="13785" title="United States House Committee on Rules" label="House Rules Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353701" start="14189" end="14205" title="Elbert D. Thomas" label="Elbert D. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14223" end="14262" title="United States Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions#Education and Labor, 1884–1947" label="Senate Committee on Education and Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q743212" start="14440" end="14456" title="Taft–Hartley Act" label="Taft–Hartley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666790" start="14587" end="14602" title="Harry A. Millis" label="Harry A. Millis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884306" start="16070" end="16091" title="unfair labor practice" label="unfair labor practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q59029" start="16737" end="16752" title="Labor history (discipline)" label="labor historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125107" start="16912" end="16930" title="Secondary action" label="secondary boycotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315225" start="16932" end="16953" title="jurisdictional strike" label="jurisdictional strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479254" start="17578" end="17588" title="rulemaking" label="rulemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666790" start="17833" end="17848" title="Harry A. Millis" label="Harry A. Millis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="19923" end="19951" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="Administrative Procedure Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336955" start="20093" end="20117" title="National War Labor Board (1942–1945)" label="National War Labor Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545698" start="20882" end="20904" title="War Labor Disputes Act" label="War Labor Disputes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152117" start="22101" end="22115" title="Paul M. Herzog" label="Paul M. Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q743212" start="22254" end="22270" title="Taft–Hartley Act" label="Taft–Hartley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q519730" start="22559" end="22573" title="Robert A. Taft" label="Robert A. Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452176" start="22617" end="22636" title="Fred A. Hartley Jr." label="Fred A. Hartley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1198713" start="22690" end="22705" title="Wildcat strike action" label="wildcat strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125107" start="22726" end="22744" title="Secondary action" label="secondary boycotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102436" start="22834" end="22845" title="closed shop" label="closed shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333460" start="23011" end="23028" title="right-to-work law" label="right-to-work law"/>
<link wikidata="Q72595878" start="23657" end="23673" title="Robert N. Denham" label="Robert N. Denham"/>
<link wikidata="Q564612" start="23697" end="23712" title="general counsel" label="general counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="23910" end="23925" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q464242" start="24556" end="24584" title="American Federation of Labor" label="American Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023739" start="24595" end="24631" title="Congress of Industrial Organizations" label="Congress of Industrial Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="25693" end="25702" title="Good faith" label="bad-faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="25703" end="25724" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743491" start="26913" end="26956" title="American Communications Ass&amp;#x27;n v. Douds" label="American Communications Ass&amp;#x27;n v. Douds"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="27031" end="27046" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="27065" end="27078" title="ex post facto" label="ex post facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q862685" start="27092" end="27109" title="bill of attainder" label="bill of attainder"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27126" end="27149" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Section 10: Limits on the States" label="Article One, Section 10"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27203" end="27214" title="Article Six of the United States Constitution#Oaths" label="Article Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523619" start="27263" end="27294" title="Garner v. Board of Public Works" label="Garner v. Board of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451972" start="27357" end="27369" title="loyalty oath" label="loyalty oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="27646" end="27657" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="27672" end="27692" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19114065" start="27795" end="27817" title="United States v. Brown (1965)" label="United States v. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914646" start="27947" end="27955" title="Joy Silk" label="Joy Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468602" start="28412" end="28444" title="NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., Inc." label="NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q8022652" start="29659" end="29675" title="Wilma B. Liebman" label="Wilma B. Liebman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="29714" end="29728" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="29786" end="29795" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="29986" end="30014" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="30117" end="30123" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550308" start="30506" end="30543" title="Service Employees International Union" label="Service Employees International Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q104185088" start="30546" end="30564" title="Mark Gaston Pearce" label="Mark Gaston Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495438" start="30723" end="30780" title="United States Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions" label="Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q250492" start="30861" end="30866" title="United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="30868" end="30874" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q250451" start="30880" end="30887" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit" label="Seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="30968" end="31010" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="31058" end="31076" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="31087" end="31105" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056352" start="31307" end="31317" title="certiorari" label="certiorari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="31459" end="31470" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901949" start="31559" end="31577" title="recess appointment" label="recess appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011068" start="31778" end="31810" title="New Process Steel, L. P. v. NLRB" label="New Process Steel, L. P. v. NLRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147134" start="31957" end="31967" title="voice vote" label="voice vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901949" start="32423" end="32441" title="recess appointment" label="recess appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q102131357" start="32472" end="32484" title="Sharon Block (government official)" label="Sharon Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702" start="32602" end="32614" title="John Boehner" label="John Boehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q709641" start="32959" end="32970" title="Edwin Meese" label="Edwin Meese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="33406" end="33418" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="D.C. Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q250438" start="33722" end="33765" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q314459" start="34039" end="34049" title="Harry Reid" label="Harry Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068154" start="34083" end="34097" title="nuclear option" label="nuclear option"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="34147" end="34160" title="supermajority" label="supermajority"/>
<link wikidata="Q624036" start="34185" end="34195" title="filibuster" label="filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q40589892" start="34873" end="34893" title="Philip A. Miscimarra" label="Philip A. Miscimarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125076" start="35086" end="35132" title="National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning" label="National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053348" start="36940" end="36945" title="Cemex" label="Cemex"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914646" start="37428" end="37436" title="Joy Silk" label="Joy Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q193701" start="37704" end="37710" title="SpaceX" label="SpaceX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="37712" end="37718" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q688825" start="37724" end="37741" title="Trader Joe&amp;#x27;s" label="Trader Joe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="37792" end="37808" title="unconstitutional" label="unconstitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451826" start="37840" end="37860" title="Separation of powers under the United States Constitution" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="37865" end="37876" title="Due Process Clause" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="37961" end="38018" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="United States District Court for the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="38102" end="38111" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q111302467" start="38220" end="38233" title="Gwynne Wilcox" label="Gwynne Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="38408" end="38436" title="National Labor Relations Act of 1935" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q743212" start="38791" end="38807" title="Taft–Hartley Act" label="Taft–Hartley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884306" start="38992" end="39013" title="unfair labor practice" label="unfair labor practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="40365" end="40376" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="40381" end="40395" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="40434" end="40446" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="40461" end="40475" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="40494" end="40522" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="40635" end="40643" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="40648" end="40655" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680500" start="40681" end="40706" title="Adamson Railway Labor Act" label="Adamson Railway Labor Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="40910" end="40929" title="interstate commerce" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683585" start="41184" end="41208" title="Administrative Law Judge" label="Administrative Law Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="41358" end="41389" title="United States Courts of Appeals" label="United States Courts of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884306" start="41593" end="41614" title="unfair labor practice" label="unfair labor practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471635" start="41638" end="41650" title="Lafe Solomon" label="Lafe Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888754" start="41832" end="41847" title="Benjamin Settle" label="Benjamin Settle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889859" start="41856" end="41923" title="United States District Court for the Western District of Washington" label="United States District Court for the Western District of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41946" end="41963" title="Temporary restraining order#Injunctions in US labor law context" label="injunctive relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440487" start="42027" end="42063" title="Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998" label="Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="42087" end="42102" title="United States district court" label="district courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q45364919" start="42755" end="42768" title="Peter B. Robb" label="Peter B. Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="42796" end="42811" title="Donald J. Trump" label="Donald J. Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="42854" end="42865" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738250" start="43025" end="43064" title="Inauguration of Joe Biden" label="President Joe Biden&amp;#x27;s inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356698" start="43406" end="43459" title="Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau" label="Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617760" start="43697" end="43713" title="Jennifer Abruzzo" label="Jennifer Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="43895" end="43908" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643351" start="43909" end="43925" title="List of tie-breaking votes cast by the vice president of the United States" label="breaking the tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="44165" end="44177" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071231" start="44292" end="44305" title="Marvin Kaplan (lawyer)" label="Marvin Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492986" start="44408" end="44420" title="John F. Ring" label="John F. Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="44896" end="44905" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q111302467" start="45010" end="45023" title="Gwynne Wilcox" label="Gwynne Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33109866" start="45102" end="45117" title="William Emanuel" label="William Emanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="45291" end="45310" title="Senate confirmation" label="Senate confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q814247" start="45552" end="45584" title="at the pleasure of the President" label="at the pleasure of the president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="45889" end="45915" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="46239" end="46270" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479254" start="46440" end="46450" title="rulemaking" label="rulemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="46614" end="46626" title="Trade union" label="labor unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="46652" end="46669" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="46794" end="46809" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="46814" end="46831" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="46948" end="46964" title="Richard M. Nixon" label="Richard M. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440273" start="47322" end="47355" title="Federal Labor Relations Authority" label="Federal Labor Relations Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440288" start="47358" end="47416" title="Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (United States)" label="Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="47419" end="47473" title="List of Chairmen of the National Labor Relations Board" label="List of chairmen of the National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954662" start="47476" end="47500" title="NLRB election procedures" label="NLRB election procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q883270" start="47503" end="47528" title="Subpoena ad testificandum" label="Subpoena ad testificandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631814" start="47531" end="47551" title="Subpoena duces tecum" label="Subpoena duces tecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145295" start="47554" end="47597" title="Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations" label="Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886765" start="47600" end="47615" title="Union organizer" label="Union organizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278209" start="47624" end="47651" title="Blue Man Vegas, LLC v. NLRB" label="Blue Man Vegas, LLC v. NLRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="48105" end="48121" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="48148" end="48175" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517400" start="48185" end="48188" title="Legal Information Institute" label="LII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="48215" end="48242" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="48246" end="48265" title="FederalRegister.gov" label="FederalRegister.gov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223374" wikidata="Q2607656" url="?curid=223374" title="Tor (fish)">
<text>Tor is a genus of freshwater ray-finned fishes belonging to the family Cyprinidae, the family which includes the carps, barbs and related fishes. The fishes in this genus, and some related genera, are commonly known as mahseers. These fishes are found in Asia.

==Species==
The currently recognized species in this genus are:
* &quot;Tor ater&quot; 
* &quot;Tor barakae&quot; 
* &quot;Tor dongnaiensis&quot; (Dongnai mahseer)
* &quot;Tor khudree&quot; (Black mahseer)
* &quot;Tor kulkarnii&quot; (Dwarf mahseer)
* &quot;Tor laterivittatus&quot; 
* &quot;Tor mahanadicus&quot; 
* &quot;Tor malabaricus&quot; (Malabar mahseer)
* &quot;Tor mekongensis&quot; 
* &quot;Tor mosal&quot; 
* &quot;Tor polylepis&quot; 
* &quot;Tor putitora&quot; (Himalayan mahseer)
* &quot;Tor remadevii&quot; (Orange-finned mahseer)
* &quot;Tor sinensis&quot; (Chinese mahseer)
* &quot;Tor tambra&quot; 
* &quot;Tor tambroides&quot; (Malayan mahseer, empurau)
* &quot;Tor tor&quot; (Red-finned mahseer)
* &quot;Tor yingjiangensis&quot; (Yingjiang mahseer)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="9" end="14" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127282" start="29" end="46" title="Actinopterygii" label="ray-finned fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="64" end="70" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q35047" start="71" end="81" title="Cyprinidae" label="Cyprinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="113" end="117" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423230" start="120" end="125" title="Barb (fish)" label="barbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13380731" start="219" end="226" title="mahseer" label="mahseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407655" start="334" end="342" title="Tor ater" label="Tor ater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397448" start="358" end="369" title="Tor barakae" label="Tor barakae"/>
<link wikidata="Q67184141" start="385" end="401" title="Tor dongnaiensis" label="Tor dongnaiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595855" start="434" end="445" title="Tor khudree" label="Tor khudree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715288" start="476" end="489" title="Tor kulkarnii" label="Tor kulkarnii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398151" start="520" end="538" title="Tor laterivittatus" label="Tor laterivittatus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="554" end="569" title="Tor mahanadicus" label="Tor mahanadicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397555" start="585" end="600" title="Tor malabaricus" label="Tor malabaricus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="633" end="648" title="Tor mekongensis" label="Tor mekongensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="664" end="673" title="Tor mosal" label="Tor mosal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760090" start="689" end="702" title="Tor polylepis" label="Tor polylepis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741221" start="718" end="730" title="Tor putitora" label="Tor putitora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713492" start="765" end="778" title="Tor remadevii" label="Tor remadevii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5789831" start="817" end="829" title="Tor sinensis" label="Tor sinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782134" start="862" end="872" title="Tor tambra" label="Tor tambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768599" start="888" end="902" title="Tor tambroides" label="Tor tambroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q147660" start="944" end="951" title="Tor tor" label="Tor tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676728" start="987" end="1005" title="Tor yingjiangensis" label="Tor yingjiangensis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="223376" wikidata="Q4500300" url="?curid=223376" title="Trapeze (1975 album)">
<text>Trapeze, also known as Trapeze 1975, is the fifth studio album by English hard rock band Trapeze. Recorded with producer Steve Smith at Island Studios, London, it was released in 1975 by Warner Bros. Records. The album was preceded by the release of one single, a cover version of &quot;On the Sunny Side of the Street&quot;, originally recorded by Frank Sinatra.

==Reception==

Music website AllMusic awarded &quot;Trapeze&quot; two out of five stars. Writer Dave Thompson described the album as &quot;a dour little disc, desperately missing the funk infusions of Glenn Hughes and, for the most part, overshadowed even by its disappointing predecessor&quot;. Thompson identified opening track &quot;Star Breaker&quot; as &quot;probably the best&quot; song on &quot;Trapeze&quot;, but summarised the release as &quot;lumpen rock by rote, dull and dismissed by all but the most desperately faithful&quot;.

==Track listing==
==Personnel==
;Musical personnel
*Mel Galley – guitar, vocals
*Rob Kendrick – guitar
*Pete Wright – bass
*Dave Holland – drums
*Glenn Hughes – vocals on tracks 3 and 10

;Additional personnel
*Steve Smith – production
*Phill Brown – engineering
*Bobby Hata – mastering
*Seabrook Graves Aslett – artwork
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="50" end="62" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="74" end="83" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q691001" start="89" end="96" title="Trapeze (band)" label="Trapeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256786" start="136" end="150" title="Sarm West Studios" label="Island Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="187" end="207" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="254" end="260" title="Single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="264" end="277" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q921669" start="287" end="318" title="On the Sunny Side of the Street" label="On the Sunny Side of the Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="349" end="362" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="394" end="402" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q310749" start="566" end="578" title="Glenn Hughes (English singer)" label="Glenn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499961" start="624" end="653" title="Hot Wire (Trapeze album)" label="its disappointing predecessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q555917" start="959" end="969" title="Mel Galley" label="Mel Galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="972" end="978" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="980" end="986" title="Singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1025" end="1029" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q555983" start="1031" end="1043" title="Dave Holland (drummer)" label="Dave Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="1046" end="1051" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q310749" start="1053" end="1065" title="Glenn Hughes (English singer)" label="Glenn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="1132" end="1142" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186598" start="1144" end="1155" title="Phill Brown" label="Phill Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="1158" end="1169" title="Audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="1184" end="1193" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333350" start="1220" end="1227" title="Album cover" label="artwork"/>
</links>
</doc>
