<doc id="220337" wikidata="Q1855102" url="?curid=220337" title="National Peasants' Party">
<text>The National Peasants&#x27; Party (also known as the National Peasant Party or National Farmers&#x27; Party; , or &quot;Partidul Național-Țărănist&quot;, PNȚ) was an agrarian political party in the Kingdom of Romania. It was formed in 1926 through the fusion of the Romanian National Party (PNR), a conservative-regionalist group centred on Transylvania, and the Peasants&#x27; Party (PȚ), which had coalesced the left-leaning agrarian movement in the Old Kingdom and Bessarabia. The definitive PNR–PȚ merger came after a decade-long rapprochement, producing a credible contender to the dominant National Liberal Party (PNL). National Peasantists agreed on the concept of a &quot;peasant state&quot;, which defended smallholding against state capitalism or state socialism, proposing voluntary cooperative farming as the basis for economic policy. Peasants were seen as the first defence of Romanian nationalism and of the country&#x27;s monarchic regime, sometimes within a system of social corporatism. Regionally, the party expressed sympathy for Balkan federalism and rallied with the International Agrarian Bureau; internally, it championed administrative decentralization and respect for minority rights, as well as, briefly, republicanism. It remained factionalized on mainly ideological grounds, leading to a series of defections.

With its attacks on the PNL establishment, the PNȚ came to endorse an authoritarian monarchy, mounting no resistance to a conspiracy which brought Carol II on the Romanian throne in 1930. Over the following five years, Carol manoeuvred against the PNȚ, which opposed his attempts to subvert liberal democracy. PNȚ governments were in power for most of the time between 1928 and 1933, with the leader Iuliu Maniu as its longest-serving Prime Minister. Supported by the Romanian Social Democrats, they expanded Romania&#x27;s welfare state, but failed to tackle the Great Depression, and organized clampdowns against radicalized workers at Lupeni and Grivița. This issue brought Maniu into conflict with the outlawed Romanian Communist Party, though the PNȚ, and in particular its left, favored a Romanian popular front. From 1935, most of the centrist wing embraced anti-fascism, outvoting the PNȚ&#x27;s far-right, which split of as a Romanian Front, under Alexandru Vaida-Voevod; in that interval, the PNȚ set up pro-democratic paramilitary units, or Peasant Guards. However, the party signed a temporary cooperation agreement with the fascist Iron Guard ahead of national elections in 1937, sparking much controversy among its own voters.

The PNȚ was banned under the National Renaissance Front (1938–1940), which also absorbed its centrists. Regrouped under Maniu, it remained active throughout World War II as an underground organization, tolerated by successive fascist regimes, but supportive of the Allied Powers; it also organized protests against the deportation of minorities and for the return of Northern Transylvania. Together with the PNL and the communists, it executed the Coup of August 1944, emerging as the most powerful party of the subsequent democratic interlude (1944–1946). In this final period, National Peasantists were repressed as instigators of anti-communist resistance. The PNȚ was registered as having lost the fraudulent elections in 1946, and was banned following the &quot;Tămădău Affair&quot; of 1947. The communist regime imprisoned its members in large numbers, though some on the pro-communist left were allowed to go free. Both Maniu and his more leftist deputy, Ion Mihalache, died in prison.

PNȚ cells were revived in the Romanian diaspora by youth leaders such as Ion Rațiu, and had representation within the Romanian National Committee. The release of political prisoners also allowed the PNȚ to claim existence inside Romania. Corneliu Coposu emerged as the underground leader of this tendency, which was admitted into the Christian Democrat World Union. Its legal successor, called Christian Democratic National Peasants&#x27; Party, was one of the first registered political groups after the December 1989 Revolution.

==History==
===Formation===
Future PNȚ leader Maniu had had its first government experience during the union of Transylvania with Romania. In alliance with the Transylvanian Socialists, his PNR had organized a Transylvanian Directorate, which functioned as that region&#x27;s transitional government to April 1920. This body was explicitly against regional autonomy, and its distinct initiatives were in the field of social welfare. As regional Minister of Social Welfare, the PNR doctor Iuliu Moldovan introduced eugenics, which also appeared as nativism in the political thought a PNR leader, Alexandru Vaida-Voevod. Based in the Romanian Old Kingdom, the Peasants&#x27; Party was founded in December 1918 by schoolteacher Ion Mihalache, with assistance from academics such as Virgil Madgearu and Dimitrie Gusti. The group soon established itself in Bessarabia, also recently united with Romania. This was due to it absorbing much of the Bessarabian Peasants&#x27; Party, under Pan Halippa and Constantin Stere. In 1921, the PȚ had been joined by Nicolae L. Lupu, formerly of the Labor Party.

In 1919–1920, the PNR was able to outmaneuver the PNL, and, backed by the PȚ, formed Romania&#x27;s national government, headed by Vaida-Voevod. Mihalache was personally involved in drafting the land reform project, taking a revolutionary stand which greatly increased the proportion of smallholders. Vaida&#x27;s cabinet was brought down by King Ferdinand I, who openly favored the National Liberals. The PNL&#x27;s return to power came with the adoption of a new constitution, and with the enactment of land reform, which massively expanded Romania&#x27;s smallholding class. The latter had an unintended consequence in that it created an electoral pool for the opposition parties; it also gave Peasantists hopes that Romania&#x27;s economy could still be built around peasant consumers. At this stage, both the PȚ and the PNR were opposed to the Constitution, seeing it as imposed on the Romanian public by the PNL, and arguing that it left the country open to future abuse of power.

The two opposition groups embarked on a long series of negotiations, eventually producing a set of principles for merger. They began in May 1924, as informal talks between Stere and the PNR&#x27;s Vasile Goldiș, resulting in a preliminary agreement that June. During this process, the PȚ shed much of its radical platform. However, left-wing Peasantists supported their ideologue Stere, who had a controversial past, for a leadership position in the unified body. This proposal was strongly opposed by figures on the PNR&#x27;s right-wing such as Vaida and Voicu Nițescu. The unification was only made possible once Mihalache &quot;sacrificed&quot; Stere. The two-party collaboration was successfully tested during the August 1925 elections for the Agricultural Chambers, a professional consultative body. In the local election of early 1926, both parties ran a United Opposition Bloc, in conjunction with Alexandru Averescu&#x27;s People&#x27;s Party (PP); also joining them was a Peasant Workers&#x27; Bloc (BMȚ), which acted as a legal front for clandestine Romanian Communist Party (PCdR). The PP withdrew from this pact once Averescu was called by Ferdinand to take power. Maniu was a first choice, but eventually discarded for his association with Mihalache, whom Ferdinand regarded as a dangerous radical.
Weakened when Goldiș and others defected to the PP, the PNR became &quot;second-fiddle&quot; to the Peasantist caucus. In the subsequent national election of June, the PNR and PȚ formed a National–Peasant Bloc, which took 27% of the vote and 69 seats in the Assembly of Deputies. As the PȚ agreed to a full merger, the PNR lost support from Nicolae Iorga&#x27;s semi-independent faction, who went on to reestablish itself as a Democratic Nationalist Party. The fusion was enshrined at a PNR–PȚ congress on October 10, 1926. Also then, Maniu was voted in as chairman; Mihalache, Lupu, Vaida-Voevod and Paul Brătășanu were vice presidents, while Madgearu became general secretary and Mihai Popovici cashier. From October 17, 1927, the party central organ became &quot;Dreptatea&quot;, though the party continued to publish various other periodicals, including &quot;Patria&quot;. On November 21 of that year, the party was admitted into the International Agrarian Bureau.

The National–Peasantist fusion could not lead to an immediate challenge to the PNL supremacy. The party dropped to 22% and 54 deputies after the June 1927 election. With Ferdinand terminally ill, it reluctantly backed Barbu Știrbey&#x27;s nominally independent cabinet, which was in practice a National Liberal front. Its leadership also rejected a pact with Averescu&#x27;s group, pushing Averescu further into political insignificance. These events also overlapped with a dynastic crisis: after Ferdinand&#x27;s death in July 1927, the throne went to his minor grandson Michael I—Michael&#x27;s disgraced father Carol II having been forced to renounce his claim and pushed into exile. The arrangement was resented by both the PNL and the PNR. For different reasons, both groups sketched out plans to depose Michael and turn Romania into a republic.

The unexpected death of PNL chairman Ion I. C. Brătianu pushed the PNȚ back into full-blown opposition: &quot;All hopes [...] focused on the democratic movement of renewal, outstandingly represented by Iuliu Maniu.&quot; The party withdrew its elected representatives and pushed citizens to engage in tax resistance. In creating a web of tactical alliances, it reconfirmed its pact with the BMȚ, while still shunning the PP. The PNȚ&#x27;s first general congress was held on May 6, 1928 at Alba Iulia. It marked an early peak of PNȚ revolutionary activity, gathering between 100,000 and 200,000 supporters. Observers expected that the columns would then &quot;march on Bucharest&quot;, by analogy with the March on Rome. This never happened, but the showing impressed the Regents into deposing the PNL cabinet and handing power to Maniu. Carol reportedly watched on as the events unfolded: at the time, Maniu &quot;remain[ed] silent&quot; as to whether he would back him for the throne. In fact, Maniu and Aurel Leucuția promised him the PNȚ&#x27;s backing if he accepted a set of conditions, including un-divorcing Helen of Greece; Carol reluctantly agreed. Maniu was adamant that Carol&#x27;s mistress Elena Lupescu stay exiled, and for this reason earned the Prince&#x27;s eternal enmity.

===PNȚ cabinets===

Maniu was sworn in as Prime Minister on October 10, 1928, leading the first of eight PNȚ government teams. This saw an extension of the welfare state and the regulation of labor through collective bargaining. Maniu&#x27;s first cabinet had Moldovan as Labor Minister, using this position to advance his program in &quot;biopolitics&quot;. His tenure saw the adoption of laws which set the working day at a maximum 10 hours and limited child labor; the effort to unify social insurance was completed in 1933. Endorsed by the Social Democratic Party (PSDR), this government team was put to the test during the December 1928 elections, which are often recognized as free from abuse and government interference, and which it still won in a landslide—with almost 78% of the vote. This result was partly owed to its alliance with the PSDR, the Jewish National People&#x27;s Party, the German Party, and the Ukrainian Nationalists. At this early stage, the PNȚ was fully controlled by Maniu, who ordered PNȚ members of Parliament to sign resignations that he would file and enact upon in case of insubordination.

In June 1930, a trans-party group of Carlist supporters engineered a coup against the Regency, which ended with Carol&#x27;s return and enthronement. The PNȚ briefly divided itself into backers of the coup and those who, like Maniu, remained more cautious. From July 1930, Carlist ideologue Nae Ionescu proposed a National Peasantist &quot;mass dictatorship&quot;, which implied dissolving all other parties. Such ideas were contained by Maniu, who spoke out in favor of maintaining and cultivating electoral democracy, and by Carol, who would have rather formed a multi-party coalition. Ionescu&#x27;s dictatorial optimism was published just as the Carol was antagonizing the PNȚ mainstream. Soon after his victory, the new King informed Maniu that he did not intend to honor his promises, causing a rift between monarch and government; Maniu resigned, was persuaded to return within days, and then resigned for good in October, handing the premiership to party colleague Gheorghe Mironescu.

Historian Barbara Jelavich sees Maniu&#x27;s resignation as &quot;ill-considered&quot;, effectively leaving Romania&#x27;s electorate without an administration that &quot;best represented [its] option&quot;. Carol ultimately asked Mironescu to resign in April 1931, and replaced him with Iorga, who led a minority cabinet. The National Peasantists were defeated by their PNL rivals in the election of June 1931, taking just 15% of the vote. Again called to power, with Vaida at the helm, they had a comeback with the early election of 1932, taking 40%. Carol persuaded Maniu to become Prime Minister in October. He resigned again in January 1933, after a row with Carol, who wanted Mihalache stripped of his post at Internal Affairs. Vaida returned as PNȚ Prime Minister, holding on to that position until November 13. Maniu had stepped down as PNȚ leader in June 1931, leaving Mihalache in charge to July of the following year; he then returned and held on to his seat to January 1933, when he was replaced by Vaida. Maniu and his supporters were now in the minority, issuing reprimands against Vaida&#x27;s alliance with Carol.

Despite its unprecedented success, the party was pushed into a defensive position by the Great Depression, and failed to enact many its various policy proposals; its support by workers and left-wing militants was affected during the strike actions of Lupeni and Grivița, which its ministers repressed with noted expediency. The former incident in particular was received as a shock by working-class voters, and led journalist Romulus Cioflec to hand in his resignation from the party, in what became a public scandal. All PNȚ cabinets were also confronted by the rise of revolutionary fascism, heralded by the Iron Guard. The latter&#x27;s &quot;Captain&quot;, Corneliu Zelea Codreanu, took up elements from the PNȚ program and planned ahead for its downfall. In 1932, PNȚ enjoys approached the newly formed National Socialist Party with an offer to share electoral lists; the offer was rejected. National Peasantism also met competition from a hard-right version of itself: the National Agrarian Party, formed by Octavian Goga (a poet and activist, once affiliated with the PNR). 

From 1931, PNȚ ministers issued regulations banning the Guard, but these proved unsuccessful. This interval witnessed the first clashes between the PNȚ and the Guardists, including one at Vulturu. A first effort at organizing a self-defense force for PNȚ politicians resulted in the 1928 &quot;civic guards&quot;. In 1929, the party had begun organizing another set of squads, called &quot;Voinici&quot; (&quot;Braves&quot;). Originally integrated with the youth organization, they later became a nucleus for the paramilitary Peasant Guards. By that time, Maniu&#x27;s guidelines had eroded left-wing support for the party. In February 1927, Lupu and Ion Buzdugan founded a rival group, the Peasants&#x27; Party–Lupu. Stere was finally expelled from the PNȚ after a heated controversy in 1930. In 1931, he established an agrarian socialist group called Democratic Peasants&#x27; Party–Stere. Another left-wing dissidence broke away with Grigore Iunian in late 1932, establishing itself as a Radical Peasants&#x27; Party (PȚR) in 1933.

Schisms and competition were compensated by recruitment, including in the intellectual sphere. Writer Șerban Cioculescu, who entered in early 1928, described the PNȚ as &quot;the only political factor which may democratize Romania&quot;. In the early 1930s, new arrivals included philosophers Petre Andrei and Constantin Rădulescu-Motru, linguist Traian Bratu, and painter Rudolf Schweitzer-Cumpăna; also joining were leaders of the Romanian Army, including Nicolae Alevra and Ioan Mihail Racoviță. The PNȚ&#x27;s left earned endorsements from poet Ion Vinea and his &quot;Facla&quot; newspaper, as well as from lawyer Haralambie Marchetti, known as a protector of the communists. The PNȚ&#x27;s more leftist youth published the magazine &quot;Stânga&quot;, which attracted collaborations from Petru Comarnescu and Traian Herseni. A highly visible left-wing cell was formed at the University of Iași by Bratu and Andrei, gathering new members and sympathizers: Constantin Balmuș, Octav Botez, Iorgu Iordan, Andrei Oțetea, and Mihai Ralea.

Unable to obtain a reduction of the foreign debt, and harangued by an increasingly confident PNL, the Vaida cabinet fell in November 1933. A PNL team under Ion G. Duca took over. The election of December 1933 was a National Liberal sweep, leaving the PNȚ with less than 15% of the votes cast. Duca took on the task of dissolving the Iron Guard, and was murdered by a death squad on December 29; the premiership passed to another PNL man, Gheorghe Tătărescu. The PNȚ viewed Tătărescu&#x27;s appointment as arbitrary, and protested on the issue. The spread of credible rumors according to which Maniu was slated for assassination by Carol&#x27;s partisans rekindled the Peasant Guards (now also known as the &quot;Maniu Guards&quot;); they continued to be active throughout most of 1934, until the party leadership asked them to dissolve.

===Vaida schism and &quot;popular front&quot;===

From March 1933, Lupu began attacking his former colleagues by bringing up alleged government corruption, in what became known as the &quot;Škoda Affair&quot;. Maniu dismissed this as Carol&#x27;s attempt to weaken the PNȚ, though the king&#x27;s maneuvering permanently damaged the reputation of PNȚ-ists such as Romulus Boilă. Won over by Carol&#x27;s political vision, Vaida lost the party chairmanship in March 1935, and inaugurated a new schism, creating his very own far-right party, the Romanian Front (FR), during the following month. Maniu also lost his grip on the PNȚ, and Mihalache was voted in for his second term. His relationship with Maniu reached a low point, with Mihalache hinting that he could order the PNR leadership expelled if they did not comply to his agenda. Under his watch, the PNȚ adopted a new statute in 1934, and a new program at the second party congress in April 1935. These pledged the party to a careful selections of cadres from the ranks of peasantry and youth, fully committing them to the project of establishing a &quot;peasant state&quot;. The architects were figures on the left of the party—Ralea, Andrei, Mihail Ghelmegeanu, and Ernest Ene—, who worked from drafts first presented in Ralea&#x27;s &quot;Viața Românească&quot;. During their ascendancy, in March 1934, Lupu and his followers were welcomed back into the PNȚ. This merger saw the party being joined by historian Ioan Hudiță, who later became one of Maniu&#x27;s dedicated supporters.

From May 1935, the PNȚ held massive rallies, showcasing Mihalache&#x27;s ambition of forming a new cabinet. Party unity was enforced by the decision of centrist Transylvanians such as Corneliu Coposu to side with democratic traditions and reject Vaida&#x27;s penchant for far-right authoritarianism. In 1935, Coposu became leader of the national youth wing, called &quot;Tineretul Național Țărănesc&quot; (TNȚ), proceeding to purge Vaidists from the various party organizations. Maniu&#x27;s nephew and potential successor, Ionel Pop, also took a stand against antisemitism, expressing horror at any attempt to align Romania with Nazi Germany. Anti-Nazism was likewise voiced by &quot;Facla&quot;, causing its editorial offices to be stormed by the National-Christian Defense League (LANC).

The Vaidist dissidence resulted in scuffles throughout Transylvania. In one such incident, PNȚ-ist Ilie Lazăr was reportedly shot in the arm. Only some 10% or 15% of PNȚ cadres were attracted by Vaida&#x27;s group. Overall, however, the National Peasantist failure to address the economic needs of its own constituents resulted in a steady decrease of its voting share—many peasants switched to supporting the Iron Guard or any of the other far-right parties. The explicitly fascist National Christian Party (PNC), founded as a merger of the LANC and Goga&#x27;s National Agrarians, was especially adept at canvassing the peasant vote in Bessarabia, veering it toward antisemitism. Alongside the FR, it earned Carol&#x27;s blessing to establish a &quot;nationalist parliamentary bloc&quot;, specifically designed to keep the PNȚ out of power.

The danger was sensed by Mihalache, who presided over massive anti-fascist rally in November 1935, amassing a reported 500,000 participants nation-wide. Following an audience with Carol, he claimed that the PNȚ would be called to power. In December 1935, the PNȚ reinforced discipline against left-wing dissent, expelling from its ranks Dem. I. Dobrescu, who went on to create his own movement, the &quot;Citizen Committees&quot;. Overall, however, the party became more sympathetic to left-wing causes. At his arrest in 1936, communist liaison Petre Constantinescu-Iași nominated the PNȚ and PȚR as anti-fascist parties; in 1935, he had tried but failed to forge a PCdR alliance with both groups, as well as with the Social Democrats and the Jewish Party. Communist support and endorsement by the Ploughmen&#x27;s Front were relevant in ensuring victories for PNȚ candidates Lupu and Ghiță Pop in the Assembly by-elections of Mehedinți and Hunedoara (February 1936). While the PNȚ elite took measures to downplay its far-left connection, left-wingers such as Dobrescu openly celebrated it as a winning combination. As summarized by historian Armin Heinen, PNȚ leftists also refrained from calling it a &quot;popular front&quot;, and only viewed socialist groups as subordinate.
The PNȚ, PSDR, PCdR and PȚR created a de facto united front during the county elections of 1936 and early 1937; also signing up where satellite parties: the Ploughmen&#x27;s Front, the Hungarian People&#x27;s Union, the Popovici Socialists, the Conservative Party, and Dobrescu&#x27;s Committees. In Bessarabia, the PCdR made noted efforts of reconciling the PNȚ and PȚR. Wherever the PNC appeared stronger, pacts also involved local PNL chapters. Similar pacts were signed in mid 1936 with the Magyar Party, although the latter withdrew, fearful of association with the communists. Many PNȚ sections also resisted alliances with far-leftist groups, but, even in such cases, the PCdR urged its followers to vote National Peasantist. Mihalache&#x27;s solution was to impose and vet a single platform for the alliance, which prevented the PCdR from using it as a means to popularize socialism.

At around the same time, Gheorghe Beza, a political conspirator with known links to the Iron Guard, began exposing Codreanu&#x27;s various secrets, including his erstwhile cultivation by Vaida. From 1936, Beza was a card-carrying PNȚ man, assigned leadership over the Peasant Guards, following their reactivation by Mihalache. The Guards were supervised by a Military Section, comprising Army officials: Admiral Dan Zaharia was a member, alongside generals Ștefan Burileanu, Gheorghe Rujinschi, Gabriel Negrei, and Ioan Sichitiu. Zaharia was directly involved with the Peasant Guards of Muscel County, whom he used to quell violence by the LANC militia, or &quot;Lăncieri&quot;. Clashes also occurred at Faraoani, where PNC men ambushed a PNȚ column, and at Focșani, where the Peasant Guards were called in to break up an Iron Guard rally. Codreanu&#x27;s followers were especially incensed by the Guards&#x27; creation, and resorted to kidnapping and threatening Madgearu in order to have them called off. At Iași, Bratu narrowly survived a stabbing, for which he blamed the Iron Guard.

===1937 crisis===
The mid 1930s also consolidated a PNȚ &quot;centrist&quot; wing, represented by Armand Călinescu, and supported by Ghelmegeanu. This faction favored a full clampdown on the Iron Guard, but hoped to achieve its defeat in close alliance with Carol. At the third general congress of April 4–5, 1937, which was to be the PNȚ&#x27;s last, inner-party stability appeared to be threatened by &quot;intrigue and ambition&quot;, although shows of unity were made in various rallies. During that interval, prosecutors brought R. Boilă to trial for his participation in the &quot;Škoda Affair&quot;. He and all other defendants were acquitted. Coposu, who attempted to show that the case was instrumented by Carol as revenge against his PNȚ opponents, was found guilty of &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; and spent three months in prison.

Ahead of legislative elections in December 1937, Carol invited Mihalache to form a cabinet, but also tried to impose some of his own selections as ministers; Mihalache refused to comply. As a result of this failure, Maniu returned as chairman of the PNȚ—he would serve as such uninterruptedly, to July 1947. Immediately after taking over, he proceeded to reinforce party discipline, obtaining promises of compliance from left-wingers Lupu and Madgearu. His return also allowed the formation of a right-wing section in Bucharest. Its leader, Ilariu Dobridor, openly argued for Lupu to be expelled from the party.

The PNȚ completely revised its alliances, agreeing to limited cooperation with the Iron Guard and the Georgist Liberals. The three parties agreed to support &quot;free elections&quot; and still competed against each other; however, the pact&#x27;s very existence shocked the liberal mainstream, especially after revelations that PNȚ cadres could no longer criticize the Guard. Călinescu and Ghelmegeanu&#x27;s group was alienated, openly describing the pact as morally unsound, and preferring full cooperation with Carol; Mihalache also dissented, but on democratic grounds. The events caught the PCdR underground by surprise: in November, its leader Ștefan Foriș had urged his colleagues to vote PNȚ, even in preference to the PSDR. A &quot;workers&#x27; delegation&quot;, made up of PSDR and PCdR activists, visited Maniu and insisted that he should revise the &quot;non-aggression pact&quot;. The scandal divided Romania&#x27;s left-wing press: newspapers such as &quot;Adevărul&quot; remained committed to Maniu, though communist sympathizers such as Zaharia Stancu and Geo Bogza went back on their support for a PNȚ-led popular front, and switched to endorsing the PȚR. By contrast, Dobrescu and his Committees deserted Iunian on December 1, and were folded back into the PNȚ.

The election marked a historic impasse, whereby the PNL failed to clearly win elections organized under its watch. It dropped to 152 parliamentary seats, with the PNȚ holding on to 86 (and 20% of the vote); this was just 20 seats ahead of the Guard, which had emerged as Romania&#x27;s third party. Carol opted to use his royal prerogative and bypassed all groups opposing his policies, handing power to a PNC minority cabinet, under Goga. Goga&#x27;s arrival signaled Romania&#x27;s rapprochement toward Germany, which had emerged as a key regional player following the Munich Agreement. Concerns about German re-armament also pushed Maniu into &quot;demand[ing] an alignment with Berlin&quot;. However, he punished attempts by other PNȚ figures to collaborate with Goga, and expelled Călinescu, who had accepted a ministerial position. This move lost the PNȚ its party organization in Argeș County, which obeyed Călinescu.

Maniu had a return as the opposition leader, speaking out against Carol and Goga, and promising a &quot;national revolt&quot; against their regime—while making note of his intention to form an &quot;opposition bloc&quot; alongside the Iron Guard. During the early days of 1938, the PNȚ was negotiating with the PNL to also join this alliance. The project was vetoed by Tătărescu, whose &quot;Young Liberals&quot; supported Carol&#x27;s policies, and by Mihalache, who resented the Maniu–Codreanu rapprochement. Though Mihalache rallied with the party line in calling out the PNC ministers as &quot;scoundrels&quot;, he secretly collaborated with Călinescu against Maniu. The latter viewed himself and his fellow defectors as a &quot;pro-government&quot; splinter of the PNȚ, and counted on Mihalache&#x27;s contextual support.

===FRN and National Legionary regimes===

An international backlash against Goga&#x27;s staunch antisemitism had also made Carol reconsider his choices. Initially, he favored creating a new majority coalition with the Iron Guard and the PNȚ (though demanding that Maniu be kept out of any such formula). Goga was deposed on February 10, 1938, when all political groups prepared for repeat elections. The Peasant Guards had been revived in January, taking the name of &quot;Maniu Guards&quot;, and were divided into two main commands: Lazăr took over in Transylvania, and General Rujinschi in the Old Kingdom. The project also involved Victor Jinga, tasked by Maniu with supervising the Guards&#x27; expansion into the provinces. Beza had left the project and, in January 1938, was attempting to form his own &quot;Workers and Peasants&#x27; Party&quot;.

At the height of the electoral campaign, the PNȚ and the PNL sought to obtain a new understanding with Carol, fearing that the PNC and the Iron Guard would form a powerful fascist alliance, and then a totalitarian state. Under pressure from the PNȚ base, Maniu revoked the pact with the Iron Guard, leaving that group entirely isolated on the political scene. He had instead initiated talks with the PȚR. This produced a &quot;common constitutional front&quot; before January 18, with negotiations continuing for the PNL&#x27;s adherence to it. The PNȚ again sought grassroots communist support: in Vâlcea County, it shared a list with the &quot;Democratic Union&quot;, assigning eligible positions to a PCdR militant Mihail Roșianu and a communist-sympathizing priest, Ioan Marina.

Carol rejected Maniu&#x27;s proposals, and used the opportunity for an anti-democratic self-coup. Despite vocal protests by Maniu and the PNL&#x27;s Dinu Brătianu, he inaugurated a royal dictatorship, leading to the creation of a catch-all National Renaissance Front (FRN). The PNȚ attempted to sabotage the authoritarian Constitution, instructing members to cast a negative vote in the February 24 plebiscite. The attempt was unsuccessful, and the party continued to lose ground over the following months. On March 30, it was outlawed together with all other traditional parties.

The new government integrated much of the PNȚ&#x27;s center, with Călinescu at Interior Affairs; Andrei, Ghelmegeanu, and Ralea, alongside Grigore Gafencu and Traian Ionașcu, became prominent FRN dignitaries, as did Moldovan. Gusti and Rădulescu-Motru were also co-opted into joining the exodus during late 1938. More junior PNȚ-ists such as Adrian Brudariu abandoned the National Peasantist cause, allegedly joining the FRN for material benefits. Maniu and Popovici could still count on their core Transylvanian constituency, which helped them circulate a December 1938 memorandum calling on Carol to restore civil liberties. Coposu was arrested and detained for distributing copies of that document.

Călinescu tacitly allowed the PNȚ and PNL to preserve parts of their infrastructures, including some local offices. In early 1939, the regime proposed allowing the PNȚ a share of parliamentary mandates, to which Mihalache responded: &quot;Mr Carol would do best to leave us alone.&quot; During the sham election of June 1939, the FRN administration took care to prevent interference by &quot;intermediary groups&quot; such as the PNȚ, PNL, PNC and Iron Guard. In May, the PNȚ, PNL and PCdR engaged in talks to form an &quot;opposition parliament&quot; and &quot;united front&quot;; authorities subsequently reported that protest votes had been cast for PNȚ leaders, whereas candidacies of PNȚ defectors such as Alexandru Mîță had been publicly booed. Maniu, Mihalache, Lupu and Iunian still qualified as lifetime Senators, but refused to wear the FRN uniform, and were expelled.

By then, Călinescu had masterminded a nation-wide clampdown against the Iron Guard, including Codreanu&#x27;s physical liquidation. This resulted in a series of retaliatory attacks, peaking in September 1939, when a Guardist death squad managed to assassinate Călinescu. During November, Carol made one final attempt to establish a &quot;national alliance&quot; around the FRN, inviting Maniu to join in; the offer was dismissed. Mihalache held a seat in the Crown Council in early 1940, possibly because doing so toned down pressures on his friend Madgearu, whom Carol had placed under arrest. A political crisis began in Romania during June 1940, when the FRN government gave in to a Soviet ultimatum and withdrew its administration from Bessarabia. Maniu referred to this as a Soviet invasion, and believed that the Army should have resisted. In August 1940, after reassurances from both Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union, Regency Hungary asked Romania to negotiate territorial cessions in Transylvania. Maniu issued a public protest, demanding no reduction of territorial integrity.

The same month, Carol&#x27;s regime yielded to Nazi pressures and Romania signed the Second Vienna Award, which divided the region roughly in half, with Northern Transylvania assigned to Hungary. This sparked major unrest, with &quot;huge protest rallies&quot; asking for Maniu to establish a cabinet of &quot;national resistance&quot;, which Maniu refused to do. One such proposal came from the PCdR and the Soviet Union, and promised Romania military assistance from the Red Army; Maniu was outraged by the proposal, arguing that the Soviet Union was &quot;imperialistic by definition&quot;. Carol assigned the task of forming a cabinet to General Ion Antonescu, who obtained backing from both the PNȚ and the PNL. Both groups insisted that Antonescu could take over only after Carol agreed to abdicate. This put an end to Carol&#x27;s rule, bringing the country under an Iron Guard regime—the National Legionary State, with Antonescu as &quot;Conducător&quot;; though still neutral to 1941, Romania was now openly aligned with the Axis Powers. Widely seen as a German arrangement, the Legionary State was in fact a result of Maniu&#x27;s refusal to follow Antonescu&#x27;s ideological command; the Nazis had repeatedly called for a multiparty alliance.

===Resisting Antonescu===

The PNȚ continued to exist semi-clandestinely, obtaining repeated assurances from Antonescu that the various territorial chapters would not be harassed by the Iron Guard, and complaining whenever he failed to keep them. According to Siguranța reports, it was always more active than the PNL. Its quarters were informally acknowledged as being Ciulei House, an apartment complex located at Sfinților Street 10, Bucharest. From late 1940, Maniu channeled anti-Nazi discontent by forming an association called &quot;Pro Transilvania&quot; and a newspaper, &quot;Ardealul&quot;, both of which reminded Romanians that Antonescu was not interested in a reversal of the Vienna Award. The Guardist takeover also pushed some National Peasantists into exile: facing a death sentence at home, Beza made his way to Cairo, where he formed a Free Romania Movement under British supervision. Viorel Tilea and Ion Rațiu opted not to return from England, serving as liaisons between the PNȚ and the British war ministry.

Towards the end of 1940, Antonescu became dissatisfied with the Guard partnership. The Guard organized the Jilava Massacre and various other murders of old-regime politicians, including Madgearu. This caused alarm for other figures of the PNȚ, in particular Mihalache and Lupu; Ghiță Pop took Madgearu&#x27;s position at the party secretariat. In the aftermath, Maniu pleaded with the &quot;Conducător&quot; that he should reinstate order and individual security. After a brief civil war in January 1941, the Guard was removed from power and again repressed. German reports identified PNȚ-ist generals as most active in destroying the National Legionary regime; armed PNȚ civilians, including Lupu, assisted the Army at various locations in Bucharest.

Following the events, Antonescu had renewed hopes that he could co-opt the PNȚ and then PNL on his cabinet. Both parties refused the offer. During February, Maniu openly criticized Antonescu for abandoning Northern Transylvania and for previously condoning Guardist abuse. He also argued that a legalized PNȚ would have been a more efficient and legitimate actor in purging the Guard. In April, he attempted to organize a rally against the invasion of Yugoslavia, but called it off when Antonescu warned him that demonstrators would be fired upon. Later that year, Maniu and Coposu engaged in encrypted correspondence with the Western Allies, preparing for an anti-Nazi takeover in Romania; they aligned themselves closely with Britain, seeking to obtain direct advice from Winston Churchill.

The PNȚ and the PNL welcomed Romania&#x27;s participation in the Nazi attack on the Soviet Union, since it returned Bessarabian lands to Romania. However, both parties protested when Antonescu gave the order to advance beyond interwar borders and annex Transnistria. This period also signaled Romania&#x27;s participation in the Holocaust, heralded by the Iași pogrom. These crimes were also vocally condemned by the PNȚ and the PNL in letters to Antonescu. Maniu still refused to believe that Antonescu had a genocidal agenda and, when interviewed by American diplomats, played down the pogrom&#x27;s importance. By 1942, having been informed that Britain and the US intended to assess and punish all antisemitic crimes, he told Romanian ministers that the deportation of Bessarabian Jews risked destroying Romania; Mihalache also added his input, describing deportations as &quot;alien to the humanitarian traditions of our people.&quot; Antonescu largely tolerated such insubordination, but also curbed it at regular intervals. In August 1942, he threatened to &quot;castigate in due course&quot; Maniu and others who opposed &quot;cleansing this nation totally of the [Jewish] blight.&quot;

In November 1941, Maniu also publicized his complete opposition to war in the East, prompting Antonescu to order a clampdown against Anglophile resistance centers. Communist sources noted a discrepancy in repression statistics: while the elites were allowed to carry out a &quot;paper war&quot; with the regime, regular PNȚ militants risked imprisonment for expressing anti-fascist beliefs. From 1942, the camp in Târgu Jiu accommodated various PNȚ-ists, including Nicolae Carandino, who had published an article critical of Antonescu, and Anton Alexandrescu, who, as leader of the TNȚ, had been approached by the PCdR. Detainees also included a selection of militants from all party factions: Lazăr, Zaharia Boilă, Radu Cioculescu, Victor Eftimiu, Augustin Popa, and Emanoil Socor. Released before May 1943, these men became vocal supporters of an understanding between Romania and the Soviets. Boilă, Coposu, Ghiță Pop and Virgil Solomon were also rounded up and threatened for having maintained contacts with the Iron Guard on behalf of Maniu. In 1944, government agents caught Augustin Vișa and Rică Georgescu, who had handled radio communications between Maniu and the Allies. Both were imprisoned, with Vișa being put on trial for high treason. The &quot;Conducător&quot; dismissed Nazi suggestions that he should have Maniu killed, noting that doing so would only push Romania&#x27;s peasantry into anti-fascist rebellion. By 1944, he was tolerating the transit through Romania of Northern Transylvanian Jews fleeing extermination in Hungary, some of whom were assisted on their journey by a PNȚ-ist network.

By early 1942, Maniu and Brătianu had come to favor an anti-Nazi coup, and had asked for direct British support. The Soviets were informed of this, but fully rejected Maniu&#x27;s demands for a restoration of Greater Romania. In January 1943, with over 100,000 Romanian soldiers trapped at Stalingrad, PCdR members approached Maniu with concrete offers for collaboration. Hoping to obtain full peace without a Soviet occupation, Maniu still counted on direct contacts with the West, sending Constantin Vișoianu to negotiate with them in Cairo. These &quot;feelers&quot; were again tolerated by Antonescu. However, a &quot;stumbling-block in all subsequent negotiations&quot; was the demand for Romania&#x27;s unconditional surrender, which Maniu found unpalatable. The PNȚ advised against toppling Antonescu in February 1944, as had been proposed by the pro-Allied King Michael I—Maniu feared that doing so would leave Romania exposed to Nazi retribution.

&quot;Operation Autonomous&quot;, a British attempt to mediate between Maniu and the Soviets, ended abruptly when Alfred Gardyne de Chastelain and Ivor Porter were captured in Romania. In the aftermath, Antonescu again protected Maniu, reassuring the Axis that the Romanian opposition had no real contact with the Allies. During March 1944, Voice of America implied that, if PNȚ leaders still refused to take up armed opposition to the regime, they could expect to be bypassed or deposed. In April, Maniu was finally ready to accept Soviet promises that Romania would be allowed to fight the Germans as an equal partner, and that its territory would not be occupied militarily. The same month, Antonescu was sent a peace protest signed by 69 academics, which was &quot;overtly pro-Soviet in sentiment&quot;. At least in part, this was a grassroots PNȚ initiative.

===1944 revival===

In June 1944, the PNȚ and PNL agreed to form a Bloc of Democratic Parties (BPD) alongside the PCdR and Social Democrats, preparing for the &quot;King Michael Coup&quot; of August 23. By then, Coposu and Cezar Spineanu were stockpiling firearms in PNȚ buildings, preparing for a BPD confrontation with the authorities. The Bloc existed largely because Maniu believed he could obtain Soviet lenience toward Romania following an armistice, and &quot;only stood to enhance [the communists&#x27;] position&quot;. The plot involved statistician Sabin Manuilă, who acted as a PNȚ representative; a disciple of Moldovan, he had been involved with Antonescu&#x27;s project to persecute Jews and deport Romanies, but also protected some 5,000 Jewish specialists working under his watch. Shortly before the coup, Maniu clashed with PCdR envoy Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu, who had wanted the BPD to be joined by Ralea and other FRN eminences. Though largely unaware about any conspiracy, the PNȚ&#x27;s lower echelons organized a pro-Allied rally at Bellu cemetery on August 20. Meeting with its leaders, Maniu expressed the hope that Antonescu himself would take Romania out of the Axis.

&quot;Dreptatea&quot;, which had been banned in 1938, reentered print on August 27, 1944. Openly active from September, the PNȚ moved office to Clemenceau Street 6, which would remain its headquarters until dissolution. Maniu was initially offered the premiership, but opted out, arguing that the position should go to a military man for the war&#x27;s duration. Historian Vlad Georgescu singles this out as Maniu&#x27;s &quot;real mistake&quot;: &quot;[It] deprived the country of the only leadership that could have been strong and popular, the only party that could have rallied the people around a truly democratic program. In refusing to take over in 1944, Maniu [...] caused a power vacuum into which the Communist Party moved.&quot; A military-civilian cabinet was formed by General Constantin Sănătescu. Since the National Peasantists and PCdR envoys could not agree on a list of ministers, these were recruited from Michael I&#x27;s courtiers, with party men serving only as ministers without portfolio; Leucuția and Solomon were the PNȚ&#x27;s representatives. The promotion of such comparatively minor figures was criticized by the party&#x27;s youth, leaving Maniu to acknowledge the brain drain which had affected National Peasantism ever since Călinescu and Ralea&#x27;s defections.

As described by scholar Lucian Boia, from 1945 the PNȚ emerged from the coup &quot;believing itself the country&#x27;s great party&quot;, which made it adopt a policy of &quot;political and moral intransigence&quot;. By 1947, it had 2.12 million card-carrying members; as noted by Georgescu, it ranked ahead of all other parties, albeit &quot;neither numbers nor popularity could bring it to power.&quot; Maniu preserved regional influence in reconquered Northern Transylvania, organized from September 1944 under a Committee of the Liberated Regions. This was presided upon by Ionel Pop. Commissariat rule often veered into an antimagyarism that was only ever curbed by the Red Army after a &quot;six-week killing spree&quot;. Various reports, including oral testimonies by Peasant Guard members and volunteers who answered calls printed in &quot;Ardealul&quot;, suggest that local Hungarians were victims of numerous lynchings, either tolerated of encouraged by the Commissariat.

By then, the PCdR had sparked a government crisis over Maniu&#x27;s rejection of its communization programs; in the aftermath, communists spuriously claimed that Maniu had personally masterminded the killing of Transylvanian Hungarians. Upon taking over at Internal Affairs, PNȚ-ist Nicolae Penescu found himself accused of stalling democratization, and was pushed into resigning. After Maniu was again offered the premiership, and again declined, power went to General Nicolae Rădescu. Maniu and his followers agreed with the PCdR on the need for &quot;de-fascization&quot; in Romania, overseeing a purge of Romania&#x27;s police agencies and appointing Ghiță Pop as PNȚ representative on the Special Committee for the investigation of war crimes. However, as noted by Boia, &quot;curious solidarities&quot; continued to be formed locally by anti-Carol PNȚ-ists and their Guardist counterparts. Noted Guardists who were accepted as PNȚ members include Horațiu Comaniciu and Silviu Crăciunaș. National Peasantists in Transylvania no longer screened against the Iron Guard, whose affiliates joined into the effort to terrorize Hungarians into leaving the area. Any such recruitment drive was curbed by the PCdR, which obtained assurances from leading Guardists that they would prevent their followers from entering the PNȚ.

The PNȚ&#x27;s vice presidents in the coup&#x27;s aftermath were Mihalache, Lupu, and Mihai Popovici. Ghiță Pop was a fourth member of this team, but has to resign upon taking up a position in Sănătescu&#x27;s cabinet. Maniu was additionally assisted by a Permanent Delegation, whose members included Halippa, Hudiță, Lazăr, Teofil Sauciuc-Săveanu, Gheorghe Zane, as well as, with the introduction of women&#x27;s suffrage, Ella Negruzzi. Overall, the party was seeing a rejuvenation of its leadership, with Coposu and Virgil Veniamin taking over as junior party secretaries. Noted militants included young academics—among them Radu and Șerban Cioculescu, as well as Vladimir Streinu. The party lost its control over the TNȚ, with Alexandrescu favoring a PCdR alliance. Consequently, Maniu ordered Coposu to establish a loyalist youth group, called &quot;Organizația M&quot;.

On February 3, 1945, the youth wing broke away from the PNȚ as the Alexandrescu Peasantists. It rallied with a communist-run National Democratic Front (FND), established in October 1944, being identified in PNȚ propaganda as &quot;lackeys of the Communist Party&quot;. While Alexandrescu&#x27;s group remained exceedingly small, the PCdR also revived the Ploughmen&#x27;s Front. This move was specifically intended to destabilize the PNȚ by recruiting smallholders. In November 1944, it absorbed the Socialist Peasants&#x27; Party, a small group established by Ralea and Ghelmegeanu. In order to counteract such moves, Maniu also established a PNȚ Workers&#x27; Organization, with Lazăr as its overseer. This body was successful in countering FND propaganda. As part of this conflict, the Printers&#x27; Syndicate, which was under communist control, imposed censorship on the opposition press: in February 1945, the PNȚ could only print nine newspapers, whereas the PCdR had thirty-one.

===Against Groza===

Rădescu was toppled following a massacre of communist-and-allied protesters, later revealed as a false flag operation carried out by PCdR militias. In early March 1945, the FND took over in government, with Petru Groza, of the Ploughmen&#x27;s Front, as Prime Minister. The PNȚ remained in the opposition, viewing the takeover as a coup. Although it sent representatives when Groza celebrated the full recovery and pacification of Northern Transylvania, these were purposefully selected from among the party youth. Groza engineered a takeover of all local administration, only failing to do so in six counties. These were progressively made to submit by selective arrests among the opposition activists and by the institution of political censorship, resulting in the closure of other PNȚ newspapers. Emil Hațieganu reported that 40 party newspapers had been shut down since 1944; &quot;Dreptatea&quot; itself was banned in March, and could only briefly reemerge in January 1946. A standoff between the King and Groza was saluted by the National Peasantists, who participated in a massive monarchist rally in November 1945. Many, including Coposu, were arrested during the clampdown.

During May 1945, while organizing Antonescu&#x27;s trial by a Romanian People&#x27;s Tribunal (with which it hoped to discredit Maniu as a Nazi collaborator), the government also ordered massive arrests among its cadres. A large number of PNȚ regional activists, as well as PNȚ youth who had participated in the November rally, were detained at camps in Caracal and Slobozia, but ultimately released in December 1945. While Maniu dissociated himself from the movement, Groza was supported by the communists&#x27; &quot;popular assemblies&quot;, which openly called for the PNȚ and PNL to be outlawed and repressed. Churchill&#x27;s electoral defeat in July was read as an additional bad omen by Maniu, who noted that Labour had no sympathy for Romanian anti-communists. He asked Rațiu not to return from England, but continue to serve as his lobbyist.

Other PNȚ men and women were by then involved in the establishment of an armed anti-communist resistance. Founded by three &quot;Ardealul&quot; volunteers in 1944, the group &quot;Haiducii lui Avram Iancu&quot; asked Maniu for assistance. It received no such endorsement, although communist prosecutors would claim that it and all other such units were financed by the party leadership. General Aurel Aldea, who spoke for &quot;Haiducii&quot;, had credentials as an adversary of the Iron Guard, but also viewed the PNȚ as inefficient and unpatriotic. In early 1945, some PNȚ members had affiliated with the National Resistance Movement, operated by a dissident Iron Guard member, George Manu. Its democratic and fascist wings remained generally hostile to one another. Maniu was still &quot;reluctant to collaborate&quot; with various resistance groups, &quot;since many manifested anti-Semitic and ultra-nationalist sentiments.&quot; From April 1946, PNȚ men networked in Suceava County between the &quot;Sumanele Negre&quot; partisans and an American envoy, Ira Hamilton. This and various other resistance units took in members of the Peasant Guards. In June, the US Central Intelligence Group worked with the PNȚ to set up a sleeper network, tasked with opening up a second front in case of a Soviet attack on Turkey. The local organization was infiltrated by the Soviets and soon after repressed. &quot;Dreptatea&quot; still published regular praise of the Soviet Union, but did so on the advice of American envoys, and hoping to ensure the party&#x27;s survival under occupation.

During May 1946, Groza established a new BPD from FND affiliates and other parties, including Alexandrescu&#x27;s. Later that year, the Border Police of Iași County reported that the local PNȚ branch was experiencing mass desertions, with Iorgu Iordan and Andrei Oțetea reemerging as communists. Maniu&#x27;s grip on the party was also loosened from January 1946, when Lupu led another schism. His eponymous Democratic Peasants&#x27; Party–Lupu (PȚD-L) condemned Maniu as an enemy of the people, but did not support Groza. As the PSDR split into anti- and pro-BPD parties, Lupu ensured contacts between the former group and the mainline PNȚ. Maniu was also able to preserve his &quot;fiefdom&quot; of Sălaj, which saw members of the Ploughmen&#x27;s Front quitting to join the PNȚ.

Groza yielded to Western demands and included two members of the interwar democratic parties into his cabinet; the PNȚ-reserved seat went to Hațieganu. This moment marked his party&#x27;s final presence in government, with the PNȚ and the BPD facing each other as adversaries in a &quot;decisive battle&quot; for the general elections in November 1946. In preparation, the government proceeded to modify the electoral list, stripping as many as 80% of PNȚ members of their voting rights; in Bucharest, only 10% of party affiliates were eligible to vote. Groza also drafted legislation that suppressed the Senate, which had traditionally been the more conservative chamber. Maniu attempted to persuade King Michael not to sign it, hoping that the resulting crisis would prompt an Anglo–American intervention. The monarch disagreed, fearing that the attempt would have uncontrollable effects.

On October 21, the PNȚ, PNL, and Constantin Titel Petrescu&#x27;s Independent Social Democrats signed an &quot;agreement for the defense of democratic freedoms&quot;. However, the PNȚ was opposed to creating a single electoral alliance, confident that it could win on its own. By then, National Peasantist electoral agents had found themselves targeted by violence, with especially brutal incidents in Arad and Pitești; four local activists were murdered, while Penescu was heavily injured. At Balinț, the arrival of pro-BPD hecklers to a PNȚ meeting resulted in an altercation, during which a communist was killed. The party was nearly prevented from even entering the race in Năsăud County. Here, its attempt to form a paramilitary resistance led to a clampdown. During the backlash, Lazăr was arrested and neutralized as a threat, with Veniamin replacing him at the Workers&#x27; Organization.

===1947 clampdown===
According to official records, the election was a landslide communist win. In-depth reporting suggests that the scrutiny was falsified by Groza&#x27;s administration, with the PNȚ taking most votes. PCdR internal documents have the PNȚ and PNL together at 52%, with over 70% reached in Dorohoi, Maramureș, Muscel, Olt, and Rădăuți. The PNȚ claimed 70% of the vote nationally, with the PNL at 10%. Maniu concluded that his party had been invested with full confidence by the Romanian public, and therefore that it should form government. When the official results were published, the PNȚ Central Executive Committee demanded a new vote; its effort to raise awareness was nullified by King Michael, who ratified all parliamentary mandates. The unicameral legislature assigned 377 mandates to Groza&#x27;s BPD, while the opposition had 37, of which 32 were held by the PNȚ and 2 by the PȚD-L. Among those elected was Mara Lazăr, wife of Ilie, who reportedly won by 93% in her husband&#x27;s constituency.

Maniu ordered PNȚ deputies not to attend Assembly sessions. During this parliamentary strike, the BPD started its &quot;brutal offensive&quot; and &quot;final assault&quot; against the National Peasantists. In early 1947, Pantelimon Chirilă, who had reorganized the PNȚ branch in Rădăuți County, had to retire from politics after being beaten up. Local activists were by then being re-arrested, though the authorities agreed to spare PNȚ deputies (by then numbering 33 people) and some in the central structures, including Mihalache and Penescu. These events prompted Maniu to publicly ask for American troops to be sent to Romania on a peacekeeping mission. In that context, the regime confiscated leaflets, allegedly sent out by the Peasant Guards, which called for a popular uprising and for &quot;death to the communists&quot;, while referring to Antonescu as &quot;an archangel and a martyr&quot;. According to police reports, the PNȚ worked with YMCA and the Friends of America Association to build a solid base in Severin County, but was divided over the possibility of recruiting among the Iron Guard&#x27;s clandestine networks.

Groza&#x27;s government then staged the &quot;Tămădău Affair&quot;, which centered on Mihalache&#x27;s attempt to leave the country clandestinely on July 14, 1947. The party headquarters was searched by police agents, and Maniu was arrested on July 19, accused of having colluded alongside Mihalache, Grigore Gafencu, and a number of foreign agents. The controversy offered a pretext for outlawing the PNȚ by a parliament act on July 29. Both the PNL and the PȚD-L endorsed this measure, resulting in a 294-to-1 majority. A show trial took place, and sentences were passed against PNȚ cadres, from seniors Maniu and Mihalache (both of whom would die in prison) to the more junior Carandino. Coposu was also arrested, and held without trial until 1956, when he was sentenced for high treason.

The party continued to exist clandestinely, though its structures are hard to reconstruct. A party representation was set up at Reșița by engineer Alexandru Popp, who proposed detonating the Assembly hall as BPD deputies were being sworn in. The Iron Guard&#x27;s Ion Gavrilă Ogoranu, who took part in the anti-communist resistance, identifies Popp as Maniu&#x27;s successor, and notes that the PNȚ was thus represented on the movement&#x27;s &quot;unified command&quot;. Also according to Ogoranu, this group already maintained links with the Romanian National Committee (RNC), formed in exile by General Rădescu. The project of merging the Iron Guard and the PNȚ into one major diaspora party was embraced and advocated by Comăniciu and Crăciunaș, who organized an anti-communist base in Austria. Crăciunaș also helped a number of PNȚ leaders to defect abroad—examples include Manuilă, Veniamin, and Romulus Boilă.

From 1947, PNȚ exiles joined Stanisław Mikołajczyk&#x27;s International Peasants&#x27; Union, which, from early 1948, had Grigore Niculescu-Buzești on its Central Committee. Their party&#x27;s affiliation to the RNC was only formalized in April 1949, when Niculescu-Buzești, Cornel Bianu, and Augustin Popa were included on its leadership board; Vișoianu and Gafencu also joined, but as independents. Unlike Rădescu, Vișoianu and Niculescu-Buzești remained opposed to any alliance with the Iron Guard. Vișoianu would serve as RNC chairman to 1975, when the Committee had dissolved; by then, Manuilă had also been inducted into the RNC.

With the inauguration of Communist Romania in early 1948, and before the formal introduction of a single-party state, the PȚD-L was still allowed to organize, with Nicolae Gh. Lupu as its new president. It ran in the sham election of March 1948, which also saw reports of &quot;reactionary propaganda&quot; in favor of the outlawed PNȚ. Persecution of National Peasantists came in successive waves. In its early months, the regime captured armed PNȚ cells led by Silvestru Fociuc of Iași and Ion Uță of Teregova. In late 1949, a lot comprising A. Popa and Gabriel Țepelea was tried and jailed for &quot;subverting the social order&quot;; Beza was also caught in 1951. Publicly tried by the Soviets, Halippa was moved between the Gulag and Romanian prisons, surviving both. In the Apuseni Mountains, a resistance cell of PNȚ and Guardists was organized by Ioan Bogdan, until being finally put down by the Securitate in 1952. This rapprochement had a utilitarian purpose for the Iron Guard: while in confinement, Ghiță Pop and Ioan Bărbuș assisted Guardist prisoners by transferring them food and medicine, without realizing that the Guardist cells were actually informing the regime on their activities.

The PNȚ had a sizable representation in both armed resistance and the prison population. According to official estimates, at least half of the anti-communist partisans had never had a political affiliation; of the remainder, a plurality were PNȚ-ists. From August 1952, all those who had served as city or county leaders in four traditional parties, including the PNȚ and PNL, were automatically deported to penal colonies; some, like Șerban Cioculescu, were tacitly excepted, while an explicit pardon was granted to all of Alexandrescu&#x27;s followers. One count suggests that, overall, 272,000 PNȚ members spent time in communist prisons. A parallel phenomenon saw former National Peasantists joining the Communist Party—which had absorbed the PSDR and was known at the time as the &quot;Workers&#x27; Party&quot; (PMR). This movement began in July 1947: while regional party leaders went into hiding, large sections of the base enlisted with the BPD parties. The PMR&#x27;s own estimates suggest that, even after an early wave of expulsions in 1950, its cadres still comprised 5.6% undesirables, including former PNȚ-ists.

===Final resurgence===

From 1954, with the advent of national communism and Romania&#x27;s interest in joining the United Nations, violent repression was toned down by unprecedented clemency. As noted at the time by Premier Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, the release of political prisoners was a dogwhistle to the National Peasantist diaspora that &quot;they should return home [and] no harm will come to them.&quot; Government agencies were by then directly probing into RNC activities. After capturing Crăciunaș, who became a communist double agent, they had direct access to the PNȚ Central Committee; they likewise blackmailed Veniamin into becoming their informant. The RNC remained factionalized: in 1964, Bessarabian PNȚ-ist Anton Crihan withdrew from its presidium over disagreements with other members.

PNȚ cells had continued to be formed in Romanian prisons. One such group was animated by Coposu and reportedly envisaged a democratic cabinet, with Gheorghe Zane as Premier. Although integrated into professional and social life, survivors of political repression were sometimes vocal dissidents. The Bucharest student movement of 1956 came with slogans such as &quot;Down with the communists&quot; and &quot;Long live the National Peasants&#x27; Party&quot;. During the following year, the regime resumed its persecution, targeting more minor National Peasantists, including a 7-man cell in Ploiești, and arresting on charges that he was plotting to reestablish the party. Though he had been active in the Ploughmen&#x27;s Front, Adrian Brudariu was arrested in December 1956, and sentenced for his earlier involvement with the PNȚ. Securitate agents noted that a Bessarabian wing of the PNȚ, which included an aged Halippa, was actively networking with other exiles and discussing plans for a post-Soviet Moldova. Also in 1957, Aiud Prison witnessed a hunger strike organized by PNȚ-ist and Guardist prisoners. Towards the end of the decade, the Securitate gathered evidence that a group of Bărăgan deportees, including Cezar Spineanu, were working on a new PNȚ platform.

Under Nicolae Ceaușescu, the PMR, renaming itself Romanian Communist Party (PCR), began extending recognition for interwar underground activists, or &quot;illegalists&quot;, who were allowed to join its nomenklatura. Ceaușescu&#x27;s guidelines resulted in scores of PNȚ leftists being honored with that title. Such overtures were not welcomed by the PNȚ-ist mainstream. Party cells were still being organized by former prisoners after that moment, often resorting to forms of passive resistance. From 1968, the National Peasantist exile recognized Coposu as a leader of the internal underground; his attempt to reorganize the party in the open was curbed by the Securitate in 1970. Meanwhile, Beza, having caused a series of embarrassments for the PCR regime, was allowed to emigrate in 1971. In 1973, several PNȚ-ists, including Coposu, Ionel Pop, Ion Diaconescu, Ion Puiu, and , organized a memorial service for Maniu. The Securitate intervened in force, fearing that as many as 10,000 people would show up. Later that decade, Carandino issued his memoirs of party life in &quot;samizdat&quot; form, managing to have them published abroad in 1986.

Following the RNC&#x27;s dissolution in 1975, Penescu established the Romanian National Council of Paris, which he led until his death in 1985, upon which he was replaced by . The 1980s saw the &quot;reappearance of activists of the old political parties that had been banned in 1947&quot;, now involved in efforts to expose the communist regime&#x27;s duplicity on the human rights&#x27; issue: &quot;Former leaders of the National Peasant Party managed to recruit some young people, including workers, and to establish a human rights association with mostly young members in Bucharest and in Transylvania.&quot; During the election of 1985, with candidacies vetted by the PCR through its Front of Socialist Unity and Democracy, Puiu issued a PNȚ platform calling for political reforms. Puiu also attempted to run, and was consequently imprisoned. Placed under Securitate surveillance, Coposu denied claims that he was the party&#x27;s new chairman, and even that there was such a thing as an &quot;inner opposition&quot; to the PCR. In 1986, together with Puiu and Carandino, he wrote a manifesto marking the 30th anniversary of the Hungarian Revolution. In other contexts, Coposu also acknowledged the PNȚ&#x27;s existence and, in February 1987, obtained its recognition and induction by the Christian Democrat World Union. This affiliation was kept secret for almost three years.

Coposu was a direct participant in the Romanian Revolution of 1989, at the end of which democratic rule was formally restored. On December 22, the day of Ceaușescu&#x27;s toppling, Coposu, Bărbuș, Diaconescu, Puiu and others signed an appeal to the population, as the &quot;Christian Democratic National Peasants&#x27; Party&quot;, which was distributed the following day. It was registered on January 8, 1990, and viewed itself as a re-legalization or reestablishment of Maniu and Mihalache&#x27;s movement. In February 1990, Carandino also relaunched &quot;Dreptatea&quot; as a new series of the pre-1947 newspaper. In 1995, the Supreme Court of Romania overturned all verdicts of treason passed against the PNȚ&#x27;s defunct leadership.

==Ideology==
===Economic and social outlook===
====Core stances====
Lucian Boia describes the PNȚ as an &quot;eclectic&quot; group &quot;lacking a unified doctrine&quot;; another historian, Damian Hurezeanu, speaks of the 1930s PNȚ as a &quot;wide array spanning the distance between left-wing peasant radicalism and the nationalist right&quot;. Early on, the more powerful component of this mix was the former Romanian National Party (PNR). It had been formed in Austria-Hungary, specifically Transylvania, with the goal of channeling the Romanian vote, and following the establishment of Greater Romania in 1918–1922, led the rebellion against PNL centralism. One element which impeded categorization was Maniu&#x27;s notorious reserve about declaring himself for or against various issues or approaches—leading him to be nicknamed &quot;The Sphinx&quot;. Scholar Dimitrie Drăghicescu noted in 1922 that, overall, there was no ideological incompatibility between the PNL and the Transylvanians, proposing that Maniu and his entourage were primarily national liberals of bourgeois extraction, who had no doctrine of their own.

A similar point is made by Heinen, according to whom the PNR was by 1926 a &quot;classic bourgeois-democratic&quot; force, different from the PNL only in that it took up &quot;Transylvanian interests&quot;. Stephen Fischer-Galați questions the consensus that Maniu was a liberal, referring to the PNȚ-ist leadership model as a &quot;controlled democracy&quot;; according to the scholar, Maniu and Carol differed only in the emphasis they placed on the premiership and the throne, respectively. Historian Vasile Dobrescu believes that PNR influence was the true conservative current of the unified party. Overall, according to Boia, Maniu &quot;made few investments in ideology, he only had tactical refinements.&quot; In one of his pronouncements on the matter, Maniu explained that the PNR was non-ideological, being instead the unified voice of the Transylvanian Romanian community, &quot;with all its centuries-old aspirations&quot;.

Through its &quot;Peasantist&quot; legacy, the PNȚ had a connection with the various strains of 19th-century agrarianism. PNL doctrinaire Ștefan Zeletin proposed that this group was a local avatar of &quot;Physiocracy&quot;, in that they rejected mercantilism and saw the rural classes as a source for economic advancement. He dismissed such manifestations as typical of &quot;primitive capitalism&quot;, and ultimately as doomed. As seen by Drăghicescu, the PȚ blended an Old-Kingdom component, which originated with the peasant associations founded by Constantin Dobrescu-Argeș and Toma Dragu, and a &quot;foreign&quot; component, which was Constantin Stere&#x27;s Poporanism. Also according to Drăghicescu, the PȚ had managed to absorb the PNL&#x27;s own agrarian wing (or Labor Party), becoming in part a replica of the latter.

From Poporanism, Mihalache&#x27;s group inherited the notion of a &quot;peasant state&quot; or &quot;peasant democracy&quot;—a moderate take on the &quot;peasant dictatorship&quot; proposed by the Bulgarian Agrarianists. Some of the core assumptions in interwar Peasantism were also informed by Marxian economics, though contradicting all Marxist assumptions about peasantry as a recessive and reactionary class. The Peasantists were fundamentally anti-bourgeoisie in their outlook, which exposed them to suspicions that they were communists. Early on, the People&#x27;s Party decried Madgearu as an agitator for &quot;economic Bolshevism&quot;. Such inferences, Drăghicescu argues, were groundless: although &quot;tactless&quot; in their occasional &quot;Marxist zeal&quot;, Peasantists rejected neither property nor inheritance, being &quot;almost conservative&quot; overall. A similar view is held by scholar Ion Ilincioiu, who sees the PNȚ&#x27;s agrarian theory as fundamentally conservative, anti-industrial, and romantic. In generic terms, Madgearu favored economic liberalism and championed free trade as the basis for economic stability—in stated contradiction with the PNL&#x27;s slogan, &quot;ourselves alone&quot;.

The PNȚ program featured many of the PȚ&#x27;s core ideas and promises, but omitted all reference to class conflict, and focused mostly on themes such as &quot;national solidarity&quot;. Historian Angela Harre argues that post-Poporanism within the party was toned down even more by the Great Depression: &quot;The resulting economic break-down mercilessly showed the connections between Romanian agriculture and international capitalism and, thus, ended the strategy of leaving capitalism aside and of jumping directly from feudalism into a better (socialist) future.&quot; According to Fischer-Galați, PNȚ politicos always subsumed Peasantism to the &quot;greatest interest of the nation&quot;, including the &quot;industrial bourgeoisie&quot;; this, he argues, was an inherent flaw. Party doctrinaires paid tribute to various alternative models that could still protect peasants from economic modernity, &quot;looking for a Third Way between liberalism and communism.&quot; In programmatic terms, the PNȚ favored &quot;the free circulation of land&quot;, but short of land grabbing, proposing upper and lower limits on property purchase. As argued by Jelavich, in the early 1930s National Peasantism remained representative of the peasantry&#x27;s &quot;more prosperous section&quot;, incapable of assisting those &quot;with only dwarf holdings or with no land at all&quot;.

====Ideological experiments====
Seen by Vasile Dobrescu as a &quot;moderator and modulator&quot; of Peasantist thought, one who personally ensured that Poporanist radicals were neutralized, Maniu always professed a belief in multilateralism and class collaboration. In 1924, Maniu argued that such integrative processes were interrelated, and together would create &quot;major social and economic units&quot;. Around the same time, Peasantists had come to realize that smallholding units remained economically unviable, and prone to market exclusion. Explicitly complimented by Maniu, the cooperative movement won over Mihalache&#x27;s Peasantist left. Within this current, the &quot;integral&quot; cooperatism was espoused by Victor Jinga, who believed that the &quot;peasant state&quot; was also the &quot;cooperative state&quot;. This faction was specifically interested in Nordic agrarianism and the Danish cooperatives: in 1930, Mihalache sent some of his peasant friends, including writer Nicolae Vucu-Secășanu, for specialization in Denmark.

Cooperative enterprises were nevertheless absent from the party platforms of 1926 and 1935, with Mihalache only promising &quot;organized and rationalized private property&quot;, without any details on what this meant. Although the party doctrines remained largely unchanged from that moment on, the following decade saw &quot;vigorous debate&quot; among PNȚ intellectuals, whose various takes on the &quot;peasant state [...] were not always fully identical with the [party&#x27;s] official views.&quot; However, as described by scholar Z. Ornea, Ralea&#x27;s program in 1935 meant an infusion of center-left ideas into PNȚ policies. At that stage, the anti-industrial consensus was fading away, with developmentalism taking the forefront. Agrarian conservatism now focused on creating a strong industry in harmony with the smallholding units. In this context, some party eminences embraced dirigisme, and, in 1933, Maniu himself proposed that agricultural machinery and infant industries could be nationalized. This was contrasted by the behavior of other PNȚ leaders, four of whom were stockholders in multinational companies by 1937.

As &quot;Third Way&quot; advocates, some PNȚ ideologues often veered into explicit support for social corporatism. This built on ideas first circulated by Stere in 1908, and, with Madgearu, became a more complex program for corporate representation. The &quot;solidarist&quot; version, embraced by Transylvanians such as Mihai Popovici, implied &quot;peasant leadership, but without oppressing and marginalizing other social categories.&quot; In addition to promoting welfare reform, the PNȚ stood by a minimum wage and, as early as 1926, promoted collective bargaining as the solution to labor disputes. In 1936, Mihalache expressed a measure of sympathy for corporate statism, which he believed had been implemented by Italian fascism. Faced with negative reactions from the left, he revised his positions, noting that, whatever its merits, that particular regime could not be imported to Romania. Harre remarks that talk of a &quot;peasant state&quot; became vaguer ca. 1936, with Mihalache settling on references to &quot;group democracy&quot;, which simply prioritized collective interests.

In 1944, Mihalache restated the party&#x27;s commitments to its 1935 platform, insisting that the PNȚ would fashion a &quot;workers&#x27; state&quot; while still adhering to smallholding as the economic norm. In the party manifesto of October 1944, the supremacy of property was qualified by the addition: &quot;land belongs to those who work it&quot;; and by an endorsement of additional land reforms. As noted by Georgescu, the PNȚ was now radicalized along &quot;Peasantist&quot; lines, also promising the nationalization of heavy industry—and thus expanding its electoral base. Among the party intellectuals, Jinga was also pressing for a return to cooperative ideals, which he believed was made possible by postwar conditions. Mihalache&#x27;s theories were soon challenged from within by younger militants such as Gabriel Țepelea. They argued that singularizing various categories of income into a &quot;peasant class&quot; was a fundamentally flawed approach. The new-generation activists held that the various peasant &quot;strata&quot; shared only a mutual apprehension against both socialism and free-trade liberalism; rather than commanding over a unified category, the PNȚ could form a peasant caucus. 

From 1945, Țepelea signaled a trend, also embraced by other Maniu disciples, which identified National Peasantism with Christian democracy, defining social justice as a function of moral theology and personalism. Ideological clarifications were again curbed by other priorities. As noted by Hurezeanu, the &quot;great theme&quot; of PNȚ propaganda during 1944–1947 was the consolidation and preservation of democracy. As formulated by Țepelea, the struggle facing his party in 1945 was &quot;to be, or not to be&quot;: &quot;no longer an academic choice between monarchy and republic, but one opposing the defense of national identity with respect for some democratic principles to the acceptance of communist-imposed servitude.&quot; Situated more to the left, in 1947 Șerban Cioculescu wrote for &quot;Dreptatea&quot;: &quot;I had sympathy for the communists while they were oppressed, but ceased liking them once they turned into oppressors.&quot;

===Nationalism===
====Main currents====

National Peasantism understood cultural nationalism as being compatible with democracy. Especially through its Transylvanian core, which had overseen the union process, the party saw Greater Romania as the product of democratic consultation. According to Maniu, Trianon &quot;did not create, but merely acknowledged for an international public, a union between Transylvania and the Romanian Kingdom.&quot; As seen by Maniu, popular sovereignty was always ensured and verified through mass gatherings, replicating the Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia of 1918—though he remained skeptical of revolutionary masses. His unusually strict commitment to the democratic process was ridiculed by adversaries as &quot;legalistic frenzy&quot;.

Maniu and many other PNR leaders belonged to a religious minority, namely the Greek Catholic Church. Sometimes chided by its bishops for favoring the predominant Eastern Orthodoxy, the PNȚ was still described by missionary priest Rafael Friedrich as &quot;closest to the Catholic Church&quot;. The party mainstream stood by the promise of corporate rights for ethnic minorities, all of which would have found their place in the agrarianist state. As noted by Harre, this goal, &quot;as well as the demand for a democratization and decentralization of the country might have calmed down many ethnic conflicts during the interwar period.&quot; In addition to sealing pacts with the minority parties, the PNȚ ran openly non-Romanian candidates on its lists; examples include Jews Tivadar Fischer, Mayer Ebner and Salomon Kinsbrunner, as well as Constantin Krakalia and Volodymyr Zalozetsky-Sas, who were Ukrainian. A Jewish steel magnate, Max Auschnitt, financed PNȚ projects both in interwar Romania and in exile.

The PNȚ&#x27;s governments, with Aurel Vlad as Minister of Arts, were criticized by the Union of Romanian Jews for tolerating discrimination, in particular against Jews and Judaism; Vlad also informed minority leaders that decentralization had been postponed indefinitely. Shortly before the Lupeni debacle of 1929, regional representatives, including Augustin Popa, spoke out in favor of restoring economic nationalism. German Romanians, who had been especially enthusiastic about the PNȚ-ist promise to decentralize Romania, switched to supporting the Nazified German People&#x27;s Party. Connections between PNȚ-ists and minorities were reactivated after World War II, when the PNȚ registered mass enlistments by non-Romanian anti-communists, including Swabians in Lugoj and Jews in Târgu Neamț.

Cosmopolitanism was supported by the various doctrinaires, including, in the mid 1930s, Ralea and Constantin Rădulescu-Motru. Both argued for non-xenophobic, secular, and conciliatory nationalism in polemics with one-time PNȚ associates such as Nae Ionescu and Nichifor Crainic. In 1937, Madgearu spoke about &quot;Romanianization&quot; as a goal of National Peasantist policies, but argued that this could only be achieved through price controls. A year after, Mihalache made reference to the &quot;Jewish Question&quot; and described the PNȚ as &quot;equally nationalist&quot; to all other parties, but still rejected &quot;negative&quot; antisemitism. The party&#x27;s Transylvanian circles criticized fascism from a moderate nationalist position: Iuliu Moldovan&#x27;s &quot;biopolitics&quot; and scientific racism had numerous points of contact with far-right antisemitism, but always remained more democratic than similar programs advanced by Romanian fascists. Ionel Pop argued in 1936 that vandalizing Jewish property was a cowardly act and a deflection, hinting that &quot;Christian parties&quot; would have done better to focus on chasing out an &quot;evil spirit&quot; that lurked in the corridors of power.

Maniu&#x27;s own anti-fascism was rendered inconsistent his overtures toward the Iron Guard. During his conflict with Elena Lupescu, he emphasized her Jewish origin in what appeared to be an attempt at gaining support from the antisemitic caucus. Albeit limited in impact, Maniu&#x27;s arrangements for 1937 are seen as a &quot;tactical error&quot;, made possible by his &quot;blind hatred&quot; toward Carol. They &quot;stifled the cause of democracy at a time when it was struggling for air&quot;, &quot;rendering more respectability to Codreanu&#x27;s public image&quot;. At the height of his conflict with Maniu, Mihalache allegedly noted: &quot;Maniu will be removed from the party once he will join the Iron Guard once and for all&quot;. A defense witness at Codreanu&#x27;s trial in 1938, Maniu insisted that the National Peasantists were neither totalitarian nor antisemitic. He therefore reported a &quot;great difference&quot; of conception between himself and the Guardists, with the only shared goal being returning Romania to a &quot;solid base of Christian morality&quot;. As noted by Heinen, he was naive in believing that his national conservatism had common ground with Codreanu, who merely used Maniu.

====Pan-nationalism, regionalism, trans-nationalism====

Anti-communism as expressed by the PNȚ&#x27;s mainstream was also motivated by nationalist priorities, with party men such as Grigore Gafencu urging for the strong defense of Bessarabia against Soviet demands and incursions. Although Poporanist traditions included criticism of Romanian &quot;militarism&quot;, PNȚ governments were hawkish on this issue, and kept up defense spending. Interwar National Peasantists were also curious about the Moldavian ASSR, created by Romanian-speakers inside Soviet Ukraine, and made oblique references to it as a Romanian irredenta. Concurrently, Maniu&#x27;s attempt to reduce spending by downsizing intelligence agencies led to allegations that he was serving communist interests. The party&#x27;s leftist faction was in fact cautious about criticizing the Soviet regime—Victor Eftimiu noted in 1932 that the &quot;capitalist press&quot; was probably overstating Soviet negatives. An overtly pro-Soviet attitude was embraced in 1940 by former PNȚ leftists Alexandru Mîță and Gheorghe Stere.

In July 1940, Maniu noted that he could no longer trust Soviet foreign policy, specifically citing its occupation of Bessarabia, as well as its war on Finland, as contributing factors. He revised the party&#x27;s stances in 1941, when he condemned the Soviets while castigating war beyond Bessarabia&#x27;s border as &quot;aggression&quot;. The Bloc of Democratic Parties could only be forged once the Soviet Union dissolved the Comintern, which had opposed the notion of Greater Romania. Maniu&#x27;s acceptance of the 1944 armistice also excluded Bessarabia from Romania&#x27;s borders, but this remained a contentious issue inside the party. attempted to persuade Maniu to reconsider, while Halippa went public with his critique of the cession in 1946. Pan-Romanianism remained central in disputes between Halippa and Anton Crihan, even after 1970.

Despite endorsing the nation state, Transylvanian party members remained vexed about PNL centralism, and came to promote regionalism as the alternative. The slogan &quot;Transylvania for the Transylvanians&quot; was taken up by Vaida-Voevod during his early activism with the party; it was also a form of nativism, directed specifically against Old-Kingdom bureaucrats sent into the region. The party&#x27;s very creation had blocked the PȚ&#x27;s slow extension into Transylvania, which PNR leaders had found unpalatable. Historian Thomas Gerard Gallagher proposes that Maniu valued political liberties more than &quot;national power&quot;, which implied that he resented centralism. As such, the 1928 takeover came with Maniu&#x27;s promise that he would bridge national cohesion and regional identities, but this objective was left unfulfilled when economic issues took the forefront. Beyond decentralization, regionalism and autonomism made occasional comebacks in National Peasantist discourse during the later interwar. In 1931, party militant Romulus Boilă published a proposal to redivide Romania&#x27;s administration along regional affiliations, but it was largely ignored by the public.

Hungarian spies claimed in 1940 that Maniu intended to proclaim an autonomous Transylvania under Soviet protection, in order to prevent its partitioning. The accuracy of such reports remains doubtful. Although formally rejecting regionalism in 1944, the PNȚ still advocated a decentralized model during the reintegration of Northern Transylvania: a part-regionalist agenda was a basis for the Commissariat of the Liberated Regions. As a corollary of his support for cooperative endeavors and defense of minority rights, Maniu championed Balkan federalism and Europeanism, both of which were referred to in his speeches of the 1920s and &#x27;30s; he viewed himself as agreeing with specific transnational proposals advanced by Nicolae Titulescu and André Tardieu. In part, such tenets reflected the PNȚ-ist stances on Transylvanian autonomy: Maniu regarded István Bethlen&#x27;s autonomism as a front for Hungarian revisionism, and proposed instead that Hungary and Romania be joined into a Central European Confederation. As envisaged by Maniu, the &quot;Little European&quot; union was also set to include 6 other states, from Austria to Greece. An offer to join was also extended to Italy, seen by Maniu as a military guarantee for the confederation, alongside Poland. His and Mironescu&#x27;s premierships brought direct talks over transforming the Little Entente into a single market.

Fischer-Galați argues that, of all the Peasantist movements emerging in 1920s Eastern Europe, Romania and Bulgaria&#x27;s were the only ones which had a tangible chance of succeeding. The PNȚ inherited an international profile from Mihalache&#x27;s group, which had adhered to a transnational &quot;agrarian league&quot; formed by the Bavarian People&#x27;s Party. National Peasantists joined the International Agrarian Bureau (IAB) as the Bureau made its first-ever recruitment drive outside Slavic Europe, with an invitation having been first addressed to the PȚ in 1924. From 1929 party also participated in the International Entente of Radical and Similar Democratic Parties, which until its dissolution in 1938 served as international platform for parties mainly in the League of Nations structures. In the 1930s, Madgearu was also able to form a &quot;Bloc of Agrarian Countries&quot;, which he championed as a reduced version of Maniu&#x27;s federalism. PNȚ contributions to the International Peasants&#x27; Union, which called for a liberation of the Eastern bloc and supported European federalism, were depicted as continuing the IAB affiliation.

==PNȚ symbols==

Before 1938, the PNȚ used as its electoral symbol a plain circle—which party propaganda also described as a &quot;ring&quot;, &quot;wheel&quot;, or &quot;sun&quot;. Originally used by the Progressive Conservative Party, and then, briefly, by Mihalache&#x27;s PȚ, it was imposed on the PNR by its allies during the formation of the National–Peasant Bloc in 1926. Coincidentally or not, most of the PNȚ&#x27;s rivals on the interwar agrarian scene, from the National Agrarian Party and the Romanian Front to the Radical Peasants&#x27; Party and the Lupists, used circular icons as their logos. The similarities had various results: while the Front claimed to have lost votes in the resulting confusion, the PȚD-L &quot;would have reportedly taken no mandates had it not used for a sign two overlaid wheels&quot;.

The PNȚ made a point of not using any political color. According to a 1936 communique jibing at the rise of fascism, the Peasant Guards could only wear badges showing the Romanian tricolor—&quot;and not signs borrowed from our [country&#x27;s] centuries-old enemies.&quot; Colored symbols were unofficial, but attested from 1928, when PNȚ organizations in Bihor had tens of flags of unspecified shades. Formed the following year, &quot;Voinici&quot; groups also carried such symbols, and had a hierarchy which included &quot;flag-bearers&quot;. Accounts of the period suggest that these carried the Romanian tricolor, or flags inscribed with the party name. Additionally, &quot;Voinici&quot; appropriated the Roman salute, which became their official greeting.

In 1930, peasant voters from the Bessarabian town of Vaisal are known to have rallied under a red flag with a circle. Months after, the party newspaper &quot;Țara de Mâine&quot; informed its readers that &quot;the symbolic color of peasant (or agrarian, agricultural etc.) parties is green.&quot; A rally held in June 1932 saw the various chapters carrying either flags marked with circles of square-shaped green flags. PNȚ youths appeared at a June 1935 rally in Iași wearing green shirts—with green described as the &quot;party color&quot;. This custom was also observed at 1936 marches, during which National Peasantist youths flew green flags, described in one account as bearing a golden clover. Distinctively, the Peasant Guards of Argeș County had green and triangular pennons, while party cells observed in Mehedinți used both green banners and national flags defaced with the circle. Reports of these rallies also suggest that PNȚ cadres used both the Roman salute, of alleged fascist inspiration, and the raised fist, which had leftist connotations. By October 1936, Eftimiu had composed &quot;Cântecul țăranilor&quot; (&quot;Song of the Peasants&quot;), which was used as a party anthem.

Unlike Vaida&#x27;s Front, the PNȚ was not affected by Tătărescu&#x27;s ordinance of March 1937, which outlawed party colors and political uniforms. Standardized electoral symbols were themselves outlawed in 1938; during the abortive electoral campaign of that year, parties ran under a &quot;numbered dots&quot; system, which reflected their order of registration. A controversy erupted when the PNȚ was assigned five dots, despite registering third. Maniu fought against the measure and obtained a three-dot symbol. For the ill-fated elections of 1946, the PNȚ used a depiction of the human eye as its logo. During early talks for an alliance with the PNL, it also registered a house icon. In August 1946, it sought to reclaim that symbol as its own, but the Electoral Commission refused to grant them this change. In his subsequent speeches, Maniu associated the eye with the need for lucidity, as in: to keep one&#x27;s eyes wide open. Where the PNȚ was discouraged from participating, hand-painted images of the eye became signals of popular discontent. Following the 1947 clampdown, the symbol was also prohibited, leading overzealous officials in Gorj County to demand that church murals featuring the Eye of Providence (which they read as &quot;Maniu&#x27;s Eye&quot;) be painted over.

== Scissions and mergers ==
=== Parties seceded from the PNȚ ===
* Peasants&#x27; Party–Lupu (1927)
* Democratic Peasants&#x27; Party–Stere (1931)
* Radical Peasants&#x27; Party (1933)
* Romanian Front (1935)
* Socialist Peasants&#x27; Party (1938)
* National Peasants&#x27; Party–Alexandrescu (1944)
* Democratic Peasants&#x27; Party–Lupu (1946)

=== Parties absorbed by the PNȚ ===
* Peasants&#x27; Party–Lupu (1937)

==Electoral history==
=== Legislative elections ===
Notes:

1 

==References==
Citations
Bibliography

*Florian Banu, &quot;&#x27;Navetiști&#x27; prin &#x27;Cortina de Fier&#x27;: Mihail Țanțu și Silviu Crăciunaș&quot;, in &quot;Caietele CNSAS&quot;, Vol. X, Issue 1, 2017, pp. 193–212.
*Gheorghe I. Bodea, &quot;Sacrificarea gemenilor în zodia cancerului&quot;, in &quot;Destin Românesc&quot;, Issue 2/1994, pp. 30–42.
*Lucian Boia, &quot;Capcanele istoriei. Elita intelectuală românească între 1930 și 1950&quot;. Bucharest: Humanitas, 2012. 
*Marian Bolum, &quot;Activitatea politică în Bârlad și județul Tutova în primii ani de după cel de-al Doilea Război Mondial (1944—1947)&quot;, in &quot;Archiva Moldaviae Meridionalis&quot;, Vols. XVIII–XIX, Part II, 2007–2008, pp. 270–285.
*Saturnino M. Borras Jr, Marc Edelman, Cristobal Kay, &quot;Transnational Agrarian Movements: Origins and Politics, Campaigns and Impact&quot;, in &quot;Journal of Agrarian Change&quot;, Vol. 8, Issues 2–3, April–July 2008, pp. 169–204.
*Radu Florian Bruja, &quot;Originea, înființarea și organizarea Frontului Renașterii Naționale (1938–1940)&quot;, in &quot;Suceava. Anuarul Complexului Muzeal Bucovina&quot;, Vols. XXIX–XXX, Part II, 2002–2003, pp. 235–268.
*Lucian T. Butaru, &quot;Rasism românesc. Componenta rasială a discursului antisemit din România, până la Al Doilea Război Mondial&quot;. Cluj-Napoca: EFES, 2010. 
*Mihaela Camelia Buzatu, &quot;Alegerea Parlamentului Frontului Renașterii Naționale în Iunie 1939&quot;, in &quot;Revista de Științe Politice&quot;, Issues 30–31, 2011, pp. 32–44.
*Aurelian Chistol, &quot;Elemente ale desfășurării campaniei electorale în armată în 1946&quot;, in &quot;Argessis, Studii și Comunicări. Seria Istorie&quot;, Vol. X, 2001, pp. 421–430.
*Adrian Cioroianu, &quot;Un stalinist de catifea: profesorul Petre Constantinescu-Iași – militant pro-comunist, abonat la trenurile europene, inculpat într-un proces politic, propagandist al guvernului Petru Groza și pensionar al lui Nicolae Ceaușescu&quot;, in Adrian Cioroianu (ed.), &quot;Comuniștii înainte de comunism: procese și condamnări ale ilegaliștilor din România&quot;, pp. 125–168. Bucharest: Editura Universității București, 2014. 
*Roland Clark, &quot;Sfîntă tinerețe legionară. Activismul fascist în România interbelică&quot;. Iași: Polirom, 2015. 
*Ion Constantin, &quot;Gherman Pântea între mit și realitate&quot;. Bucharest: Editura Biblioteca Bucureștilor, 2010. 
*Tiberiu Dumitru Costăchescu, &quot;Partidul Național Liberal în anii regimurilor autoritare (februarie 1938 – august 1944)&quot;, in &quot;Transilvania&quot;, Issue 2/2006, pp. 80–89.
*Simion Costea, &quot;Ideea de unificare europeană în doctrina și acțiunea politică a lui Iuliu Maniu (1924–1937)&quot;, in &quot;Revista Bistriței&quot;, Vols. XII–XIII, 1999, pp. 391–402.
*Eugenia Irina Crișan, Constantin I. Stan, &quot;Activitatea lui Ghiță Popp pentru înfăptuirea, consolidarea și apărarea României Mari&quot;, in &quot;Angvstia&quot;, Vol. 3, 1998, pp. 165–172.
*Dennis Deletant, &quot;Hitler&#x27;s Forgotten Ally: Ion Antonescu and His Regime, Romania, 1940–1944&quot;. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. 
*Mihai Demetriade, &quot;Victor Biriș, cel mai important agent de influență din penitenciarul Aiud (1957–1963)&quot;, in &quot;Caietele CNSAS&quot;, Vol. V, Issues 1–2, 2012, pp. 11–148.
*Vasile Dobrescu, 
**&quot;Tradiție și naționalism în discursul politic al lui Iuliu Maniu&quot;, in &quot;Annales Universitatis Apulensis, Series Historica&quot;, Vol. 7, 2003, pp. 351–358.
**&quot;Victor Jinga and the Problem of Cooperativism during the First Half of the 20th Century Romania &quot;, in &quot;Studia Universitatis Petru Maior, Series Historia&quot;, Vol. 5, 2005, pp. 125–140.
*Dumitru Drăghicescu, &quot;Partide politice și clase sociale&quot;. Bucharest: Tipografia Reforma Socială, 1922.
*Alesandru Duțu, Florica Dobre, &quot;Generalul Aurel Aldea: &#x27;Între cămașa verde, steagul roșu și cel românesc, am ales tricolorul&#x27;&quot;, in &quot;Magazin Istoric&quot;, August 1996, pp. 16–22.
*Radu Filipescu, &quot;Percepția frontierei româno–sovietice în parlamentul României (1919–1934)&quot;, in &quot;Acta Moldaviae Septentrionalis&quot;, Vols. VII-VIII, 2009, pp. 239–252.
*Stephen Fischer-Galați, 
**&quot;Peasantism in Interwar Eastern Europe&quot;, in &quot;Balkan Studies&quot;, Vol. 8, Issues 1–2, 1967, pp. 103–114.
**&quot;Romania, B.: Fascism in Romania&quot;, in Peter F. Sugar (ed.), &quot;Native Fascism in the Successor States, 1918–1945&quot;, pp. 112–121. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 1971. 
*Gheorghe I. Florescu, &quot;Aspecte ale vieții politice românești. Declinul partidului poporului (iunie 1927—martie 1932)&quot;, in &quot;Hierasus&quot;, Vol. I, 1978, pp. 451–462.
*Vlad Georgescu, &quot;The Romanians. A History&quot;. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1991. 
*Johanna Granville, &quot;&quot;If Hope Is Sin, Then We Are All Guilty&quot;: Romanian Students&#x27; Reactions to the Hungarian Revolution and Soviet Intervention, 1956–1958&quot;, Carl Beck Paper, Issue 1905, April 2008.
*Angela Harre, &quot;Between Marxism and Liberal Democracy: Romanian Agrarianism as an Economic Third Way&quot;, in Piotr Wawrzeniuk (ed.), &quot;Societal Change and Ideological Formation among the Rural Population of the Baltic Area, 1880–1939&quot;, pp. 57–73. Huddinge: Södertörn University, 2008. 
*Elizabeth Hazard, &quot;Războiul Rece a început în România&quot;, in &quot;Magazin Istoric&quot;, August 1996, pp. 55–58.
*Armin Heinen, &quot;Legiunea &#x27;Arhanghelul Mihail&#x27;: o contribuție la problema fascismului internațional&quot;. Bucharest: Humanitas, 2006. 
*Damian Hurezeanu, &quot;Partidul Național-Țărănesc și țărănismul între 1944—1947&quot;, in &quot;Revista Istorică&quot;, Vol. 4, Issues 7–8, July–August 1993, pp. 687–698.
*Ion Ilincioiu, &quot;Studiu introductiv&quot;, in Vasile Niculae, Ion Ilincioiu, Stelian Neagoe (eds.), &quot;Doctrina țărănistă în România. Antologie de texte&quot;, pp. 7–35. Bucharest: Editura Noua Alternativă &amp; Social Theory Institute of the Romanian Academy, 1994. 
*Oana Ionel, &quot;Metode folosite de F.N.D. pentru mobilizarea la manifestații împotriva guvernului (ianuarie – februarie 1945)&quot;, in &quot;Caietele CNSAS&quot;, Vol. V, Issues 1–2, 2012, pp. 357–386.
*Gh. I. Ioniță, &quot;Succesele forțelor democratice din România în alegerile comunale și județene din anii 1936—1937&quot;, in &quot;Studii. Revistă de Istorie&quot;, Vol. 18, Issue 4, 1965, pp. 785–805.
*Ovidiu Emil Iudean, &quot;The Banat Political Elite during the 1926 General Elections&quot;, in &quot;Analele Banatului. Arheologie—Istorie&quot;, Vol. XXIII, 2015, pp. 451–458.
*Barbara Jelavich, &quot;History of the Balkans: Twentieth Century&quot;. Cambridge etc.: Cambridge University Press, 1983. 
*Florian Kührer-Wielach, &quot;The Transylvanian Promise. Political Mobilisation, Unfulfilled Hope and the Rise of Authoritarianism in Interwar Romania&quot;, in &quot;European Review of History&quot;, Vol. 23, Issue 4, 2016, pp. 580–594.
*Ioan Lăcustă, &quot;În București, acum 50 ani&quot;, in &quot;Magazin Istoric&quot;, February 1996, pp. 28–31.
*Wilfried Martens, &quot;Europe: I Struggle, I Overcome&quot;. Dordrecht etc.: Springer &amp; Centre for European Studies, 2008. 
*Ion Mezarescu, &quot;Partidul Național-Creștin: 1935–1937&quot;. Bucharest: Editura Paideia, 2018. 
*Florin-Răzvan Mihai, &quot;Dinamica electorală a candidaților minoritari din Bucovina la alegerile generale din România interbelică&quot;, in Vasile Ciobanu, Sorin Radu (eds.), &quot;Partide politice și minorități naționale din România în secolul XX&quot;, Vol. V, pp. 77–102. Sibiu: TechnoMedia, 2010. 
*Gheorghe Miron, &quot;Aspecte privind Mișcarea Legionară din Vrancea în perioada interbelică&quot;, in &quot;Cronica Vrancei&quot;, Vol. IV, 2003, pp. 154–184.
*Gabriel Moisa, 
**&quot;Electoral Practices and Behaviour in Western Romania during the Elections of November 19th, 1946&quot;, in &quot;Revista Română de Geografie Politică&quot;, Vol. XIV, Issue 1, May 2012, pp. 51–60.
**&quot;Lumea țărănească și politica în Bihorul interbelic&quot;, in &quot;Studia Universitatis Moldaviae. Seria Științe Umanistice&quot;, Issue 10 (110), 2017, pp. 211–226.
*Pavel Moraru, &quot;Organizarea și activitatea serviciilor de informații și siguranță românești din Basarabia în perioada anilor 1918–1944&quot; (Dr. hab. thesis). Chișinău: Moldovan Academy of Sciences, 2016.
*Mihály Zoltán Nagy, Gábor Vincze, &quot;Autonomiști și centraliști. Enigmele unor decizii istorice. Transilvania de Nord din septembrie 1944 până în martie 1945&quot;. Cluj-Napoca: Ethnocultural Diversity Resource Center, 2008. 
*Eusebiu Narai, &quot;Situația politică în județele Caraș și Severin: (1944–1948)&quot;. Timișoara: Editura Mirton, 2008. 
*Victor Neumann, &quot;Conceptul de totalitarism în limbajele social-politice românești&quot;, in Victor Neumann, Armin Heinen (eds.), &quot;Istoria României prin concepte. Perspective alternative asupra limbajelor social-politice&quot;, pp. 401–418. Iași: Polirom, 2010. 
*Alexandru Nicolaescu, &quot;Alegerile parlamentare din 1926 reflectate în presa vremii&quot;, in &quot;Anuarul Institutului de Cercetări Socio-Umane Sibiu&quot;, Vol. XXV, 2018, pp. 139–170.
*Sorin Oane, &quot;Istoria comunismului vâlcean până la 23 august 1944&quot;, in &quot;Buridava&quot;, Vol. XI, 2013–2014, pp. 227–248.
*Marian Olaru, &quot;Procese social-politice și economice pe teritoriul fostei Bucovine (partea de sud), 1944–1947&quot;, in &quot;Archiva Moldaviæ&quot;, Vol. II, 2010, pp. 141–166.
*Z. Ornea, &quot;Anii treizeci. Extrema dreaptă românească&quot;. Bucharest: Editura Fundației Culturale Române, 1995. 
*Teodor Gheorghe Păiușan, &quot;Forme organizate și spontane ale rezistenței anticomuniste și la colectivizare din Valea Crișului Alb&quot;, in Doru Sinaci, Emil Arbonie (eds.), &quot;Administrație românească arădeană. Studii și comunicări. Volumul III&quot;, pp. 233–280. Arad: Vasile Goldiș University Press, 2011. 
*Cristina Petrescu, Dragoș Petrescu, &quot;The Pitești Syndrome: A Romanian &quot;Vergangenheitsbewältigung&quot;?&quot;, in Stefan Troebst, Susan Baumgartl (eds.), &quot;Postdiktatorische Geschichtskulturen im Süden und Osten Europas. Bestandsaufnahme und Forschungsperspektiven (Diktaturen und ihre Überwindung im 20. und 21. Jahrhundert, Band 5)&quot;, pp. 502–618. Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag, 2010. 
*Radu Petrescu, &quot;Portret: Amiralul Dan Zaharia (1878–1943)&quot;, in Raduț Bîlbîie, Mihaela Teodor (eds.), &quot;Elita culturală și presa (Congresul Național de istorie a presei, ediția a VI-a)&quot;, pp. 133–148. Bucharest: Editura Militară, 2013. 
*Liviu Pleșa, &quot;Cadrele Securității în timpul lui Teohari Georgescu&quot;, in &quot;Caietele CNSAS&quot;, Vol. IV, Issues 1–2, 2011, pp. 9–56.
*Claudiu Porumbăcean, &quot;Aspecte privind istoria Partidului Național Țărănesc. Organizația județului Satu Mare&quot;, in &quot;Satu Mare. Studii și Comunicări&quot;, Vol. XIV, 1997, pp. 233–246.
*Sorin Radu, &quot;Semnele electorale ale partidelor politice în perioada interbelică&quot;, in &quot;Anuarul Apulum&quot;, Vol. XXXIX, 2002, pp. 573–586.
*Sabrina P. Ramet, &quot;Social Currents in Eastern Europe: The Sources and Consequences of the Great Transformation&quot;. Durham &amp; London: Duke University Press, 1995. 
*Ioan-Gheorghe Rațiu, &quot;Laudatio &#x27;Lordului&#x27; politicii românești postdecembriste Ion (Ioan-Augustin-Nicolae) Rațiu la împlinirea unui secol de la naștere&quot;, in &quot;Țara Bârsei&quot;, 2017, pp. 245–255.
*Ioan Scurtu, 
**&quot;O tentativă eșuată de fuziune între naționali și țărăniști. &#x27;Căsătoria&#x27; nu a avut loc&quot;, in &quot;Magazin Istoric&quot;, May 1973, pp. 68–72.
**&quot;De la &#x27;Trăiască regele!&#x27; la &#x27;Jos regele!&#x27;&quot;, in &quot;Magazin Istoric&quot;, November 1997, pp. 9–17.
**&quot;Șperțuri, spionaj și manevre politicianiste. &#x27;Afacerea Škoda&#x27;&quot;, in &quot;Dosarele Istoriei&quot;, Issue 7 (23), 1998, pp. 35–41.
**&quot;PNL și PNȚ: Rezerve, nemulțumiri, proteste. Partidele istorice sub guvernarea antonesciano-legionară&quot;, in &quot;Dosarele Istoriei&quot;, Issue 9 (49), 2000, pp. 6–12.
**&quot;Votul universal: o schimbare radicală în peisajul politic național. Duelul putere – opoziție&quot;, in &quot;Dosarele Istoriei&quot;, Issue 11 (51), 2000, pp. 11–16.
*Adela Șerban, &quot;Controversial Issues Regarding Resistance and Dissidence in Romania (1945–1989)&quot;, in &quot;Romanian Journal of Sociology&quot;, Issues 1–2, 2009, pp. 105–130.
*Peter Siani-Davies, &quot;The Traditional Parties and the Romanian Elections of May 1990&quot;, in Rebecca Haynes (ed.), &quot;Occasional Papers in Romanian Studies, No. 2: Papers Presented at the 4th and 5th Romanian Studies Days, SSEES, University of London, March 1996 and February 1997&quot;, pp. 125–146. London: UCL School of Slavonic and East European Studies, 1998. 
*Raluca Nicoleta Spiridon, 
**&quot;Excluderi profesionale în perioada de instaurare a comunismului: destinul criticului literar Șerban Cioculescu (1902–1988)&quot;, in &quot;Caietele CNSAS&quot;, Vol. VI, Issues 1–2, 2013, pp. 246–257.
**&quot;Acțiuni represive împotriva opoziției politice întreprinse de vechile structuri informative în perioada 1944–1948&quot;, in &quot;Caietele CNSAS&quot;, Vol. X, Issue 1, 2017, pp. 7–24.
*Marin C. Stănescu, &quot;&#x27;Aici stăm splendid&#x27;. Gloanțe și sînge la Lupeni &#x27;29&quot;, in &quot;Dosarele Istoriei&quot;, Issue 1 (41), 2000, pp. 18–21. 
*Gabriel Țepelea, &quot;Credință și speranță. Pagini de publicistică radiofonică: 1943–2004&quot;. Bucharest: Romanian Radio Broadcasting Company, 2006. 
*Gabriel Țepelea, Emil Șimăndan, &quot;Călătorie prin veac&quot;. Arad: Editura Fundației Ioan Slavici, 2000. 
*Ottmar Trașcă, &quot;1940–1941. Iuliu Maniu în rapoarte germane&quot;, in &quot;Magazin Istoric&quot;, September 2018, pp. 12–16, 60.
*, &quot;Alegerile parlamentare din noiembrie &#x27;46: guvernul procomunist joacă și câștigă. Ilegalități flagrante, rezultat viciat&quot;, in &quot;Dosarele Istoriei&quot;, Issue 11 (51), 2000, pp. 35–36.
*Traian Udrea, &quot;Acțiuni ale Partidului Comunist Român pentru făurirea Frontului Patriotic Antihitlerist&quot;, in &quot;Studii. Revistă de Istorie&quot;, Vol. 24, Issue 3, 1971, pp. 537–561.
*Iosif Uilăcan, &quot;Județul Năsăud în anul 1946&quot;, in &quot;Revista Bistriței&quot;, Vol. XXVII, 2013, pp. 267–340.
*Tudor Călin Zarojanu, &quot;Viața lui Corneliu Coposu&quot;. Bucharest: Editura Mașina de Scris, 2005. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1855102" start="4" end="33" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855102" start="53" end="75" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855102" start="79" end="107" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Farmers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="166" end="174" title="Agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="198" end="216" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220114" start="266" end="289" title="Romanian National Party" label="Romanian National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="341" end="353" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158424" start="363" end="383" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party (Romania)" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="452" end="463" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="468" end="478" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="596" end="618" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="716" end="728" title="smallholding" label="smallholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q548235" start="737" end="753" title="state capitalism" label="state capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="757" end="772" title="state socialism" label="state socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996615" start="794" end="813" title="cooperative farming" label="cooperative farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025987" start="891" end="911" title="Romanian nationalism" label="Romanian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15718641" start="985" end="1003" title="social corporatism" label="social corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262881" start="1050" end="1067" title="Balkan Federation" label="Balkan federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124124" start="1089" end="1118" title="International Agrarian Bureau" label="International Agrarian Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="1487" end="1495" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="1631" end="1648" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="1740" end="1751" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="1775" end="1789" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390996" start="1808" end="1833" title="Romanian Social Democratic Party (1927–48)" label="Romanian Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="1864" end="1877" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q106092830" start="1904" end="1920" title="Great Depression in Romania" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q555511" start="1978" end="1984" title="Lupeni strike of 1929" label="Lupeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609753" start="1989" end="1996" title="Grivița strike of 1933" label="Grivița"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="2055" end="2079" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="2144" end="2157" title="popular front" label="popular front"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="2205" end="2217" title="anti-fascism" label="anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362550" start="2275" end="2289" title="Romanian Front" label="Romanian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q622305" start="2297" end="2319" title="Alexandru Vaida-Voevod" label="Alexandru Vaida-Voevod"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2392" end="2406" title="Maniu Guards" label="Peasant Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="2485" end="2495" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826796" start="2505" end="2531" title="1937 Romanian general election" label="national elections in 1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q303668" start="2611" end="2637" title="National Renaissance Front" label="National Renaissance Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q48779337" start="2758" end="2782" title="Romanian resistance movement during World War II" label="underground organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357609" start="2797" end="2823" title="Romania in World War II" label="successive fascist regimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2847" end="2860" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376121" start="2901" end="2926" title="Holocaust in Romania" label="deportation of minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="2949" end="2970" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="3030" end="3049" title="1944 Romanian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Coup of August 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880362" start="3215" end="3240" title="Romanian anti-communist resistance movement" label="anti-communist resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827067" start="3284" end="3312" title="1946 Romanian general election" label="fraudulent elections in 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862526" start="3349" end="3363" title="Tămădău Affair" label="Tămădău Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="3383" end="3399" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="communist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779508" start="3544" end="3557" title="Ion Mihalache" label="Ion Mihalache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091237" start="3606" end="3623" title="Romanian diaspora" label="Romanian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357755" start="3649" end="3658" title="Ion Rațiu" label="Ion Rațiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362557" start="3694" end="3721" title="Romanian National Committee (1948)" label="Romanian National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q869137" start="3814" end="3829" title="Corneliu Coposu" label="Corneliu Coposu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128064" start="3910" end="3940" title="Centrist Democrat International" label="Christian Democrat World Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q259887" start="3970" end="4020" title="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="4081" end="4105" title="Romanian Revolution" label="December 1989 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989779" start="4211" end="4245" title="union of Transylvania with Romania" label="union of Transylvania with Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036057" start="4268" end="4292" title="Socialist Party of Transylvania" label="Transylvanian Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4318" end="4343" title="Directory Council of Transylvania" label="Transylvanian Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="4525" end="4539" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4596" end="4610" title="Iuliu Moldovan" label="Iuliu Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="4622" end="4630" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969722" start="4655" end="4663" title="Nativism (politics)" label="nativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q622305" start="4703" end="4725" title="Alexandru Vaida-Voevod" label="Alexandru Vaida-Voevod"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="4740" end="4760" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Romanian Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158424" start="4766" end="4786" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party (Romania)" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779508" start="4833" end="4846" title="Ion Mihalache" label="Ion Mihalache"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933788" start="4887" end="4902" title="Virgil Madgearu" label="Virgil Madgearu"/>
<link wikidata="Q220269" start="4907" end="4921" title="Dimitrie Gusti" label="Dimitrie Gusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="4960" end="4970" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377743" start="4977" end="5005" title="Union of Bessarabia with Romania" label="recently united with Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896392" start="5048" end="5080" title="Bessarabian Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Bessarabian Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997436" start="5088" end="5099" title="Pan Halippa" label="Pan Halippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025879" start="5104" end="5120" title="Constantin Stere" label="Constantin Stere"/>
<link wikidata="Q592508" start="5157" end="5172" title="Nicolae L. Lupu" label="Nicolae L. Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981659" start="5190" end="5201" title="Labor Party (Romania)" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484258" start="5399" end="5418" title="Land reform in Romania" label="land reform project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="5491" end="5503" title="Smallholding" label="smallholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="5546" end="5550" title="King of Romania" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="5551" end="5562" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995243" start="5665" end="5681" title="1923 Constitution of Romania" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687740" start="6389" end="6402" title="Vasile Goldiș" label="Vasile Goldiș"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6749" end="6762" title="Voicu Nițescu" label="Voicu Nițescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7005" end="7033" title="1926 Romanian local elections" label="local election of early 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q58285" start="7098" end="7116" title="Alexandru Averescu" label="Alexandru Averescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165679" start="7124" end="7143" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (interwar Romania)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639618" start="7174" end="7200" title="Peasant Workers&amp;#x27; Bloc" label="Peasant Workers&amp;#x27; Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="7253" end="7277" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362606" start="7642" end="7667" title="1926 Romanian general election" label="national election of June"/>
<link wikidata="Q320306" start="7763" end="7783" title="Chamber of Deputies of Romania" label="Assembly of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q313581" start="7846" end="7859" title="Nicolae Iorga" label="Nicolae Iorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064811" start="7932" end="7960" title="Democratic Nationalist Party (Romania)" label="Democratic Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8106" end="8120" title="Paul Brătășanu" label="Paul Brătășanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735504" start="8187" end="8201" title="Mihai Popovici" label="Mihai Popovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306979" start="8271" end="8280" title="Dreptatea" label="Dreptatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124124" start="8444" end="8473" title="International Agrarian Bureau" label="International Agrarian Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362605" start="8621" end="8639" title="1927 Romanian general election" label="June 1927 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q613397" start="8694" end="8707" title="Barbu Știrbey" label="Barbu Știrbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="9048" end="9057" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="9090" end="9098" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q462175" start="9365" end="9383" title="Ion I. C. Brătianu" label="Ion I. C. Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937612" start="9629" end="9643" title="tax resistance" label="tax resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="9818" end="9828" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="9997" end="10006" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="10034" end="10047" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10334" end="10348" title="Aurel Leucuția" label="Aurel Leucuția"/>
<link wikidata="Q162177" start="10444" end="10459" title="Helen of Greece and Denmark" label="Helen of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q434493" start="10532" end="10545" title="Elena Lupescu" label="Elena Lupescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="10777" end="10790" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="10827" end="10848" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583450" start="10893" end="10907" title="Ministry of Labor and Social Justice (Romania)" label="Labor Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904237" start="10961" end="10972" title="biopolitics" label="biopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="11076" end="11087" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653906" start="11109" end="11125" title="social insurance" label="social insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390996" start="11165" end="11188" title="Romanian Social Democratic Party (1927–48)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362607" start="11249" end="11272" title="1928 Romanian general election" label="December 1928 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189898" start="11479" end="11514" title="Jewish National People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Jewish National People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q831042" start="11520" end="11532" title="German Party (Romania)" label="German Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364577" start="11542" end="11564" title="Ukrainian National Party" label="Ukrainian Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="11653" end="11663" title="Parliament of Romania" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380594" start="12039" end="12050" title="Nae Ionescu" label="Nae Ionescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q927758" start="12721" end="12739" title="Gheorghe Mironescu" label="Gheorghe Mironescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859028" start="12752" end="12768" title="Barbara Jelavich" label="Barbara Jelavich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362608" start="13131" end="13152" title="1931 Romanian general election" label="election of June 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362609" start="13259" end="13281" title="1932 Romanian general election" label="early election of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583505" start="13458" end="13474" title="Ministry of Internal Affairs (Romania)" label="Internal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q106092830" start="13962" end="13978" title="Great Depression in Romania" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q555511" start="14124" end="14130" title="Lupeni strike of 1929" label="Lupeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609753" start="14135" end="14142" title="Grivița strike of 1933" label="Grivița"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363380" start="14299" end="14314" title="Romulus Cioflec" label="Romulus Cioflec"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="14483" end="14493" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="14534" end="14557" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978510" start="14681" end="14705" title="National Socialist Party (Romania)" label="National Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970219" start="14852" end="14875" title="National Agrarian Party" label="National Agrarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q223414" start="14887" end="14900" title="Octavian Goga" label="Octavian Goga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721758" start="15144" end="15151" title="Vulturu, Vrancea" label="Vulturu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15482" end="15496" title="Maniu Guards" label="Peasant Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062928" start="15607" end="15619" title="Ion Buzdugan" label="Ion Buzdugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639621" start="15647" end="15672" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981930" start="15777" end="15795" title="agrarian socialist" label="agrarian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639172" start="15809" end="15846" title="Democratic Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Stere" label="Democratic Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Stere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609038" start="15893" end="15907" title="Grigore Iunian" label="Grigore Iunian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639659" start="15947" end="15975" title="Radical Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Radical Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686623" start="16094" end="16111" title="Șerban Cioculescu" label="Șerban Cioculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080483" start="16285" end="16297" title="Petre Andrei" label="Petre Andrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q550792" start="16302" end="16328" title="Constantin Rădulescu-Motru" label="Constantin Rădulescu-Motru"/>
<link wikidata="Q12742454" start="16339" end="16351" title="Traian Bratu" label="Traian Bratu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739640" start="16365" end="16390" title="Rudolf Schweitzer-Cumpăna" label="Rudolf Schweitzer-Cumpăna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="16425" end="16438" title="Romanian Army" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537342" start="16450" end="16464" title="Nicolae Alevra" label="Nicolae Alevra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385802" start="16469" end="16489" title="Ioan Mihail Racoviță" label="Ioan Mihail Racoviță"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801407" start="16541" end="16550" title="Ion Vinea" label="Ion Vinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12728049" start="16565" end="16570" title="Facla" label="Facla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16611" end="16631" title="Haralambie Marchetti" label="Haralambie Marchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179171" start="16786" end="16802" title="Petru Comarnescu" label="Petru Comarnescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18540734" start="16807" end="16821" title="Traian Herseni" label="Traian Herseni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523902" start="16873" end="16891" title="University of Iași" label="University of Iași"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16953" end="16970" title="Constantin Balmuș" label="Constantin Balmuș"/>
<link wikidata="Q20006978" start="16972" end="16983" title="Octav Botez" label="Octav Botez"/>
<link wikidata="Q443190" start="16985" end="16997" title="Iorgu Iordan" label="Iorgu Iordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720679" start="16999" end="17012" title="Andrei Oțetea" label="Andrei Oțetea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17317979" start="17018" end="17029" title="Mihai Ralea" label="Mihai Ralea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377596" start="17188" end="17199" title="Ion G. Duca" label="Ion G. Duca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362610" start="17215" end="17240" title="1933 Romanian general election" label="election of December 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="17399" end="17410" title="Iron Guard" label="death squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842040" start="17470" end="17488" title="Gheorghe Tătărescu" label="Gheorghe Tătărescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18060" end="18072" title="Škoda Affair" label="Škoda Affair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18234" end="18247" title="Romulus Boilă" label="Romulus Boilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362550" start="18414" end="18428" title="Romanian Front" label="Romanian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626677" start="19071" end="19089" title="Mihail Ghelmegeanu" label="Mihail Ghelmegeanu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19095" end="19105" title="Ernest Ene" label="Ernest Ene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682179" start="19169" end="19185" title="Viața Românească" label="Viața Românească"/>
<link wikidata="Q12730867" start="19341" end="19352" title="Ioan Hudiță" label="Ioan Hudiță"/>
<link wikidata="Q869137" start="19598" end="19613" title="Corneliu Coposu" label="Corneliu Coposu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19938" end="19947" title="Ionel Pop" label="Ionel Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="20044" end="20056" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273663" start="20163" end="20196" title="National-Christian Defense League" label="National-Christian Defense League"/>
<link wikidata="Q12730313" start="20305" end="20315" title="Ilie Lazăr" label="Ilie Lazăr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270876" start="20689" end="20713" title="National Christian Party" label="National Christian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254985" start="21387" end="21403" title="Dem. I. Dobrescu" label="Dem. I. Dobrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18539247" start="21595" end="21620" title="Petre Constantinescu-Iași" label="Petre Constantinescu-Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902739" start="21793" end="21805" title="Jewish Party (Romania)" label="Jewish Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470070" start="21848" end="21870" title="Ploughmen&amp;#x27;s Front" label="Ploughmen&amp;#x27;s Front"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21935" end="21944" title="Ghiță Pop" label="Ghiță Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q191717" start="21977" end="21986" title="Mehedinți County" label="Mehedinți"/>
<link wikidata="Q191071" start="21991" end="22000" title="Hunedoara County" label="Hunedoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="22259" end="22272" title="popular front" label="popular front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362630" start="22400" end="22424" title="1936 Romanian local elections" label="county elections of 1936"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22429" end="22439" title="1937 Romanian local elections" label="early 1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162156" start="22514" end="22543" title="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Union" label="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q113269040" start="22549" end="22568" title="United Socialist Party (Romania)" label="Popovici Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639877" start="22574" end="22592" title="Vlad Țepeș League" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226156" start="22824" end="22836" title="Magyar Party (Romania)" label="Magyar Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23247" end="23260" title="Gheorghe Beza" label="Gheorghe Beza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23634" end="23645" title="Dan Zaharia" label="Dan Zaharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960763" start="23679" end="23695" title="Ștefan Burileanu" label="Ștefan Burileanu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23697" end="23715" title="Gheorghe Rujinschi" label="Gheorghe Rujinschi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23717" end="23731" title="Gabriel Negrei" label="Gabriel Negrei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23737" end="23750" title="Ioan Sichitiu" label="Ioan Sichitiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731473" start="23809" end="23822" title="Muscel County" label="Muscel County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711609" start="23885" end="23893" title="Lăncieri" label="Lăncieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q254871" start="23926" end="23934" title="Faraoani" label="Faraoani"/>
<link wikidata="Q192265" start="23980" end="23987" title="Focșani" label="Focșani"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="24232" end="24236" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q439903" start="24409" end="24425" title="Armand Călinescu" label="Armand Călinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="25096" end="25108" title="lèse-majesté" label="lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826796" start="25159" end="25197" title="1937 Romanian general election" label="legislative elections in December 1937"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25691" end="25706" title="Ilariu Dobridor" label="Ilariu Dobridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974094" start="25865" end="25882" title="National Liberal Party-Brătianu" label="Georgist Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q838826" start="26414" end="26426" title="Ștefan Foriș" label="Ștefan Foriș"/>
<link wikidata="Q426356" start="26736" end="26744" title="Adevărul" label="Adevărul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468239" start="26818" end="26832" title="Zaharia Stancu" label="Zaharia Stancu"/>
<link wikidata="Q847345" start="26837" end="26846" title="Geo Bogza" label="Geo Bogza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="27368" end="27385" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="27617" end="27633" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q702246" start="27650" end="27668" title="German re-armament" label="German re-armament"/>
<link wikidata="Q179567" start="27933" end="27945" title="Argeș County" label="Argeș County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29435" end="29447" title="Victor Jinga" label="Victor Jinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q186838" start="30254" end="30267" title="Vâlcea County" label="Vâlcea County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18547558" start="30373" end="30387" title="Mihail Roșianu" label="Mihail Roșianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462600" start="30425" end="30436" title="Patriarch Justinian of Romania" label="Ioan Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460509" start="30526" end="30535" title="self-coup" label="self-coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278752" start="30588" end="30601" title="Dinu Brătianu" label="Dinu Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q303668" start="30679" end="30705" title="National Renaissance Front" label="National Renaissance Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564250" start="30747" end="30773" title="1938 Constitution of Romania" label="authoritarian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362590" start="30826" end="30848" title="1938 Romanian constitutional referendum" label="February 24 plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q521249" start="31160" end="31175" title="Grigore Gafencu" label="Grigore Gafencu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31180" end="31194" title="Traian Ionașcu" label="Traian Ionașcu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31363" end="31378" title="Adrian Brudariu" label="Adrian Brudariu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362611" start="32022" end="32048" title="1939 Romanian general election" label="sham election of June 1939"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32435" end="32449" title="Alexandru Mîță" label="Alexandru Mîță"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466018" start="32537" end="32545" title="Senate of Romania" label="Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725412" start="33063" end="33076" title="Crown Council of Romania" label="Crown Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="33290" end="33296" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="33311" end="33354" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="withdrew its administration from Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="33530" end="33545" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Regency Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="33777" end="33796" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="33845" end="33866" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="34165" end="34173" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090550" start="34251" end="34278" title="Soviet Empire" label="imperialistic by definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="34342" end="34355" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507497" start="34588" end="34612" title="National Legionary State" label="National Legionary State"/>
<link wikidata="Q868715" start="34638" end="34648" title="Conducător" label="Conducător"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="34726" end="34737" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q77656" start="35209" end="35218" title="Siguranța" label="Siguranța"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067154" start="35734" end="35748" title="Capital punishment in Romania" label="death sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="35779" end="35784" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933415" start="35853" end="35865" title="Viorel Tilea" label="Viorel Tilea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357755" start="35870" end="35879" title="Ion Rațiu" label="Ion Rațiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118241" start="35958" end="35978" title="Churchill war ministry" label="British war ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070808" start="36088" end="36103" title="Jilava Massacre" label="Jilava Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36259" end="36268" title="Ghiță Pop" label="Ghiță Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="36453" end="36484" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; rebellion and Bucharest pogrom" label="brief civil war in January 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="37174" end="37196" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="37508" end="37525" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="37593" end="37624" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Nazi attack on the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="37781" end="37793" title="Transnistria Governorate" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376121" start="37821" end="37866" title="Holocaust in Romania" label="Romania&amp;#x27;s participation in the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102584" start="37884" end="37895" title="Iași pogrom" label="Iași pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869624" start="38301" end="38317" title="Bessarabian Jews" label="Bessarabian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="38791" end="38806" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="war in the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q48779337" start="38857" end="38886" title="Romanian resistance movement during World War II" label="Anglophile resistance centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731921" start="39130" end="39147" title="Târgu Jiu internment camp" label="camp in Târgu Jiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12736621" start="39189" end="39206" title="Nicolae Carandino" label="Nicolae Carandino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39264" end="39282" title="Anton Alexandrescu" label="Anton Alexandrescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39425" end="39438" title="Zaharia Boilă" label="Zaharia Boilă"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39440" end="39455" title="Radu Cioculescu" label="Radu Cioculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q935162" start="39457" end="39471" title="Victor Eftimiu" label="Victor Eftimiu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39473" end="39486" title="Augustin Popa" label="Augustin Popa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39492" end="39505" title="Emanoil Socor" label="Emanoil Socor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39635" end="39644" title="Ghiță Pop" label="Ghiță Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q124646014" start="39649" end="39663" title="Virgil Solomon" label="Virgil Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39805" end="39818" title="Augustin Vișa" label="Augustin Vișa"/>
<link wikidata="Q926080" start="40248" end="40272" title="Holocaust in Hungary" label="extermination in Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362529" start="40620" end="40641" title="Romanian armies in the Battle of Stalingrad" label="trapped at Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296124" start="40751" end="40768" title="Soviet occupation of Romania" label="Soviet occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163779" start="40832" end="40851" title="Constantin Vișoianu" label="Constantin Vișoianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="41211" end="41220" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096772" start="41304" end="41324" title="Operation Autonomous" label="Operation Autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722705" start="41412" end="41440" title="Alfred Gardyne de Chastelain" label="Alfred Gardyne de Chastelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099479" start="41445" end="41456" title="Ivor Porter" label="Ivor Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="41639" end="41655" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="42328" end="42345" title="King Michael Coup" label="King Michael Coup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42386" end="42400" title="Cezar Spineanu" label="Cezar Spineanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12740294" start="42722" end="42735" title="Sabin Manuilă" label="Sabin Manuilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="42876" end="42884" title="Romani people in Romania" label="Romanies"/>
<link wikidata="Q838996" start="43015" end="43034" title="Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu" label="Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q592204" start="43213" end="43227" title="Bellu cemetery" label="Bellu cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938151" start="43726" end="43740" title="Vlad Georgescu" label="Vlad Georgescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q368100" start="44143" end="44163" title="Constantin Sănătescu" label="Constantin Sănătescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="44549" end="44560" title="brain drain" label="brain drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265175" start="44675" end="44686" title="Lucian Boia" label="Lucian Boia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162686" start="45279" end="45292" title="Anti-Hungarian sentiment" label="antimagyarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="45326" end="45334" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="45534" end="45544" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989699" start="45719" end="45732" title="communization" label="communization"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580439" start="45917" end="45932" title="Nicolae Penescu" label="Nicolae Penescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q279653" start="46104" end="46119" title="Nicolae Rădescu" label="Nicolae Rădescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46587" end="46604" title="Horațiu Comaniciu" label="Horațiu Comaniciu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014041" start="46609" end="46625" title="Silviu Crăciunaș" label="Silviu Crăciunaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735504" start="47044" end="47058" title="Mihai Popovici" label="Mihai Popovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q12742241" start="47283" end="47305" title="Teofil Sauciuc-Săveanu" label="Teofil Sauciuc-Săveanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17277335" start="47307" end="47320" title="Gheorghe Zane" label="Gheorghe Zane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727536" start="47382" end="47395" title="Ella Negruzzi" label="Ella Negruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47477" end="47492" title="Virgil Veniamin" label="Virgil Veniamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743643" start="47625" end="47641" title="Vladimir Streinu" label="Vladimir Streinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12737591" start="47902" end="47926" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Alexandrescu" label="Alexandrescu Peasantists"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848882" start="47960" end="47985" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Front (Romania)" label="National Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470070" start="48190" end="48212" title="Ploughmen&amp;#x27;s Front" label="Ploughmen&amp;#x27;s Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510581" start="48335" end="48365" title="Socialist Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Socialist Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q420474" start="48941" end="48951" title="false flag" label="false flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q317313" start="49051" end="49062" title="Petru Groza" label="Petru Groza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058914" start="49573" end="49593" title="Censorship in Communist Romania" label="political censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683306" start="49645" end="49659" title="Emil Hațieganu" label="Emil Hațieganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362569" start="50091" end="50122" title="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunal" label="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q609044" start="50383" end="50390" title="Caracal, Romania" label="Caracal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215723" start="50395" end="50403" title="Slobozia" label="Slobozia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="50644" end="50677" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="Churchill&amp;#x27;s electoral defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="50746" end="50752" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880362" start="50955" end="50986" title="Romanian anti-communist resistance movement" label="armed anti-communist resistance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51062" end="51086" title="Haiducii lui Avram Iancu" label="Haiducii lui Avram Iancu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321594" start="51277" end="51288" title="Aurel Aldea" label="Aurel Aldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181209" start="51855" end="51869" title="Suceava County" label="Suceava County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652038" start="52051" end="52077" title="National Intelligence Authority (United States)" label="Central Intelligence Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020232" start="52110" end="52125" title="Sleeper agent" label="sleeper network"/>
<link wikidata="Q182888" start="52621" end="52632" title="Iași County" label="Iași County"/>
<link wikidata="Q443190" start="52707" end="52719" title="Iorgu Iordan" label="Iorgu Iordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720679" start="52724" end="52737" title="Andrei Oțetea" label="Andrei Oțetea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902195" start="52876" end="52912" title="Democratic Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu" label="Democratic Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q741775" start="52943" end="52962" title="enemy of the people" label="enemy of the people"/>
<link wikidata="Q190690" start="53169" end="53174" title="Sălaj County" label="Sălaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827067" start="53568" end="53602" title="1946 Romanian general election" label="general elections in November 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163771" start="54176" end="54201" title="Constantin Titel Petrescu" label="Constantin Titel Petrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q173591" start="54545" end="54549" title="Arad, Romania" label="Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q187938" start="54554" end="54561" title="Pitești" label="Pitești"/>
<link wikidata="Q804998" start="54637" end="54643" title="Balinț" label="Balinț"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731471" start="54821" end="54834" title="Năsăud County" label="Năsăud County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298169" start="55348" end="55355" title="Dorohoi County" label="Dorohoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188813" start="55357" end="55366" title="Maramureș County" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731473" start="55368" end="55374" title="Muscel County" label="Muscel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188945" start="55376" end="55379" title="Olt County" label="Olt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18547330" start="55385" end="55392" title="Rădăuți County" label="Rădăuți"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55976" end="55986" title="Mara Lazăr" label="Mara Lazăr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56287" end="56305" title="Pantelimon Chirilă" label="Pantelimon Chirilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q18547330" start="56345" end="56359" title="Rădăuți County" label="Rădăuți County"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="57017" end="57021" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457875" start="57086" end="57100" title="Severin County" label="Severin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862526" start="57250" end="57264" title="Tămădău Affair" label="Tămădău Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q521249" start="57505" end="57520" title="Grigore Gafencu" label="Grigore Gafencu"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="57728" end="57738" title="show trial" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q75634" start="58125" end="58131" title="Reșița" label="Reșița"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58144" end="58158" title="Alexandru Popp (engineer)" label="Alexandru Popp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917262" start="58261" end="58280" title="Ion Gavrilă Ogoranu" label="Ion Gavrilă Ogoranu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362557" start="58541" end="58568" title="Romanian National Committee (1948)" label="Romanian National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58899" end="58912" title="Romulus Boilă" label="Romulus Boilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q527012" start="58944" end="58965" title="Stanisław Mikołajczyk" label="Stanisław Mikołajczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609046" start="59037" end="59062" title="Grigore Niculescu-Buzești" label="Grigore Niculescu-Buzești"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59190" end="59202" title="Cornel Bianu" label="Cornel Bianu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59208" end="59221" title="Augustin Popa" label="Augustin Popa"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="59577" end="59594" title="Communist Romania" label="Communist Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12736662" start="59716" end="59732" title="Nicolae Gh. Lupu" label="Nicolae Gh. Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362616" start="59769" end="59796" title="1948 Romanian legislative election" label="sham election of March 1948"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60044" end="60051" title="Ion Uță" label="Ion Uță"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725204" start="60055" end="60063" title="Teregova" label="Teregova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60108" end="60123" title="Gabriel Țepelea" label="Gabriel Țepelea"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="60281" end="60286" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q285425" start="60332" end="60349" title="Apuseni Mountains" label="Apuseni Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="60456" end="60466" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60577" end="60588" title="Ioan Bărbuș" label="Ioan Bărbuș"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971723" start="61938" end="61956" title="National communism in Romania" label="national communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="62000" end="62014" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q294072" start="62109" end="62131" title="Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej" label="Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058375" start="62416" end="62428" title="double agent" label="double agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775719" start="62610" end="62622" title="Anton Crihan" label="Anton Crihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17277335" start="62839" end="62852" title="Gheorghe Zane" label="Gheorghe Zane"/>
<link wikidata="Q737218" start="62991" end="63025" title="Bucharest student movement of 1956" label="Bucharest student movement of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="63282" end="63290" title="Ploiești" label="Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63421" end="63436" title="Adrian Brudariu" label="Adrian Brudariu"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="63524" end="63534" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="63685" end="63704" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="post-Soviet Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699353" start="63720" end="63731" title="Aiud Prison" label="Aiud Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131519" start="63883" end="63900" title="Bărăgan deportations" label="Bărăgan deportees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63912" end="63926" title="Cezar Spineanu" label="Cezar Spineanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="63971" end="63988" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q156728" start="64168" end="64180" title="nomenklatura" label="nomenklatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="64442" end="64460" title="passive resistance" label="passive resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063040" start="64815" end="64829" title="Ion Diaconescu" label="Ion Diaconescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64831" end="64839" title="Ion Puiu" label="Ion Puiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350176" start="64859" end="64875" title="Memorial service in the Eastern Orthodox Church" label="memorial service"/>
<link wikidata="Q152416" start="65047" end="65055" title="samizdat" label="samizdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17418439" start="65742" end="65758" title="1985 Romanian legislative election" label="election of 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q12728623" start="65807" end="65845" title="Front of Socialist Unity and Democracy" label="Front of Socialist Unity and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="66252" end="66272" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q128064" start="66412" end="66442" title="Centrist Democrat International" label="Christian Democrat World Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="66541" end="66560" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q259887" start="66776" end="66826" title="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755230" start="67133" end="67157" title="High Court of Cassation and Justice" label="Supreme Court of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265175" start="67312" end="67323" title="Lucian Boia" label="Lucian Boia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220114" start="67655" end="67678" title="Romanian National Party" label="Romanian National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="67708" end="67723" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="67738" end="67750" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="67834" end="67849" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277535" start="68110" end="68130" title="Dimitrie Drăghicescu" label="Dimitrie Drăghicescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q660018" start="68295" end="68312" title="National liberalism" label="national liberals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68580" end="68602" title="Stephen Fischer-Galați" label="Stephen Fischer-Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499669" start="68706" end="68726" title="Guided democracy" label="controlled democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158424" start="69329" end="69339" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party (Romania)" label="Peasantist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12744342" start="69449" end="69463" title="Ștefan Zeletin" label="Ștefan Zeletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="69517" end="69528" title="Physiocracy" label="Physiocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="69558" end="69570" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="69784" end="69795" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Old-Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23932731" start="69865" end="69890" title="Constantin Dobrescu-Argeș" label="Constantin Dobrescu-Argeș"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69895" end="69905" title="Toma Dragu" label="Toma Dragu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025879" start="69954" end="69970" title="Constantin Stere" label="Constantin Stere"/>
<link wikidata="Q265685" start="69978" end="69988" title="Poporanism" label="Poporanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981659" start="70087" end="70098" title="Labor Party (Romania)" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q834016" start="70341" end="70363" title="Bulgarian Agrarian National Union" label="Bulgarian Agrarianists"/>
<link wikidata="Q854537" start="70439" end="70456" title="Marxian economics" label="Marxian economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165679" start="70701" end="70720" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (interwar Romania)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q472940" start="70772" end="70782" title="Bolshevism" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="71142" end="71157" title="Deindustrialization" label="anti-industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="71208" end="71227" title="economic liberalism" label="economic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="71243" end="71253" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q555887" start="71348" end="71363" title="Economic nationalism" label="ourselves alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="71473" end="71487" title="class conflict" label="class conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q494792" start="72299" end="72308" title="Third Way" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801901" start="72443" end="72456" title="land grabbing" label="land grabbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413574" start="72976" end="72991" title="multilateralism" label="multilateralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q751533" start="72996" end="73015" title="class collaboration" label="class collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444992" start="73340" end="73360" title="cooperative movement" label="cooperative movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73478" end="73490" title="Victor Jinga" label="Victor Jinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282509" start="73628" end="73646" title="Nordic agrarian parties" label="Nordic agrarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992343" start="73655" end="73674" title="Danish cooperative movement" label="Danish cooperatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73746" end="73767" title="Nicolae Vucu-Secășanu" label="Nicolae Vucu-Secășanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071814" start="74339" end="74347" title="Z. Ornea" label="Z. Ornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143021" start="74503" end="74519" title="developmentalism" label="developmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227725" start="74693" end="74702" title="dirigisme" label="dirigisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="74746" end="74768" title="agricultural machinery" label="agricultural machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052551" start="74773" end="74790" title="Infant industry" label="infant industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979824" start="74800" end="74812" title="Nationalization in Romania" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q15718641" start="75035" end="75053" title="social corporatism" label="social corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735504" start="75261" end="75275" title="Mihai Popovici" label="Mihai Popovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="75443" end="75455" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="75488" end="75509" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q872760" start="75600" end="75617" title="corporate statism" label="corporate statism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="75661" end="75676" title="Italian fascism" label="Italian fascism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76857" end="76872" title="Gabriel Țepelea" label="Gabriel Țepelea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="77372" end="77391" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="77402" end="77416" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665156" start="77434" end="77448" title="Christian ethics" label="moral theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q856020" start="77453" end="77464" title="personalism" label="personalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365408" start="77745" end="77764" title="to be, or not to be" label="to be, or not to be"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686623" start="78023" end="78040" title="Șerban Cioculescu" label="Șerban Cioculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306979" start="78057" end="78066" title="Dreptatea" label="Dreptatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993616" start="78277" end="78297" title="cultural nationalism" label="cultural nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989779" start="78400" end="78413" title="Union of Transylvania with Romania" label="union process"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="78429" end="78444" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="78508" end="78515" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="78670" end="78689" title="popular sovereignty" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12734854" start="78763" end="78800" title="Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia" label="Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q856349" start="79063" end="79084" title="Romanian Greek Catholic Church" label="Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="79147" end="79164" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79779" end="79790" title="Mayer Ebner" label="Mayer Ebner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79827" end="79846" title="Constantin Krakalia" label="Constantin Krakalia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79851" end="79875" title="Volodymyr Zalozetsky-Sas" label="Volodymyr Zalozetsky-Sas"/>
<link wikidata="Q369739" start="79886" end="79895" title="Ukrainians of Romania" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794558" start="79921" end="79934" title="Max Auschnitt" label="Max Auschnitt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80031" end="80041" title="Aurel Vlad" label="Aurel Vlad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398002" start="80045" end="80061" title="Ministry of Culture and National Identity (Romania)" label="Minister of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040235" start="80086" end="80108" title="Union of Romanian Jews" label="Union of Romanian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q555511" start="80290" end="80312" title="Lupeni strike of 1929" label="Lupeni debacle of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80350" end="80363" title="Augustin Popa" label="Augustin Popa"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="80419" end="80435" title="Germans in Romania" label="German Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551183" start="80561" end="80587" title="German People&amp;#x27;s Party (Romania)" label="German People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q445618" start="80754" end="80762" title="Banat Swabians" label="Swabians"/>
<link wikidata="Q258981" start="80766" end="80771" title="Lugoj" label="Lugoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q756593" start="80784" end="80795" title="Târgu Neamț" label="Târgu Neamț"/>
<link wikidata="Q550792" start="80896" end="80922" title="Constantin Rădulescu-Motru" label="Constantin Rădulescu-Motru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380594" start="81043" end="81054" title="Nae Ionescu" label="Nae Ionescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272124" start="81059" end="81075" title="Nichifor Crainic" label="Nichifor Crainic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576784" start="81113" end="81128" title="Romanianization" label="Romanianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="81230" end="81244" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q708764" start="81298" end="81313" title="Jewish Question" label="Jewish Question"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81549" end="81563" title="Iuliu Moldovan" label="Iuliu Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904237" start="81577" end="81588" title="biopolitics" label="biopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="81599" end="81616" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81766" end="81775" title="Ionel Pop" label="Ionel Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q434493" start="82136" end="82149" title="Elena Lupescu" label="Elena Lupescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q852739" start="83160" end="83181" title="national conservatism" label="national conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q521249" start="83422" end="83437" title="Grigore Gafencu" label="Grigore Gafencu"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="83471" end="83481" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143148" start="83739" end="83753" title="Moldavian ASSR" label="Moldavian ASSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="83791" end="83805" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Soviet Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q935162" start="84106" end="84120" title="Victor Eftimiu" label="Victor Eftimiu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84291" end="84305" title="Alexandru Mîță" label="Alexandru Mîță"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84310" end="84324" title="Gheorghe Stere" label="Gheorghe Stere"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="84471" end="84485" title="Winter War" label="war on Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q474138" start="84650" end="84660" title="War of aggression" label="aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="84756" end="84765" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q852483" start="85083" end="85098" title="Unification of Moldova and Romania" label="Pan-Romanianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775719" start="85148" end="85160" title="Anton Crihan" label="Anton Crihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12816549" start="85350" end="85385" title="Transylvanianism" label="Transylvania for the Transylvanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789994" start="85713" end="85736" title="Thomas Gerard Gallagher" label="Thomas Gerard Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86230" end="86243" title="Romulus Boilă" label="Romulus Boilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="86703" end="86724" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262881" start="86916" end="86933" title="Balkan Federation" label="Balkan federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377153" start="86938" end="86949" title="Europeanism" label="Europeanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q781476" start="87106" end="87123" title="Nicolae Titulescu" label="Nicolae Titulescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q346648" start="87128" end="87141" title="André Tardieu" label="André Tardieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q529130" start="87236" end="87250" title="István Bethlen" label="István Bethlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q592886" start="87284" end="87305" title="Hungarian revisionism" label="Hungarian revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q666670" start="87370" end="87400" title="Danubian Federation" label="Central European Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="87508" end="87515" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q265824" start="87519" end="87525" title="Second Hellenic Republic" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="87565" end="87570" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="87643" end="87649" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q733951" start="87732" end="87746" title="Little Entente" label="Little Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="87754" end="87767" title="single market" label="single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="87876" end="87884" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q302884" start="88105" end="88133" title="Bavarian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Bavarian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124124" start="88167" end="88196" title="International Agrarian Bureau" label="International Agrarian Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="88263" end="88276" title="Slavic Europe" label="Slavic Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q116951802" start="88385" end="88448" title="International Entente of Radical and Similar Democratic Parties" label="International Entente of Radical and Similar Democratic Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="88545" end="88562" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="88829" end="88841" title="Eastern bloc" label="Eastern bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="88856" end="88875" title="European Federation" label="European federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18588989" start="89132" end="89162" title="Progressive Conservative Party (Romania)" label="Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970219" start="89400" end="89423" title="National Agrarian Party" label="National Agrarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362550" start="89432" end="89446" title="Romanian Front" label="Romanian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639659" start="89454" end="89482" title="Radical Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Radical Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639621" start="89491" end="89498" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu" label="Lupists"/>
<link wikidata="Q130811" start="89927" end="89944" title="Flag of Romania" label="Romanian tricolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q179588" start="90112" end="90117" title="Bihor County" label="Bihor"/>
<link wikidata="Q841184" start="90465" end="90477" title="Roman salute" label="Roman salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975341" start="90571" end="90577" title="Vasylivka, Bolhrad Raion" label="Vaisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q517327" start="90612" end="90620" title="Red flag (politics)" label="red flag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90676" end="90689" title="Țara de Mâine" label="Țara de Mâine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603516" start="90925" end="90935" title="green flag" label="green flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="91211" end="91217" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q179567" start="91256" end="91268" title="Argeș County" label="Argeș County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069129" start="91294" end="91300" title="pennon" label="pennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191717" start="91333" end="91342" title="Mehedinți County" label="Mehedinți"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543966" start="91533" end="91544" title="raised fist" label="raised fist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827067" start="92254" end="92271" title="1946 Romanian general election" label="elections of 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q190406" start="92872" end="92883" title="Gorj County" label="Gorj County"/>
<link wikidata="Q285268" start="92927" end="92944" title="Eye of Providence" label="Eye of Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639621" start="93080" end="93105" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639172" start="93115" end="93152" title="Democratic Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Stere" label="Democratic Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Stere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639659" start="93162" end="93190" title="Radical Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Radical Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362550" start="93200" end="93214" title="Romanian Front" label="Romanian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510581" start="93224" end="93254" title="Socialist Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Socialist Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12737591" start="93264" end="93306" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Alexandrescu" label="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Alexandrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902195" start="93316" end="93352" title="Democratic Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu" label="Democratic Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639621" start="93399" end="93424" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party–Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265175" start="93854" end="93865" title="Lucian Boia" label="Lucian Boia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680566" start="93960" end="93969" title="Humanitas publishing house" label="Humanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710069" start="94371" end="94397" title="Journal of Agrarian Change" label="Journal of Agrarian Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q372760" start="95211" end="95227" title="Adrian Cioroianu" label="Adrian Cioroianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q608338" start="95617" end="95648" title="Editura Universității București" label="Editura Universității București"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209795" start="95760" end="95767" title="Polirom" label="Polirom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189074" start="96465" end="96480" title="Dennis Deletant" label="Dennis Deletant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076074" start="96582" end="96600" title="Palgrave Macmillan" label="Palgrave Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277535" start="97193" end="97212" title="Dumitru Drăghicescu" label="Dumitru Drăghicescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729740" start="97464" end="97479" title="Magazin Istoric" label="Magazin Istoric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97698" end="97720" title="Stephen Fischer-Galați" label="Stephen Fischer-Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567211" start="97896" end="97910" title="Peter F. Sugar" label="Peter F. Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q667886" start="98009" end="98017" title="ABC-CLIO" label="ABC-CLIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938151" start="98209" end="98223" title="Vlad Georgescu" label="Vlad Georgescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080970" start="98273" end="98300" title="Ohio State University Press" label="Ohio State University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4102101" start="98648" end="98664" title="Piotr Wawrzeniuk" label="Piotr Wawrzeniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110979" start="98805" end="98825" title="Södertörn University" label="Södertörn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859028" start="100147" end="100163" title="Barbara Jelavich" label="Barbara Jelavich"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="100236" end="100262" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15814228" start="100439" end="100465" title="European Review of History" label="European Review of History"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100511" end="100523" title="Ioan Lăcustă" label="Ioan Lăcustă"/>
<link wikidata="Q313809" start="100623" end="100639" title="Wilfried Martens" label="Wilfried Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q176916" start="100701" end="100709" title="Springer Science+Business Media" label="Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062434" start="100716" end="100743" title="Wilfried Martens Centre for European Studies" label="Centre for European Studies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100829" end="100844" title="Editura Paideia" label="Editura Paideia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338761" start="101890" end="101918" title="Moldovan Academy of Sciences" label="Moldovan Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904805" start="102280" end="102294" title="Victor Neumann" label="Victor Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071814" start="103064" end="103072" title="Zigu Ornea" label="Z. Ornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740485" start="103140" end="103174" title="Editura Fundației Culturale Române" label="Editura Fundației Culturale Române"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031813" start="103462" end="103492" title="Vasile Goldiș Western University of Arad" label="Vasile Goldiș University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338755" start="104136" end="104152" title="Editura Militară" label="Editura Militară"/>
<link wikidata="Q543910" start="104662" end="104678" title="Sabrina P. Ramet" label="Sabrina P. Ramet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041095" start="104806" end="104827" title="Duke University Press" label="Duke University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466845" start="106380" end="106428" title="UCL School of Slavonic and East European Studies" label="UCL School of Slavonic and East European Studies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="107035" end="107050" title="Gabriel Țepelea" label="Gabriel Țepelea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488631" start="107144" end="107179" title="Romanian Radio Broadcasting Company" label="Romanian Radio Broadcasting Company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220346" wikidata="Q312501" url="?curid=220346" title="Henri Pirenne">
<text>Henri Pirenne (; 23 December 1862 – 24 October 1935) was a Belgian historian. A medievalist of Walloon descent, he wrote a multivolume history of Belgium in French and became a prominent public intellectual. Pirenne made a lasting contribution to the study of cities that was a controversial interpretation of the end of Roman civilization and the rebirth of medieval urban culture. He also became prominent in the nonviolent resistance to the Germans who occupied Belgium in World War I.

Henri Pirenne&#x27;s reputation today rests on three contributions to European history: for what has become known as the Pirenne Thesis, concerning origins of the Middle Ages in reactive state formation and shifts in trade; for a distinctive view of Belgium&#x27;s medieval history; and for his model of the development of the medieval city.

Pirenne argued that profound social, economic, cultural, and religious movements in the long term resulted from equally profound underlying causes, and this attitude influenced Marc Bloch and the outlook of the French Annales School of social history. Though Pirenne had his opponents, notably Alfons Dopsch who disagreed on essential points, several recent historians of the Middle Ages have taken Pirenne&#x27;s main theses, however much they are modified, as starting points.

==Biography==

===Early years===

Pirenne was born in Verviers, an industrial city in the Province of Liège in south-east Belgium.

He studied at the University of Liège where he was a student of Godefroid Kurth (1847–1916). He became Professor of History at the University of Ghent in 1886, a post he held until the end of his teaching career in 1930. After World War I he was the most prominent and influential historian in Belgium, receiving numerous honours and committee assignments. He was Rector of the University of Ghent from 1918 to 1921. Pirenne was a close friend of German historian Karl Lamprecht (1856–1915), until they broke during the war when Lamprecht headed a mission to invite Belgians to collaborate with Germany&#x27;s long-term goals.

===Captivity===

In 1914, Belgium was invaded by the German Empire and placed under German military occupation. How involved Pirenne was in the Belgian resistance during World War I is not known. What is known is that Pirenne was questioned by German occupiers on 18 March 1916, and subsequently arrested. The occupying army had ordered striking professors at the University of Ghent to continue teaching. Pirenne&#x27;s son Pierre had been killed in the fighting at the Battle of the Yser in October 1914. The German officer questioning Pirenne asked why he insisted on answering in French when it was known that Pirenne spoke excellent German and had done postgraduate studies at Leipzig and Berlin. Pirenne responded: &quot;I have forgotten German since 3 August 1914&quot;, the date of the German invasion of Belgium, part of Germany&#x27;s war plan to defeat France.

Pirenne was held in Crefeld, then in Holzminden, and finally in Jena, where he was interned from 24 August 1916 until the end of the war. He was denied books, but he learned Russian from soldiers captured on the Eastern Front and subsequently read Russian-language histories made available to him by Russian prisoners. This gave Pirenne&#x27;s work a unique perspective. At Jena, he began his history of medieval Europe, starting with the fall of Rome. He wrote completely from memory. Rather than a blow-by-blow chronology of wars, dynasties and incidents, &quot;A History of Europe&quot; presents a big-picture approach to social, political and mercantile trends. It is remarkable not only for its historical insight but also its objectivity, especially considering the conditions under which it was written.

===After the war===
After the war, he reflected the widespread disillusionment in Belgium with German culture, while taking a nuanced position which allowed him to criticize German nationalism without excluding German works from the scholarly canon. He attacked race theory and Völkisch nationalism as the underlying causes of German wartime excesses. His earlier belief in the inevitable progress of humanity collapsed, so he began to accept chance or the fortuitous in history and came to acknowledge the significance of single great individuals at certain points in history.

At the conclusion of the war, Henri Pirenne stopped his work on &quot;A History of Europe&quot; in the middle of the 16th century. He returned home and took up his life. He died at Uccle, Brussels in 1935. His son Jacques Pirenne, who had survived the war to become a historian in his own right, discovered the manuscript. He edited the work by inserting dates for which his father was uncertain in parentheses. Jacques wrote a preface explaining its provenance and published it, with the English translation appearing in 1956. It stands as a monumental intellectual achievement.

==Theses and works==

===On the formation of European towns===
Pirenne first expressed ideas on the formation of European towns in articles of 1895; he further developed the idea for the Pirenne Thesis while imprisoned in Germany during World War I. He subsequently published it in a series of papers from 1922 to 1923 and spent the rest of his life refining the thesis with supporting evidence. The most famous expositions appear in &quot;Medieval Cities: Their Origins and the Revival of Trade&quot; (1927, based on a series of lectures of 1922) and in his posthumous &quot;Mohammed and Charlemagne&quot; (1937), published from Pirenne&#x27;s first draft.
In brief, the Pirenne Thesis, an early essay in economic history diverging from the narrative history of the 19th century, notes that in the ninth century long-distance trading was at a low ebb; the only settlements that were not purely agricultural were the ecclesiastical, military and administrative centres that served the feudal ruling classes as fortresses, episcopal seats, abbeys and occasional royal residences of the peripatetic &quot;palatium&quot;. When trade revived in the late tenth and eleventh centuries, merchants and artisans were drawn to the existing centres, forming suburbs in which trade and manufactures were concentrated. These were &quot;new men&quot; outside the feudal structure, living on the peripheries of the established order. The feudal core remained static and inert. A time came when the developing merchant class was strong enough to throw off feudal obligations or to buy out the prerogatives of the old order, which Pirenne contrasted with the new element in numerous ways. The leaders among the mercantile class formed a bourgeois patriciate, in whose hands economic and political power came to be concentrated.

Pirenne&#x27;s thesis takes as axiomatic that the natural interests of the feudal nobility and of the urban patriciate, which came to well-attested frictions in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, were in their origins incompatible. This aspect of his thesis has been challenged in detail.

Traditionally, historians had dated the Middle Ages from the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century, a theory Edward Gibbon famously put forward in the 18th century, and which is inexorably linked to the supposition of a Roman &quot;decline&quot; from a previous classic ideal. Pirenne postponed the demise of classical civilization to the 8th century. He challenged the notion that Germanic barbarians had caused the Western Roman Empire to end and he challenged the notion that the end of the Western Roman Empire should be equated with the end of the office of emperor in Europe, which occurred in 476. He pointed out the essential continuity of the economy of the Roman Mediterranean even after the barbarian invasions, and that the Roman way of doing things did not fundamentally change in the time immediately after the &quot;fall&quot; of Rome. Barbarian Goths came to Rome not to destroy it, but to take part in its benefits; they tried to preserve the Roman way of life. The more recent formulation of a historical period characterized as &quot;Late Antiquity&quot; emphasizes the transformations of ancient to medieval worlds within a cultural continuity, and European archaeology of the first millennium, purposefully undertaken in the later 20th century, even extends the continuity in material culture and patterns of settlement below the political overlay as reaching as late as the eleventh century.

===Islam and the Early Middle Ages===
According to Pirenne, the real break in Roman history occurred in the 8th century as a result of Arab expansion. Islamic conquest of the area of today&#x27;s south-eastern Turkey, Syria, Palestine, North Africa, Spain and Portugal ruptured economic ties to western Europe, cutting the region off from trade and turning it into a stagnant backwater, with wealth flowing out in the form of raw resources and nothing coming back. This began a steady decline and impoverishment so that, by the time of Charlemagne, western Europe had become almost entirely agrarian at a subsistence level, with no long-distance trade.

In a summary, Pirenne stated that &quot;Without Islam, the Frankish Empire would probably never have existed, and Charlemagne, without Muhammad, would be inconceivable.&quot; That is, he rejected the notion that barbarian invasions in the 4th and 5th centuries caused the collapse of the Roman Empire. Instead, the Muslim conquest of north Africa made the Mediterranean a barrier, cutting western Europe off from the east, enabling the Carolingians, especially Charlemagne, to create a new, distinctly western form of government. Pirenne used statistical data regarding money in support of his thesis. Much of his argument builds upon the disappearance from western Europe of items that had to come from outside. For example, the minting of gold coins north of the Alps stopped after the 7th century, indicating a loss of access to wealthier parts of the world. Papyrus, made only in Egypt, no longer appeared in northern Europe after the 7th century; writing reverted to using parchment, indicating its economic isolation.

Pirenne&#x27;s thesis did not convince most of the historians at the time of its publication, but historians since that time generally agree it has stimulated debate on the Early Middle Ages, and has provided a provocative example of how periodization would work. It continues to inform historical discussion in the 21st century, with more recent debate focusing on whether later archaeological discoveries refute the thesis or demonstrate its fundamental viability.

===Belgian history===
Pirenne&#x27;s other major idea concerned the nature of medieval Belgium. Belgium as an independent nation-state had appeared in 1830 only a generation before Pirenne&#x27;s birth; throughout Western history, its fortunes had been tied up with the Low Countries, which now include the Netherlands, Luxembourg and parts of northern France. Furthermore, Belgium lies across the great linguistic divide between French and Dutch. The unity of the country might appear accidental, something which Pirenne sought to disprove in his &quot;History of Belgium&quot; (1899–1932) by tracing Belgium&#x27;s history back to the Roman period. His ideas, promoting a form of Belgian nationalism, have also proved controversial.

Pirenne&#x27;s &quot;Histoire de Belgique&quot;, published in seven volumes from 1899–1932, stressed how traditional and economic forces had drawn the Flemish and Walloons together. Pirenne, inspired by patriotic nationalism, presupposed the existence of a unified &quot;Belgian civilisation&quot; – in a social, political, and ethnic sense – which predated its 1830 independence by centuries. Although a liberal himself, his history was written with such balance that Catholics, liberals and socialists across the divides in Belgium&#x27;s pillarized society could quote from it with equal respect in publications, newspapers, and even in political gatherings. It was also innovative by the standards of contemporary national histories in avoiding the concept of a racially defined &quot;Volksgeist&quot; (national spirit) but argued that Belgium had developed naturally as a cosmopolitan society to serve as a mediator between Latin and Germanic Europe.

Pirenne&#x27;s history cemented his reputation as one of Belgium&#x27;s leading public intellectuals in his lifetime. His thesis remains crucial to the understanding of Belgium&#x27;s past, but his notion of a continuity of Belgian civilization forming the basis of political unity has lost favour. Some Belgian scholars have argued that the creation of their country was a historical chance. Pirenne&#x27;s argument that the long Spanish rule in the Low Countries had little continuing cultural impact has likewise fallen, in the face of new research since 1970 in the fields of cultural, military, economic, and political history. Henri Pirenne donated the majority of his personal library to the Academia Belgica in Rome. In 1933, the seventh volume received was awarded the Francqui Prize on Human Sciences.

===&quot;Medieval Cities&quot;===
Pirenne was also the author of &quot;Medieval Cities: Their Origins and the Revival of Trade&quot; (1927), a book based on lectures he delivered in the United States in 1922. In this book, he contends that through the period from the tenth to the twelfth centuries, Europe reclaimed control of the Mediterranean from the Muslim world, and opened up sea routes to the Orient. This allowed the formation of a merchant/middle class and the development of that class&#x27;s characteristic abode, the city.

He argued that capitalism originated in Europe&#x27;s cities, as did democracy. His &quot;Merchant Enterprise School&quot; opposed Marxism but shared many of Marx&#x27;s ideas on the merchant class. Pirenne&#x27;s theory of a commercial renaissance in towns in the 11th century remains the standard interpretation.

===&quot;A History of Europe&quot;===

Pirenne wrote a two-volume &quot;A History of Europe: From the End of the Roman World in the West to the Beginnings of the Western States&quot;, a remarkable but incomplete work which Pirenne wrote while imprisoned in Germany during World War I. It was published by his son in 1936. A translation into English, by Bernard Miall, was first published in Great Britain in 1939 by George Allen and Unwin.

==Bibliography==
* Pirenne, Henri. &quot;Histoire de Belgique&quot; (7 vols.) (1899–1932)
* Pirenne, Henri. &quot;Belgian Democracy, Its Early History&quot; (1910, 1915) 250 pp. History of towns in the Low Countries online free 
* Pirenne, Henri. &quot;The Stages in the Social History of Capitalism&quot;, &quot;The American Historical Review,&quot; 19:494, April 1914 in JSTOR
* Pirenne, Henri. &quot;Medieval Cities: Their Origins and the Revival of Trade&quot; (1927)
* Pirenne, Henri. &quot;A History of Europe&quot; (1936).
* Pirenne, Henri. &quot;Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe&quot; (1956)
* Pirenne, Henri. &quot;Mohammed and Charlemagne&quot; (1937)
* Pirenne, Henri. &quot;Reflexions d&#x27;un Solitaire&quot;. (edited by Jacques-Henri Pirenne) in &quot;Bulletin de la Commission royale d&#x27;Histoire&quot; 1994 160(3–4): 143–257. . First publication of his wartime prison journal.
* | 2014 

==See also==
* Paul Fredericq – historian, regarded as the Flemish equivalent of Pirenne

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* Brown, Peter. &quot;&quot;Mohammed and Charlemagne&quot; by Henri Pirenne.&quot; &quot;Daedalus&quot; 1974 103(1): 25–33. 
* Cate, James L. &quot;Henri Pirenne (1862–1935),&quot; in S. William Halperin, ed. &quot;Some 20th Century Historians-essays on Eminent Europeans,&quot; (1961) 1–30.
* Frank, Kenneth W. &quot;Pirenne Again: A Muslim Viewpoint,&quot; &quot;The History Teacher,&quot; Vol. 26, No. 3 (May 1993), pp. 371–383 in JSTOR
* Ganshof, F. L. &quot;Henri Pirenne and Economic History.&quot; &quot;Economic History Review&quot; 1936 6(2): 179–185. online
* Havighurst, Alfred F. ed. &quot;The Pirenne Thesis: Analysis, Criticism, and Revision&quot; (1958) readings by scholars , 
* Hodges, Richard and David Whitehouse (1983). &quot;Mohammed, Charlemagne, and the origins of Europe.&quot; Cornell University Press. . Influential analysis of the Pirenne Thesis and the role of recent archaeological findings.
* Lyon, Bryce. &quot;Henri Pirenne: A Biographical and Intellectual Study&quot; (1974)
* Lyon, Bryce. &quot;The Letters of Henri Pirenne to Karl Lamprecht (1894–1915).&quot; &quot;Bulletin De La Commission Royale D&#x27;histoire&quot; 1966 132(2): 161–231.
* Brown, Elizabeth A. R. &quot;Henri Pirenne: a Biographical and Intellectual Study.&quot; &quot;History and Theory&quot; 1976 15(1): 66–76. review of Lyon in Jstor
* McCormick, Michael (2001). &quot;Origins of the European Economy: Communications and Commerce, 300–900.&quot; Cambridge University Press. . A reexamination of the Pirenne Thesis.
* Powicke, F. M. &quot;Henri Pirenne,&quot; &quot;The English Historical Review,&quot; Vol. 51, No. 201 (January 1936), pp. 79–89 in JSTOR
* Tollebeek, Jo. &quot;At the crossroads of nationalism: Huizinga, Pirenne and the Low Countries in Europe,&quot; &quot;European Review of History&quot; (2010) 17#2 pp. 187–215.

==External links==

* &quot;Henry Pirenne&quot;. In &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; Online.
* Digitheque Henri Pirenne 
* A review of &quot;Mohammed and Charlemagne&quot;
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312501" start="0" end="13" title="Henri Pirenne" label="Henri Pirenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q119190" start="80" end="91" title="Medieval studies" label="medievalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="95" end="102" title="Wallonia" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="187" end="206" title="public intellectual" label="public intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="321" end="339" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="415" end="436" title="nonviolent resistance" label="nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18108964" start="444" end="472" title="German occupation of Belgium during World War I" label="Germans who occupied Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="476" end="487" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="560" end="576" title="History of Europe" label="European history"/>
<link wikidata="Q312501" start="611" end="625" title="Henri Pirenne" label="Pirenne Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="653" end="664" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q205317" start="740" end="771" title="history of Belgium" label="Belgium&amp;#x27;s medieval history"/>
<link wikidata="Q247145" start="921" end="930" title="longue durée" label="long term"/>
<link wikidata="Q156585" start="1010" end="1020" title="Marc Bloch" label="Marc Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q336241" start="1051" end="1065" title="Annales School" label="Annales School"/>
<link wikidata="Q86287" start="1127" end="1140" title="Alfons Dopsch" label="Alfons Dopsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q202954" start="1367" end="1375" title="Verviers" label="Verviers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127" start="1403" end="1420" title="Liège (province)" label="Province of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1435" end="1442" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334582" start="1463" end="1482" title="University of Liège" label="University of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q710649" start="1509" end="1524" title="Godefroid Kurth" label="Godefroid Kurth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137665" start="1576" end="1595" title="University of Ghent" label="University of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1672" end="1683" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137665" start="1823" end="1842" title="University of Ghent" label="University of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q63369" start="1909" end="1923" title="Karl Lamprecht" label="Karl Lamprecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q792340" start="2107" end="2118" title="German invasion of Belgium (1914)" label="was invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q18108964" start="2157" end="2183" title="German occupation of Belgium during World War I" label="German military occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137058" start="2243" end="2254" title="Belgium in World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137665" start="2437" end="2456" title="University of Ghent" label="University of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653331" start="2544" end="2562" title="Battle of the Yser" label="Battle of the Yser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805" start="2966" end="2973" title="Crefeld" label="Crefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201029" start="2983" end="2993" title="Holzminden internment camp" label="Holzminden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150" start="3010" end="3014" title="Jena" label="Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="4020" end="4031" title="race theory" label="race theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="4036" end="4056" title="Völkisch movement" label="Völkisch nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203312" start="4518" end="4523" title="Uccle" label="Uccle"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="4525" end="4533" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4551" end="4566" title="Jacques Pirenne" label="Jacques Pirenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47398" start="5624" end="5640" title="economic history" label="economic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="5903" end="5924" title="feudalism" label="feudal ruling classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="6021" end="6029" title="Palace" label="palatium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="6165" end="6171" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095374" start="6648" end="6658" title="Patrician (post-Roman Europe)" label="patriciate"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="7087" end="7119" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="7149" end="7162" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="7422" end="7441" title="Migration Period" label="Germanic barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="7457" end="7477" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="7603" end="7610" title="Roman Emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="7713" end="7726" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="7742" end="7751" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="7915" end="7919" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="8093" end="8107" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143054" start="8337" end="8353" title="material culture" label="material culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="8590" end="8604" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Arab expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="8665" end="8671" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="8673" end="8678" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="8680" end="8689" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="8691" end="8703" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8705" end="8710" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="8715" end="8723" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="8991" end="9002" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="9570" end="9581" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="9874" end="9878" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="9971" end="9978" title="Papyrus" label="Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q226697" start="10087" end="10096" title="parchment" label="parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="10307" end="10324" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q816829" start="10372" end="10385" title="periodization" label="periodization"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="10689" end="10696" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="10872" end="10885" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="10909" end="10920" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="10922" end="10932" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10955" end="10961" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="11032" end="11038" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="11043" end="11048" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47277" start="11054" end="11074" title="partition of Belgium" label="unity of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237853" start="11284" end="11303" title="Belgian nationalism" label="Belgian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165966" start="11879" end="11897" title="pillarization" label="pillarized society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248740" start="12056" end="12074" title="nationalist historiography" label="national histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000098" start="12127" end="12137" title="Volksgeist" label="Volksgeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="12267" end="12272" title="Romance-speaking Europe" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="12277" end="12292" title="Germanic-speaking Europe" label="Germanic Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964636" start="12994" end="13010" title="Academia Belgica" label="Academia Belgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="13014" end="13018" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q166072" start="13073" end="13087" title="Francqui Prize" label="Francqui Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13294" end="13307" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="13558" end="13570" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943961" start="14314" end="14327" title="Bernard Miall" label="Bernard Miall"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057323" start="15183" end="15231" title="Bulletin de la Commission royale d&amp;#x27;Histoire" label="Bulletin de la Commission royale d&amp;#x27;Histoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659663" start="15339" end="15353" title="Paul Fredericq" label="Paul Fredericq"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="17344" end="17367" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220348" wikidata="Q350750" url="?curid=220348" title="SEK">
<text>SEK or Sek may refer to:

==Organisations==
* Federation of Swiss Protestant Churches (&quot;Schweizerischer Evangelischer Kirchenbund&quot;)
* SEK Studio, a North Korean animation studio
* Stagecoach in East Kent, a transportation company in England
* SEK (Germany) (&quot;Spezialeinsatzkommando&quot;), police tactical units of the German state police forces
* Hellenic State Railways (&quot;Sidirodromoi Ellinikou Kratous&quot;), a former Greek public sector entity
* Socialist Workers Party (Greece) (&quot;Sosialistikó Ergatikó Kómma&quot;), a Greek political party
* Swedish Export Credit Corporation (&quot;Svensk Exportkredit&quot;)

==People==
* Sęk, a Polish surname
* Sek Henry (born 1987), American-Jamaican basketball player
* Samuel Edward Konkin III (1947–2004), known as SEK III, Canadian-American writer

==Other uses==
* Swedish krona (ISO 4217 currency code), the currency of Sweden
* Sehk or Sek, a village in South Khorasan Province, Iran
* Sewer Evil King, a fictional character in &quot;Okage: Shadow King&quot;

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350750" start="0" end="3" title="SEK" label="SEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q350750" start="7" end="10" title="SEK" label="Sek"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="46" end="85" title="Federation of Swiss Protestant Churches" label="Federation of Swiss Protestant Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050337" start="144" end="154" title="SEK Studio" label="SEK Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596864" start="190" end="213" title="Stagecoach in East Kent" label="Stagecoach in East Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q511896" start="253" end="266" title="SEK (Germany)" label="SEK (Germany)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098038" start="363" end="386" title="Hellenic State Railways" label="Hellenic State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565916" start="471" end="503" title="Socialist Workers Party (Greece)" label="Socialist Workers Party (Greece)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10684798" start="573" end="606" title="Swedish Export Credit Corporation" label="Swedish Export Credit Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27943010" start="655" end="658" title="Sęk" label="Sęk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17490281" start="679" end="688" title="Sek Henry" label="Sek Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110509" start="740" end="764" title="Samuel Edward Konkin III" label="Samuel Edward Konkin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="839" end="852" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish krona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446518" start="904" end="908" title="Sehk" label="Sehk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711226" start="962" end="977" title="Sewer Evil King" label="Sewer Evil King"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220352" wikidata="Q742568" url="?curid=220352" title="Tannoy">
<text>Tannoy is a British manufacturer of loudspeakers and public address systems founded in 1926. Today the company is part of the Music Tribe group of brands.

==History==
The company was founded by the Yorkshire-born engineer Guy Fountain (1898-1977) at a garage in Tulsemere Road, Dulwich in London as the Tulsemere Manufacturing Company. It originally made battery chargers for wireless radio sets. The company name was changed to Tannoy in 1928 and a small factory was opened in Dalton Road, West Norwood, later moving to Canterbury Grove. Tannoy Square SE27 commemorates the site today.

During World War II Tannoy public address systems were supplied to the armed forces, and a Tannoy PA system was used at Buckingham Palace in 1945 to announce the end of hostilities. Tannoy speakers were also supplied to factories around Britain to relay the BBC&#x27;s motivational radio series Music While You Work, and to Butlins and Pontins holiday camps following the war - where they were famously used to waken guests with the words &quot;Good morning, campers!&quot;. The Tannoy factory moved from Canterbury Grove to Coatbridge, Scotland in the 1970s.

In 2002, Tannoy was acquired by TC Group, and TC Group was subsequently acquired by Music Group in 2015. Following the Music Group acquisition, it was suggested that the Coatbridge facility would be closed and all related activities would be relocated to Manchester, England. In 2016, however, Music Group confirmed that Tannoy loudspeaker manufacturing would continue in Scotland, with a brand new manufacturing facility planned.

==Brand name==
The name Tannoy is a syllabic abbreviation of tantalum alloy, which was the material used in a type of electrolytic rectifier developed by the company. The brand was trademarked by 10 March 1932, on which date the Tulsemere Manufacturing Company formally registered as Guy R. Fountain Limited.

Tannoy became a household name due to widespread and high profile adoption during and after the war, each speaker having the Tannoy logo prominently displayed on the speaker grills. As a result, the term &quot;tannoy&quot; came to be used in British English for any public-address system, and as a verb, to &quot;tannoy&quot;, for making an announcement in a public place. That is, although Tannoy is a registered trademark, , it is still often used generically. Because of this, the company&#x27;s intellectual property department keeps a close eye on the media. To preserve its trademark, it often notifies publications not to use its trade name without a capital letter, or as a generic term for a PA system.

==Products==
Tannoy&#x27;s image is particularly linked to both studio monitors as well as its flagship Prestige range of home speakers. Prestige speakers use Dual Concentric cone speakers and are easily recognisable by their &quot;vintage&quot; design. Tannoy is notable for its &#x27;Dual Concentric&#x27; speaker design, which places the tweeter behind the centre of the medium or bass driver. &quot;Dual Concentric&quot; is a trademark although Tannoy is not the only speaker manufacturer to design coaxial speakers.

Home and Studio speakers:
* Cheviot Series
* Reveal Series (Made in China)
* Plus Series
* 70Anniversary Series
* Surrey Series
* Gold Series
* Definition Series
* Eclipse Series
* Mercury Series
* Prestige Series
* Classic Monitor
* K3838 monitor kit (similar to Classic Monitor)
* Super Red Monitor
* K3808 monitor kit (similar to Super Red Monitor)
* Little Red
* Sixes Series
* Profile Series
* Precision Series
* Revolution Series
* Dimension Series
* Eyris Series
* Arena 5.1

Cabinets:
* Lancaster
* System DMT

PA Systems:
* Wildcats (1984)
* CPA Series (1990)
* T &amp; I Series (1998)
* B Series (1998)
* V Series (2002)
* VS Series (2003)
* IQ Series (2004)
* VQ &amp; VQNET Series (2009)
* VX &amp; VXP Series (2011)
* VSX Series (2012)
* VSXNET (2015)

==Further reading==

== See also ==
* List of studio monitor manufacturers

==References==
==External links==

* Tannoy worldwide homepage
* Tannoy Monitor Gold website
* Tannoy Dual Concentric website
* The Tannoy Factory, Canterbury Grove, West Norwood, circa 1968</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q742568" start="0" end="6" title="Tannoy" label="Tannoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="36" end="47" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="53" end="75" title="PA system" label="public address systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941530" start="126" end="137" title="Music Tribe" label="Music Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q146766" start="279" end="286" title="Dulwich" label="Dulwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q146833" start="492" end="504" title="West Norwood" label="West Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389916" start="554" end="558" title="SE postcode area" label="SE27"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="596" end="608" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="660" end="672" title="Military of the United Kingdom" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="709" end="726" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941691" start="884" end="904" title="Music While You Work" label="Music While You Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002725" start="913" end="920" title="Butlins" label="Butlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228301" start="925" end="932" title="Pontins" label="Pontins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006838" start="933" end="945" title="holiday camp" label="holiday camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018723" start="1114" end="1124" title="Coatbridge" label="Coatbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387270" start="1182" end="1190" title="TC Group" label="TC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941530" start="1234" end="1245" title="Music Tribe" label="Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018723" start="1320" end="1330" title="Coatbridge" label="Coatbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="1405" end="1415" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="1618" end="1639" title="syllabic abbreviation" label="syllabic abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="1643" end="1651" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="1652" end="1657" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="1700" end="1712" title="electrolyte" label="electrolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="1713" end="1722" title="rectifier" label="rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="2134" end="2149" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="2158" end="2179" title="Public address" label="public-address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="2295" end="2315" title="registered trademark" label="registered trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="2342" end="2353" title="genericised trademark" label="generically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138673" start="3108" end="3124" title="coaxial speakers" label="coaxial speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359876" start="3931" end="3967" title="List of studio monitor manufacturers" label="List of studio monitor manufacturers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220354" wikidata="Q4338113" url="?curid=220354" title="Principles of Economics (Menger book)">
<text>Principles of Economics (; 1871) is a book by economist Carl Menger which is credited with the founding of the Austrian School of economics. It was one of the first modern treatises to advance the theory of marginal utility.

==Summary==
Menger advanced his theory that the marginal utility of goods, rather than labor inputs, is the source of their value. This marginalist theory solved the diamond-water paradox that had been puzzling classical economists: the fact that mankind finds diamonds to be far more valuable than water although water is far more important.

Menger stressed uncertainty in the making of economic decisions, rather than relying on &quot;homo economicus&quot; or the rational man who was fully informed of all circumstances impinging on his decisions. This was a deviation from classical and neoclassical economic thought. Menger asserted that such perfect knowledge never exists, and that therefore all economic activity implies risk. The entrepreneurs&#x27; role was to collect and evaluate information and to act on those risks.

Menger saw that time was the root of uncertainty within economics. As production takes time then producers have no certainty on the supply or demand for their product. Thus the price of the finished product bears no resemblance to the costs of production, since the two represent market conditions at very different points in time.

The labour theory of value was the explanation that had been reached by Adam Smith among others, and the Marxist school of economics still relies on this theory. The labour theory of value was that the value of an object was reliant on the labour that had gone into producing it, including any training or investment that supplemented the labour.

According to neoclassical economists the labour theory of value could not explain fluctuating values for different kinds of labour, nor did it explain how found goods could be more valuable than extracted goods.

As the price of a commodity is the average cost of production, it includes the fact that a tiny proportion of commodities may be found, although finding goods is hardly typical of modern manufacturing processes.

Marginal utility as the source of value meant that the perceived need for an object was seen to be dictating the value, on an individual rather than a general level. The implication was that the individual mind is the source of economic value.

Although Menger accepted the marginal utility theory, he made deviations from the work of other neoclassical pioneers. Most importantly he fundamentally rejected the use of mathematical methods insisting that the function of economics was to investigate the essences rather than the specific quantities of economic phenomena.

==Reception==
Ludwig von Mises called the book the best introduction to the Austrian School of economics.

==See also==

*History of economic thought

== Notes ==

==External links==
*Full text of &quot;Principles of Economics&quot; in HTML or in PDF format.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q84177" start="56" end="67" title="Carl Menger" label="Carl Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="111" end="126" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="130" end="139" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q842271" start="207" end="223" title="marginal utility" label="marginal utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q910816" start="362" end="373" title="marginalist" label="marginalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q915342" start="392" end="413" title="paradox of value" label="diamond-water paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="437" end="457" title="classical economists" label="classical economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164073" start="664" end="679" title="homo economicus" label="homo economicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="966" end="978" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q584987" start="1396" end="1418" title="labour theory of value" label="labour theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="1464" end="1474" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q854537" start="1497" end="1524" title="Marxist school of economics" label="Marxist school of economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="1632" end="1638" title="labour (economics)" label="labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="1753" end="1776" title="neoclassical economists" label="neoclassical economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q842271" start="2440" end="2463" title="marginal utility theory" label="marginal utility theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q910816" start="2507" end="2528" title="Neoclassical Revolution" label="neoclassical pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="2752" end="2768" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Ludwig von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="2814" end="2842" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School of economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q268194" start="2860" end="2887" title="History of economic thought" label="History of economic thought"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220355" wikidata="Q849488" url="?curid=220355" title="Vaio">
<text>is a Japanese personal computer manufacturer headquartered in Azumino, Nagano Prefecture. It is owned by Nojima Corporation.

Vaio began as a brand of Sony, introduced in 1996, until it offloaded it into an independent company in 2014, with Japan Industrial Partners (JIP) purchasing the Vaio business while Sony maintained a minority stake. Sony still holds the intellectual property rights for the VAIO brand and logo. JIP sold Vaio Corporation to Japanese retailer Nojima in 2025. 

==Etymology==
Originally an acronym of Video Audio Input Output, later amended to Video Audio Integrated Operation, and later to Visual Audio Intelligent Organizer in 2008 to celebrate the brand&#x27;s 10th anniversary. The logo, along with the first of the VAIO computers, were designed by Teiyu Goto, supervisor of product design from the Sony Creative Center in Tokyo. He incorporated many meanings into the logo and acronym: the pronunciation in both English (VAIO) and Japanese () is similar to &quot;bio&quot;, which is symbolic of life and the product&#x27;s future evolution. It&#x27;s also near &quot;violet&quot;, which is why most early Vaios were purple or included purple components. Additionally, the logo is stylized to make the &quot;VA&quot; look like a sine wave and the &quot;IO&quot; like binary digits 1 and 0, the combination representing the merging of analog and digital signals. The sound some Vaio models make during startup is derived from the melody created when pressing a telephone keypad to spell the letters V-A-I-O.

== Global operations ==
As of 2023, Vaio is operational in the following countries and regions:
* Argentina
* Brazil
* Chile
* China
* Hong Kong
* India
* Japan
* Malaysia
* Mexico
* Singapore
* Taiwan
* United States
* Uruguay
As of 2023, Vaio operates its stores in several countries and regions, such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Singapore, Taiwan, the United States and Uruguay and so on.

==History==

=== As part of Sony ===
Although Sony made computers in the 1980s, such as MSX-based HitBit computers mainly for the Japanese market, the company withdrew from the computer business around the beginning of the 1990s. Under the then-new VAIO brand, Sony&#x27;s re-entry into the global computer market began in 1996. Sony&#x27;s then-president Nobuyuki Idei thought &quot;there was no point making an ordinary PC&quot;, so the VAIO lineup was to focus on Audio Visual (as the VAIO name suggests), portability, and design.

The PCV-90 was the first series of desktops introduced in 1996, and designed with a 3D graphical interface as a novelty for new users. The first VAIO laptop computers followed in 1997 with the US$2,000 PCG-505 &quot;SuperSlim&quot; model, constructed out of a four-panel magnesium body. VisualFlow was a Sony program distributed in the late 1990s and early 2000s with Sony VAIO computers.

Over the years, many audio visual technologies and interfaces pioneered by Sony became a key focus for its VAIO computers, including Memory Stick, i.Link, and even MiniDisc.

In 2001, Steve Jobs presented a VAIO PC running Mac OS to Sony executives, suggesting the possibility of collaboration. Sony&#x27;s VAIO team ultimately turned down the proposal they regarded a &quot;diversion of resources&quot;, as the popularity of the Windows-based premium PC brand was growing.

Sony VAIO released later designs (2011 and later) during a period of low PC sales. They included models with innovations such as magnetized stands. The VAIO Tap, which was designed with a completely separate keyboard. The latest models were complemented by the Windows 8 operating system.

===Spin-off from Sony===
On 4 February 2014, Sony announced that it was selling its VAIO PC business due to poor sales. Sony created VAIO Corporation, a special purpose company with investment firm Japan Industrial Partners, as part of its restructuring effort to focus on mobile devices. In March 2014, it was announced that Japan Industrial Partners had purchased a 95% stake in the VAIO division.

The sale closed on 1 July 2014. On the same day, the company announced refreshed entries in the VAIO Fit and Pro lines. They initially distributed the relaunched products in Japan, then later in Brazil. In August 2015, VAIO announced plans to re-enter international markets, beginning with Brazil and the United States. VAIO CEO Yoshimi Ota stated that the company planned to focus more on high-end products in niche segments (such as the creative industries), as they felt Sony was somewhat too focused on attempting to garner a large market share in its PC business. The Z Canvas tablet was released in the United States on 5 October 2015, through Microsoft Store and the VAIO website. On 16 October 2015, VAIO agreed to introduce their products in Brazil through a partnership with a local manufacturer Positivo Informática.

On 2 February 2016, VAIO announced that it would unveil a Windows 10 smartphone. Also that month, it was also reported that VAIO was negotiating with Toshiba and Fujitsu Technology Solutions to consolidate their personal computer businesses together.

On 4 June 2018, Nexstgo Company Limited announced that they would be licensed by VAIO Corporation to oversee the business in Asia. This license agreement between Hong Kongbased Nexstgo and the Japan-based VAIO Corporation would include manufacturing, sales and marketing as well as servicing of VAIO laptops under the VAIO trademark in the Hong Kong, Macau, Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan markets.

Currently in the US, VAIO business products are sold by Trans Cosmos America, Inc.

On November 11, 2024, a major Japanese electronics retailer named Nojima Co, Ltd. announced it will acquire Vaio for ¥11.2 billion. It will purchase about 93% of the Japan Industrial Partners&#x27;s stake while Sony will retain a 4.7% stake. The deal was completed on January 6, 2025 with Vaio becoming a subsidiary of Noijma.

==Products==

===Sony VAIO (1996 to 2014)===

Sony&#x27;s VAIO brand included product lines across notebooks, subnotebooks, desktops, media centres, and even Network media solutions.



====Computers====

Sony&#x27;s VAIO range of computers consisted of the following lineups:

=====Desktops=====
* Desktops
** PCV series (19962005)
* Multimedia Desktops
** PCV-M series (19981999)
** PCV-MX series (2000, built-in FM radio, MiniDisc player and amplifier)
* Tablet PC Desktops
** PCV-LX series (20002008)
* Media Center PCs
** VGX-XL series (2005, audio receiver form factor)
** VGX-TP series (2007, cylindrical disc form factor)
** VGC-R series (2006)
* All-In-One Computers
** PCV-W series (20022006)
** VGC-VA series (20052006, 20&quot;, integrated TV tuner)
** L series (20062013, 15.4&quot; or 19&quot; touchscreen display, integrated TV tuner, Sony&#x27;s Living Room PC)
** Tap 20 (2013, 20&quot; touchscreen display)
** Tap 21 (2014, 21.5&quot; 1920 x 1080 touchscreen display)

=====Notebooks=====
* Ultraportable Premium
** 505 series (19972004, 10.4&quot; or 12.1&quot; display, external floppy and CD drives, originally called SuperSlim)
** 700 series (19971998, 12.1&quot; display, external floppy and CD drives)
** 800 series (19981999, 13.3&quot; display, external floppy and CD drives)
** TX series (20052007, 11.1&quot; 1366 x 768 display, first laptop with 16:9 LED backlit display)
** TZ series (20072008, 11.1&quot; 1366 x 768 display)
** TT series (20082010, 11.1&quot; 1366 x 768 display)
** SZ series (20062008, 13.3&quot; 1280 x 800 display, switchable graphics)
** Z series (20082014, 13.1&quot; display, switchable graphics)
* Ultraportable Mainstream
** SR series (2000-2001, 10.4&quot; SVGA display, circular trackpad)
** SRX series (2001-2002, 10.4&quot; 1024 x 768 display, circular trackpad)
** TR series (2003, 10.6&quot; 1280 x 768 display)
** VX series (2002, 10.4&quot; or 12.1&quot; display)
** SR series (20082010, 13.3&quot; 1280 x 800 display)
** S series (20102013, 13.3&quot; 1600 x 900 display)
** T series (20122014, 13.3&quot; 1366 x 768 display)
** Y series (13.3&quot; 1366 x 768 display, no optical drive)
* Ultraportable Netbooks
** G series (2007, 12.1&quot; 1024 x 768 display, Intel Core processor)
** M series (2008, 10.1&quot; 1024 x 600 display, Intel Atom processor)
** W series (2009, 10.1&quot; 1366 x 768 display, Intel Atom processor)
** X series (11.1&quot; 1366 x 768 display, Intel Atom processor)
* Consumer, Home &amp; Work
** F series (19992000, 13.0&quot; or 14.1&quot; 1024 x 768 display, desktop replacement)
** FX/FXA series (20012003, 14.1&quot; display, desktop replacement) 
** XG/XE/XR series (19992001, 13.3&quot; or 14.1&quot; 1024 x 768 display, modular DVD/CD-RW/Floppy/2nd battery/2nd hard drive bay)
** QR series (2001, 13.3&quot; 1024 x 768 display)
** FRV series (2003, 15&quot; 1024 x 768 display, desktop replacement)
** GR series (2002, 15&quot; 1400 x 1050 display, desktop replacement, swappable multi-bay)
** GRX series (2002, 15&quot; 1024 x 768 or 16.1&quot; 1600 x 1200 display, desktop replacement)
** GRZ series (2003, 15&quot; 1024 x 768 display, desktop replacement)
** GRT series (2004, 15&quot; 1024 x 768 or 16.1&quot; 1600 x 1200 display, desktop replacement)
** NV/NVR series (2002-2005, 15&quot; 1024 x 768 or 1440 x 1050 display, modular Floppy/MiniDisc/Numeric Keypad/Compact Subwoofer bay)
** B series (2004)
** BX series (2005, 14.1&quot; display)
** FJ series (2005, 14.1&quot; display)
** C series (13.3&quot; 1280 x 800 display, choice of colors)
** CR series (2007, 14.1&quot; 1280 x 800 display, choice of colors)
** NR series (2007, 15&quot; 1280 x 800 display)
** E series (2010, 15.5&quot; or 17.3&quot; display, choice of colors)
** XE series (2011, 15.5&quot; 1920 x 1080 display)
** Fit 14 &amp; 15 (2013, 14&quot; or 15&quot; touchscreen laptop, SVF)
** Duo (2013, 13.3&quot; hybrid touchscreen laptop, SVD)
** Tap 11 (2013, 11.6&quot; touchscreen convertible, SVT)
* Multimedia
** A series (2004, 17&quot; 1920 x 1200 display)
** AX series (2005, 17&quot; 1440 x 900 display)
** AR series (2006, 17&quot; 1440 x 900 or 1920 x 1200 display, first with BD-R drive)
** AW series (2008, 18.4&quot; 1680 x 945 or 1920 x 1080 display)
* Portable Entertainment
** FS series (20052006, 15.4&quot; 1280 x 800 display)
** FE series (20062007, 15.4&quot; 1280 x 800 display)
** FZ series (20072008, 15.4&quot; 1280 x 800 display)
** FW series (20082010, 16.4&quot; 1920 x 1080 display)
** F series (2010, 16.4&quot; 1920 x 1080 display)
** NW series (2009, 15.4&quot; 1366 x 768 display)
* Lifestyle &amp; UMPC Subnotebooks
** C1 series (19982003, 8.9&quot; 1024 x 480 display, branded as PictureBook)
** GT series (2001, Japan only, 6.4&quot; display, built-in digital camera)
** U series (20022004, 6.4&quot; or 7.1&quot; 1024 x 768 display, Sony&#x27;s first UMPC)
** UX series (2006, 4.5&quot; 1024 x 600 display)
** P series (20092010, 8&quot; 1600 x 768 display)

=====Experience=====

Included as part of the out-of-box experience are prompts to register at Club VAIO, an online community for VAIO owners and enthusiasts, which also provides automatic driver updates and technical support via email, along with exclusive desktop wallpapers and promotional offers. From 1997 to 2001 in Japan, the SAPARi program was also pre-installed on VAIO machines. On later models, the customer is also prompted to register the installed trial versions of Microsoft Office 2010 and the antivirus software (Norton AntiVirus on older models, and McAfee VirusScan or TrendMicro on newer ones) upon initial boot.

Vaio computers come with components from companies such as Intel processors, Seagate Technology, Hitachi, Fujitsu or Toshiba hard drives, Infineon or Elpida RAM, Atheros and Intel wireless chipsets, Sony (usually made by Hitachi) or Matsushita optical drives, Intel, NVIDIA or AMD graphics cards and Sony speakers. Recent laptops have been shipped with Qimonda RAM, HP speakers with Realtek High Definition Audio Systems, and optional Dolby Sound Room technology.

A selection of media centres were added to the VAIO range in 2006. These monitorless units (identified by a product code prefixed by VGX rather than VGN) are designed to form part of a home entertainment system. They typically take input from a TV tuner card, and output video via HDMI or composite video connection to an ideally high-definition television. The range included the XL and TP lines. The VGX-TP line is visually unique, featuring a circular, &#x27;biscuit-tin&#x27; style design with most features obscured behind panels, rather than the traditional set-top box design.

In 2013, Sony VAIO&#x27;s range comprised seven products. The most basic were the E, T and S series while the high end models, the F and Z Series, were discontinued. Sony also had a range of hybrid tablet computers, with models called VAIO Duo 11/13, VAIO Tap 11/20 and VAIO Fit multi-flip, as well as a desktop computer under the L series. These models use Windows systems and Intel processors, as described above.

====Portable music players====
Sony released some of their early digital audio players (DAP) under the VAIO line. The first model, the &quot;VAIO Music Clip&quot;, was released in 1999, powered by an AA battery and featuring 64 MB of internal memory. It differed from Sony&#x27;s players in the &quot;Network Walkman&quot; line, which used external Memory Stick medium at the time. Succeeding models were also released, but it was mainly sold domestically, with Walkman-branded players more widespread internationally. In 2004 the brand made a comeback with the VAIO Pocket (model VGF-AP1L), featuring a 40 GB hard disk drive for up to 26,000 songs, and a 2.0-inch color LCD display. Like Walkman DAPs it used SonicStage software.

====Music streamers====
Sony had also released several other products under the VAIO lineup, including the VAIO WA1 wireless digital music streamer, essentially a portable radio and speaker.

===VAIO (2014 to present)===
The current and past lineup of Vaio computers, developed by VAIO Corporation, continues the same product line naming, and currently include:
* VAIO Z
* VAIO SX14
* VAIO SX12
* VAIO FH14
* VAIO FE14
* VAIO FE15
* VAIO F14
* VAIO F16
* VAIO S13
* VAIO S15

====Z Canvas====

The first new VAIO computer developed by VAIO corporation was the VAIO Z Canvas 2-in-1 PC, which began sales on 23 September 2015 starting from $2,199 in the USA. The Z Canvas is focused on creative professionals as its target audience. Graphic artists, illustrators, animators, etc. With a 12.3-inch LCD WQXGA+ 2560 x 1704 IPS multi-touch display with digitizer stylus (pen) capability, the Z Canvas looks similar in design to the Microsoft Surface Pro 3, but comes with Windows 10 Pro and is available as a Microsoft Signature PC. It has an Intel Core i7 processor, an Intel Iris Pro Graphics 5200, a 2nd generation PCIe SSD with PCIe Gen.3 compatibility (up to 1 TB) or SATA/M.2 for the 256 GB model, and up to 16 GB of memory.

====Smartphones====
In February 2016, VAIO announced the VAIO Phone Biz—a premium built mid-range Windows 10 Mobile device. This was VAIO&#x27;s first Windows smartphone. In March 2017, VAIO announced VAIO Phone A, which had the look of the VAIO Phone Biz, but runs the Android operating system instead.

==Technology==

===Innovations===

Over the years, the Sony VAIO lineup has been responsible for many &#x27;firsts&#x27; in desktops and laptops, as well as for setting trends for what would now be considered standard equipment.

====Integrated webcam====

The Sony VAIO C1 PictureBook subnotebook, first released in 1998, was among the first to feature a built in web-cam, at 0.27 megapixels, and could swivel around to capture photos on both sides.

====Chiclet keyboards====

The Sony VAIO X505 laptop, released in 2004, popularized the chiclet keyboard in laptops.

====Displays====

Some Sony VAIO models come with Sony&#x27;s proprietary XBRITE (known as ClearBright in Japan and the Asia-Pacific region) displays. The first model to introduce this feature was the Vaio TR series, which was also the first consumer product to utilize such technology. It is a combination of smooth screen, anti-reflection (AR) coating and high-efficiency lens sheet. Sony claims that the smooth finish provides a sharper screen display, the AR coating prevents external light from scattering when it hits the screen, and the high-efficiency lens sheet provides 1.5 times the brightness improvement over traditional LCD designs. Battery life is also extended through reduced usage of the LCD backlight. The technology was pioneered by Sony engineer Masaaki Nakagawa, who is in charge of the Vaio TR development.

The TX series, introduced in September 2005, was the first notebook to implement a LED back-lit screen, which provides lower power consumption and greater color reproduction. This technology has since been widely adopted by many other notebook manufacturers. The TX series was also the first to use a 16:9 aspect ratio screen with 1366x768 resolution. The successor to the TX series was the TZ series in May 2007. This new design featured an optional 32 or 64GB Solid State Drive (SSD) for rapid boot-up times, quicker application launches and greater durability. If selected, a 250 GB Hard Drive could also have been included in place of the built-in CD/DVD drive to provide room for additional storage. For security, this model included a biometric fingerprint sensor and Trusted Platform Module. The TZ offered a built-in highly miniaturized Motion Eye camera built into the LCD panel for video conferencing. Additional features included the XBRITE LCD, integrated Wireless Wide Area Network (WWAN) technology and Bluetooth technology.

====Switchable graphics====

The SZ series was the first to use switchable graphics – the motherboard contained an Intel GMCH (Graphics Memory Controller Hub) featuring its own in-built graphics controller (complete memory hub controller and graphics accelerator on the one die) and a separate NVIDIA graphics accelerator chipset directly interfaced with the GMCH. The GMCH could reduce power consumption and extend battery, life whereas the NVIDIA chipset provided greater graphics processing power. A mechanical switch toggled between the graphics options but required that the user preselect the mode to use before the motherboard could initialize. The Z series, which replaced the SZ series, can change graphics modes &quot;on the fly&quot; on Windows Vista, and does not require a restart of the system. This feature has subsequently been used by other manufacturers, including Apple, Asus and Alienware.

====Blu-ray====

The AR Series was the first to incorporate a Blu-ray Disc burner, at the height of the Blu-Ray vs. HD-DVD format war. This series was designed to be the epitome of high-definition products including a 1080p capable WUXGA (1920 × 1200 pixels) screen, HDMI output and the aforementioned Blu-ray burner. The AR series also includes an illuminated logo below the screen. Blu-ray/HDMI capable models have been the subject of intense promotion since mid-2007, selling with a variety of bundled Blu-ray Discs. The AR series was subsequently replaced by the AW series, and in 2011, replaced by the F Series, which incorporates all of these features in a 16.4&quot; 16:9 display.

===Startup Chime===
The chime heard when a VAIO computer is booted are the DTMF notes corresponding to V-A-I-O (8-2-4-6) dialed on a telephone keypad.

===Bundled Software===
Sony has been criticized for loading its VAIO laptops with bloatware, or ineffective and unrequested software that supposedly allows the user to immediately use the laptop for multimedia purposes. This includes trial versions of Adobe Premiere Elements &amp; Adobe Photoshop Elements with VAIO Media Gate and XMB. Sony later offered a &quot;Fresh start&quot; option in some regions with several of their business models. With this option, the computer is shipped only with a basic Windows operating system and very little trial software already installed.

The default webcam software in Vaio notebooks is ArcSoft WebCam Companion. It offers a set of special effects called Magic-i visual effects, through which users can enhance the images and videos taken through the webcam. It also features a face detection feature. Certain other Sony proprietary software such as Click to Disc Editor, VAIO Music Box, VAIO Movie Story, VAIO Media Plus are also included with recent models. Those shipped with ATI Radeon video cards feature the Catalyst Control Centre, which enables control of brightness, contrast, resolution etc., and also enables connection to an external display the best laptop.

===Recovery Media===
Early Sony VAIO models included recovery media in the form of CDs and/or DVDs.

Beginning in mid-2005, a hidden partition on the hard drive, accessible at boot via the BIOS or within Windows via a utility was used instead. Pressing [F10] at the Vaio logo during boot-up will cause the notebook to boot from the recovery partition; where the user has the choice of either running hardware diagnostics without affecting the installed system, or restoring (re-imaging) the hard drive to factory condition – an option that destroys all user installed applications and data). The first time a new VAIO PC is started up, users are prompted to create their own recovery media. This physical media would be required in case of hard disk failure and/or replacement. In cases where the system comes with Windows 7 64-bit pre-installed, the provided recovery media restores the system to Windows 7 32- or 64-bit.

== Explanatory notes ==
==See also==

* Sony NEWS
* Splashtop covers &quot;Vaio Quick Web Access&quot;

==References==
==External links==

* Official Website (Japan)
* Official Website (United States)
* Sony US VAIO Product Support
* Sony VAIO UK
* Sony VAIO India
* Official Website (Hong Kong)
* Official Website (Taiwan)
* Official Website (Singapore)
* Official Website (Malaysia)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="14" end="31" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q534667" start="62" end="69" title="Azumino, Nagano" label="Azumino"/>
<link wikidata="Q127877" start="71" end="88" title="Nagano Prefecture" label="Nagano Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="151" end="155" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17220913" start="241" end="266" title="Japan Industrial Partners" label="Japan Industrial Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="514" end="521" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="851" end="856" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257809" start="1145" end="1151" title="purple" label="purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="1257" end="1266" title="sine wave" label="sine wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1634" end="1643" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1646" end="1652" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1655" end="1660" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1663" end="1668" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="1671" end="1680" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1683" end="1688" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1691" end="1696" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1699" end="1707" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1710" end="1716" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1719" end="1728" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1731" end="1737" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1740" end="1753" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="1756" end="1763" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1843" end="1852" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1854" end="1860" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1862" end="1867" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="1869" end="1878" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1880" end="1885" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1887" end="1892" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1894" end="1902" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1904" end="1910" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1912" end="1921" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1923" end="1929" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1935" end="1948" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="1953" end="1960" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="2061" end="2064" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q840998" start="2329" end="2342" title="Nobuyuki Idei" label="Nobuyuki Idei"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="2592" end="2594" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="2779" end="2788" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936515" start="2795" end="2805" title="VisualFlow" label="VisualFlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="3031" end="3043" title="Memory Stick" label="Memory Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="3045" end="3051" title="IEEE_1394" label="i.Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="3062" end="3070" title="MiniDisc" label="MiniDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="3082" end="3092" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="3121" end="3127" title="OS-X" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="3328" end="3335" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="3634" end="3643" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q17220913" start="3861" end="3886" title="Japan Industrial Partners" label="Japan Industrial Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="3936" end="3950" title="Sony Mobile" label="mobile devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="4503" end="4522" title="creative industries" label="creative industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688786" start="4714" end="4729" title="Microsoft Store (retail)" label="Microsoft Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="4815" end="4821" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601457" start="4870" end="4890" title="Positivo Informática" label="Positivo Informática"/>
<link wikidata="Q18845397" start="4951" end="4961" title="Windows 10 Mobile" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="4962" end="4972" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="5043" end="5050" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q164152" start="5055" end="5083" title="Fujitsu Technology Solutions" label="Fujitsu Technology Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="6055" end="6064" title="laptop" label="notebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115655" start="6066" end="6077" title="subnotebook" label="subnotebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="6080" end="6088" title="desktop computer" label="desktops"/>
<link wikidata="Q185185" start="6090" end="6103" title="Home theater PC" label="media centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q106867798" start="6267" end="6277" title="Sony_Vaio_PCV_series" label="PCV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562544" start="6314" end="6326" title="Sony_Vaio_M_series" label="PCV-M series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16888491" start="6341" end="6354" title="Sony_Vaio_MX_series" label="PCV-MX series"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="6381" end="6389" title="MiniDisc" label="MiniDisc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6483" end="6496" title="Sony_Vaio_VGX_Series#VGX-XL Series" label="VGX-XL series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6535" end="6548" title="Sony_Vaio_VGX_Series#VGX-TP Series" label="VGX-TP series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258213" start="6611" end="6621" title="All-in-one PC" label="All-In-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562550" start="6635" end="6647" title="Sony_Vaio_W_series" label="PCV-W series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562543" start="6721" end="6729" title="Sony_Vaio_L_series" label="L series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562524" start="6990" end="7000" title="Sony_Vaio_505_series" label="505 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562526" start="7109" end="7119" title="Sony_Vaio_700_series" label="700 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562527" start="7185" end="7195" title="Sony_Vaio_800_series" label="800 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908817" start="7261" end="7270" title="Vaio_VGN-TX2" label="TX series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562548" start="7415" end="7424" title="Sony_Vaio_TT_series" label="TT series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562546" start="7470" end="7479" title="Sony_Vaio_SZ_series" label="SZ series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562553" start="7546" end="7554" title="Sony_Vaio_Z_series" label="Z series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562545" start="7887" end="7896" title="Sony_Vaio_SR_series" label="SR series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562547" start="7942" end="7950" title="Sony_Vaio_S_series" label="S series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562551" start="8050" end="8058" title="Sony_Vaio_Y_series" label="Y series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562542" start="8137" end="8145" title="Sony_Vaio_G_series" label="G series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562544" start="8209" end="8217" title="Sony_Vaio_M_series" label="M series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562550" start="8281" end="8289" title="Sony_Vaio_W_series" label="W series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562552" start="8353" end="8361" title="Sony Vaio X series" label="X series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562541" start="8447" end="8455" title="Sony_Vaio_F_series" label="F series"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="9302" end="9310" title="MiniDisc" label="MiniDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q199306" start="9311" end="9325" title="Numeric_keypad" label="Numeric Keypad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562537" start="9411" end="9420" title="Sony_Vaio_FJ" label="FJ series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562535" start="9631" end="9639" title="Sony_Vaio_E_series" label="E series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562532" start="9954" end="9962" title="Sony_Vaio_A_series" label="A series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562531" start="10003" end="10012" title="Sony_Vaio_AX_series" label="AX series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562530" start="10052" end="10061" title="Sony_Vaio_AR_series" label="AR series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562529" start="10139" end="10148" title="Sony_Vaio_AW_series" label="AW series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562538" start="10230" end="10239" title="Sony_Vaio_FS_series" label="FS series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562536" start="10285" end="10294" title="Sony_Vaio_FE_series" label="FE series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562540" start="10340" end="10349" title="Sony_Vaio_FZ_series" label="FZ series"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048742" start="10395" end="10404" title="Sony_Vaio_FW_series" label="FW series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562541" start="10451" end="10459" title="Sony_Vaio_F_series" label="F series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115655" start="10573" end="10585" title="Subnotebook" label="Subnotebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562533" start="10589" end="10598" title="Sony_Vaio_C1_series" label="C1 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562522" start="10743" end="10751" title="Sony_U_series" label="U series"/>
<link wikidata="Q621681" start="10824" end="10828" title="Ultra-mobile_PC" label="UMPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302515" start="10833" end="10842" title="Sony_Vaio_UX_Micro_PC" label="UX series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049783" start="10883" end="10891" title="Sony_Vaio_P_series" label="P series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111397" start="10978" end="10999" title="out-of-box experience" label="out-of-box experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q366580" start="11140" end="11157" title="technical support" label="technical support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139104" start="11190" end="11207" title="desktop wallpaper" label="desktop wallpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259790" start="11213" end="11231" title="sales promotion" label="promotional offers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268217" start="11265" end="11271" title="SAPARi" label="SAPARi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="11394" end="11407" title="trial version" label="trial version"/>
<link wikidata="Q689579" start="11412" end="11433" title="Microsoft Office 2010" label="Microsoft Office 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q93249" start="11442" end="11460" title="antivirus software" label="antivirus software"/>
<link wikidata="Q741128" start="11462" end="11478" title="Norton AntiVirus" label="Norton AntiVirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629915" start="11500" end="11516" title="McAfee VirusScan" label="McAfee VirusScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="11625" end="11630" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q705392" start="11643" end="11661" title="Seagate Technology" label="Seagate Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="11672" end="11679" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="11683" end="11690" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q311394" start="11704" end="11712" title="Infineon" label="Infineon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192687" start="11716" end="11722" title="Elpida Memory" label="Elpida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083858" start="11728" end="11735" title="Atheros" label="Atheros"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="11787" end="11794" title="Hitachi, Ltd." label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="11799" end="11809" title="Panasonic Corporation" label="Matsushita"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="11833" end="11839" title="NVIDIA" label="NVIDIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="11843" end="11846" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q682533" start="11919" end="11926" title="Qimonda" label="Qimonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q261288" start="12001" end="12006" title="Dolby" label="Dolby"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="12320" end="12335" title="composite video" label="composite video"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="12595" end="12606" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12807" end="12830" title="Tablet computer#2-in-1" label="hybrid tablet computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="12920" end="12936" title="desktop computer" label="desktop computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="12974" end="12981" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="12994" end="12999" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="13098" end="13118" title="digital audio player" label="digital audio player"/>
<link wikidata="Q622493" start="13342" end="13349" title="Walkman" label="Walkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="13382" end="13394" title="Memory Stick" label="Memory Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564939" start="13743" end="13753" title="SonicStage" label="SonicStage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978753" start="14339" end="14348" title="2-in-1 PC" label="2-in-1 PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q390557" start="14587" end="14598" title="multi-touch" label="multi-touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225075" start="14622" end="14634" title="digital pen" label="stylus (pen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042552" start="14701" end="14714" title="Surface Pro 3" label="Surface Pro 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q20023017" start="14731" end="14745" title="Windows 10 Pro" label="Windows 10 Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688786" start="14768" end="14790" title="Microsoft Signature PC" label="Microsoft Signature PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="14802" end="14815" title="Intel Core i7" label="Intel Core i7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="14830" end="14853" title="Intel Iris Graphics" label="Intel Iris Pro Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="14877" end="14881" title="PCIe" label="PCIe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="14932" end="14936" title="SATA" label="SATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18845397" start="15089" end="15106" title="Windows 10 Mobile" label="Windows 10 Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="15261" end="15268" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737082" start="15836" end="15852" title="chiclet keyboard" label="chiclet keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529277" start="15940" end="15946" title="XBRITE" label="XBRITE"/>
<link wikidata="Q574291" start="16576" end="16585" title="backlight" label="backlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140366" start="17471" end="17494" title="Trusted Platform Module" label="Trusted Platform Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="18710" end="18722" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492" start="18723" end="18729" title="Optical disc drive" label="burner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736363" start="18752" end="18781" title="High-definition_optical_disc_format_war" label="Blu-Ray vs. HD-DVD format war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916762" start="18829" end="18844" title="High-definition video" label="high-definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17211" start="18866" end="18871" title="1080p" label="1080p"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365548" start="18880" end="18885" title="WUXGA" label="WUXGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q184292" start="18915" end="18919" title="HDMI" label="HDMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q941685" start="19412" end="19416" title="DTMF" label="DTMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q360424" start="19741" end="19764" title="Adobe Premiere Elements" label="Adobe Premiere Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="19771" end="19795" title="Adobe Photoshop Elements" label="Adobe Photoshop Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785002" start="20118" end="20125" title="ArcSoft" label="ArcSoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="20853" end="20863" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="20879" end="20883" title="Booting" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="20892" end="20896" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408770" start="21443" end="21460" title="hard disk failure" label="hard disk failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562505" start="21667" end="21676" title="Sony NEWS" label="Sony NEWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q28955224" start="21679" end="21688" title="Splashtop OS" label="Splashtop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220358" wikidata="Q57318" url="?curid=220358" title="Free imperial city">
<text>In the Holy Roman Empire, the collective term free and imperial cities (), briefly worded free imperial city (&quot;, ), was used from the 15th century to denote a self-ruling city that had a certain amount of autonomy and was represented in the Imperial Diet. 

An imperial city held the status of imperial immediacy, and was subordinate only to the Holy Roman Emperor, as opposed to a territorial city or town (&#x27;), which was subordinate to a territorial [[Prince of the Holy Roman Empire|prince]]be it an ecclesiastical lord ([[prince-bishop]], [[prince-abbot]]), or a secular prince ([[duke]] (&#x27;), margrave, count (&quot;), etc.).

==Origin==
The evolution of some German cities into self-ruling constitutional entities of the Empire was slower than that of the secular and ecclesiastical princes. In the course of the 13th and 14th centuries, some cities were promoted by the emperor to the status of Imperial Cities (&#x27;; &#x27;), essentially for fiscal reasons. Those cities, which had been founded by the German kings and emperors in the 10th through 13th centuries and had initially been administered by royal/imperial stewards (&quot;&quot;), gradually gained independence as their city magistrates assumed the duties of administration and justice; some prominent examples are Colmar, Haguenau, and Mulhouse in Alsace or Memmingen and Ravensburg in upper Swabia.
The Free Cities (&#x27;; &#x27;) were those, such as Basel, Augsburg, Cologne or Strasbourg, that were initially subjected to a prince-bishop and, likewise, progressively gained independence from that lord. In a few cases, such as in Cologne, the former ecclesiastical lord continued to claim the right to exercise some residual feudal privileges over the Free City, a claim that gave rise to constant litigation almost until the end of the Empire.

Over time, the difference between Imperial Cities and Free Cities became increasingly blurred, so that they became collectively known as &quot;Free Imperial Cities&quot;, or &quot;Free and Imperial Cities&quot;, and by the late 15th century, many cities included both &quot;Free&quot; and &quot;Imperial&quot; in their name. Like the other Imperial Estates, they could wage war, make peace, and control their own trade, and they permitted little interference from outside. In the later Middle Ages, a number of Free Cities formed City Leagues (&quot;), such as the Hanseatic League or the Alsatian , to promote and defend their interests.

In the course of the Middle Ages, cities gained, and sometimesif rarelylost, their freedom through the vicissitudes of power politics. Some favored cities gained charters by gift. Others purchased one from a prince in need of funds. Some won it by force of arms during the troubled 13th and 14th centuries and others lost their privileges during the same period by the same way. Some cities became free through the void created by the extinction of dominant families, like the Swabian . Some voluntarily placed themselves under the protection of a territorial ruler and therefore lost their independence.

A few, like Protestant , which in 1607 was annexed to the Catholic Duchy of Bavaria, were stripped by the Emperor of their status as a Free Cityfor genuine or trumped-up reasons. This rarely happened after the Reformation, and of the sixty Free Imperial Cities that remained at the Peace of Westphalia, all but the ten Alsatian cities which were annexed by France during the late 17th century continued to exist until the mediatization of 1803.

==Distinction between free imperial cities and other cities==
The Empire had approximately 4000 towns and cities, although fewer than 400 of these had more than a thousand inhabitants around the year 1600. During the Late Middle Ages, fewer than 200 of these places ever enjoyed the status of Free Imperial Cities, and some of those did so only for a few decades. The Imperial military tax register (&quot;) of 1521 listed eighty-five such cities, and this figure had fallen to 65 by the time of the Peace of Augsburg in 1555. From the Peace of Westphalia of 1648 to 1803, their number oscillated at around 50.
Unlike the Free Imperial Cities, the second category of towns and cities, now called &quot;territorial cities&quot;, were subject to an ecclesiastical or lay lord, and while many of them enjoyed self-government to varying degrees, this was a precarious privilege which might be curtailed or abolished according to the will of the lord.

Reflecting the complex constitutional set-up of the Holy Roman Empire, a third category, composed of semi-autonomous cities that belonged to neither of those two types, is distinguished by some historians. These were cities whose size and economic strength was sufficient to sustain a substantial independence from surrounding territorial lords for a considerable time, even though no formal right to independence existed. These cities were typically located in small territories where the ruler was weak. They were the exception among the multitude of territorial towns and cities. Cities of both latter categories normally had representation in territorial diets, but not in the Imperial Diet.

==Organization==
Free imperial cities were not officially admitted as individual Imperial Estates to the Imperial Diet until 1489, and even then their votes were usually considered only advisory (&quot;&quot;) compared to the benches of the electors and princes. The cities divided themselves into two groups, or benches, in the Imperial Diet, the Rhenish and the Swabian benches.

These same cities were among the 85 free imperial cities listed on the &quot;Reichsmatrikel&quot; of 1521, the imperial civil and military tax-schedule used for more than a century to assess the contributions of all the Imperial Estates in case of a war formally declared by the Imperial Diet. The military and monetary contribution of each city is indicated in parentheses. For instance Cologne (30-322-600) means that Cologne had to provide 30 horsemen, 322 footsoldiers and 600 gulden. 

These numbers are equivalent to one &quot;simplum&quot;. If need be, the Diet could vote a second and a third &quot;simplum&quot;, in which case each member&#x27;s contribution was doubled or tripled. At the time, the free imperial cities were considered wealthy and the monetary contribution of Nuremberg, Ulm and Cologne for instance were as high as that of the Electors (Mainz, Trier, Cologne, Palatinate, Saxony, Brandenburg) and the Dukes of Württemberg and of Lorraine.

The following list contains the 50 free imperial cities that took part in the Imperial Diet of 1792. They are listed according to their voting order on the Rhenish and Swabian benches.

===Rhenish bench===
===Swabian bench===
By the time of the Peace of Westphalia, the cities constituted a formal third &quot;college&quot; and their full vote (&quot;&quot;) was confirmed, although they failed to secure parity of representation with the two other colleges. To avoid the possibility that they would have the casting vote in case of a tie between the Electors and the Princes, it was decided that these should decide first and consult the cities afterward.

Despite this somewhat unequal status of the cities in the functioning of the Imperial Diet, their full admittance to that federal institution was crucial in clarifying their hitherto uncertain status and in legitimizing their permanent existence as full-fledged Imperial Estates. Constitutionally, if in no other way, the diminutive Free Imperial City of Isny was the equal of the Margraviate of Brandenburg.

==Development==
Having probably learned from experience that there was not much to gain from active, and costly, participation in the Imperial Diet&#x27;s proceedings due to the lack of empathy of the princes, the cities made little use of their representation in that body. By about 1700, almost all the cities with the exception of Nuremberg, Ulm and Regensburg, where by then the Perpetual Imperial Diet was located, were represented by various Regensburg lawyers and officials who often represented several cities simultaneously. Instead, many cities found it more profitable to maintain agents at the Aulic Council in Vienna, where the risk of an adverse judgment posed a greater risk to city treasuries and independence.

The territory of most Free Imperial Cities was generally quite small but there were exceptions. The largest territories formed in what is now Switzerland with cities like Bern, Zürich and Luzern, but also cities like Ulm, Nuremberg and Hamburg in what is now Germany possessed substantial hinterlands or fiefs that comprised dozens of villages and thousands of subject peasants who did not enjoy the same rights as the urban population. At the opposite end, the authority of Cologne, Aachen, Worms, Goslar, Wetzlar, Augsburg and Regensburg barely extended beyond the city walls.

The constitution of Free and Imperial Cities was republican in form, but in all but the smallest cities, the city government was oligarchic in nature with a governing town council composed of an elite, hereditary patrician class, the so-called town council families (&quot;). They were the most economically significant burgher families who had asserted themselves politically over time.

Below them, with a say in the government of the city, were the citizens or burghers, the smaller, privileged section of the city&#x27;s permanent population whose number varied according to the rule of citizenship of each city. There were exceptions, such as Nuremberg, where the patriciate ruled alone. To the common town dwellerwhether he lived in a prestigious Free Imperial City like Frankfurt, Augsburg or Nuremberg, or in a small market town such as there were hundreds throughout Germanyattaining burgher status (&quot;) could be his greatest aim in life. 

The burgher status was usually an inherited privilege renewed pro-forma in each generation of the family concerned but it could also be purchased. At times, the sale of burgher status could be a significant item of town income as fiscal records show. The &quot;&quot; was local and not transferable to another city.

The burghers were usually the lowest social group to have political power and privilege within the Holy Roman Empire. Below them was the disenfranchised urban population, maybe half of the total in many cities, the so-called &quot;residents&quot; (&quot;&quot;) or &quot;guests&quot;: smaller artisans, craftsmen, street venders, day laborers, servants and the poor, and those whose residence in the city was temporary, such as wintering noblemen, foreign merchants, princely officials, and so on.

Urban conflicts in Free Imperial Cities, which sometimes amounted to class warfare, were not uncommon in the Early Modern Age, particularly in the 17th century (Lübeck, 1598–1669; Schwäbisch Hall, 1601–1604; Frankfurt, 1612–1614; Wezlar, 1612–1615; Erfurt, 1648–1664; Cologne, 1680–1685; Hamburg 1678–1693, 1702–1708). Sometimes, as in the case of Hamburg in 1708, the situation was considered sufficiently serious to warrant the dispatch of an Imperial commissioner with troops to restore order and negotiate a compromise and a new city constitution between the warring parties.

The number of Imperial Cities shrank over time until the Peace of Westphalia. There were more in areas that were very fragmented politically, such as Swabia and Franconia in the southwest, than in the North and the East where the larger and more powerful territories, such as Brandenburg and Saxony, were located, which were more prone to absorb smaller, weaker states.

In the 16th and 17th century, a number of Imperial Cities were separated from the Empire due to external territorial change. Henry II of France seized the Imperial Cities connected to the Three Bishoprics of Metz, Verdun and Toul. Louis XIV seized many cities based on claims produced by his Chambers of Reunion. That way, Strasbourg and the ten cities of the were annexed. When the Old Swiss Confederacy gained its formal independence from the Empire in 1648, it had been de facto independent since 1499, the independence of the Imperial Cities of Basel, Bern, Lucerne, St. Gallen, Schaffhausen, Solothurn, and Zürich was formally recognized.


With the rise of Revolutionary France in Europe, this trend accelerated enormously. After 1795, the areas west of the Rhine were annexed to France by the revolutionary armies, suppressing the independence of Imperial Cities as diverse as Cologne, Aachen, Speyer and Worms. Then, the Napoleonic Wars led to the reorganization of the Empire in 1803 (see German Mediatisation), where all of the free cities but sixHamburg, Bremen, Lübeck, Frankfurt, Augsburg, and Nuremberglost their independence and were absorbed into neighboring territories. 

Under pressure from Napoleon, the Holy Roman Empire was dissolved in 1806. By 1811, all of the Imperial Cities had lost their independenceAugsburg and Nuremberg had been annexed by Bavaria, Frankfurt had become the center of the Grand Duchy of Frankfurt, a Napoleonic puppet state, and the three Hanseatic cities had been directly annexed by France as part of its effort to enforce the Continental Blockade against Britain. Hamburg and Lübeck with surrounding territories formed the département of , and Bremen the .

When the German Confederation was established by the Congress of Vienna in 1815, Hamburg, Lübeck, Bremen, and Frankfurt were once again made Free Cities, this time enjoying total sovereignty as all the members of the loose Confederation. Frankfurt was annexed by Prussia in consequence of the part it took in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866. The three other Free Cities became constituent states of the new German Empire in 1871 and consequently were no longer fully sovereign as they lost control over defence, foreign affairs and a few other fields. 

They retained that status in the Weimar Republic and into Nazi Germany, although under Hitler it became purely notional. Due to Hitler&#x27;s distaste for Lübeck and its liberal tradition, the need was devised to compensate Prussia for territorial losses under the Greater Hamburg Act, and Lübeck was annexed to Prussia in 1937. In the Federal Republic of Germany which was established after the war, Bremen and Hamburg, but not Lübeck, became constituent states, a status which they retain to the present day. Berlin, which had never been a Free City in its history, received the status of a state after the war due to its special position in divided post-war Germany.

Regensburg was, apart from hosting the Imperial Diet, a most peculiar city: an officially Lutheran city that was the seat of the Catholic prince-bishopric of Regensburg, its prince-bishop and cathedral chapter. The Imperial City also housed three Imperial abbeys: St. Emmeram, and . They were five immediate entities fully independent of each other existing in the same small city.

==Image gallery==

==See also==
* City-state
* Free city (classical antiquity)
* Imperial immediacy
* List of Free Imperial Cities
* Lübeck law
* Royal free city

==Notes==
==Citations==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="7" end="24" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="46" end="70" title="Free imperial city" label="free and imperial cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="90" end="108" title="Free imperial city" label="free imperial city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018" start="139" end="151" title="15th century" label="15th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="246" end="259" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="299" end="317" title="imperial immediacy" label="imperial immediacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="351" end="369" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="413" end="602" title="Free imperial city" label="&amp;#x27;), which was subordinate to a territorial [[Prince of the Holy Roman Empire|prince]]be it an ecclesiastical lord ([[prince-bishop]], [[prince-abbot]]), or a secular prince ([[duke]] ("/>
<link wikidata="Q157802" start="611" end="619" title="margrave" label="margrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="621" end="626" title="count" label="count"/>
<link wikidata="Q130994" start="1299" end="1305" title="Colmar" label="Colmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22730" start="1307" end="1315" title="Haguenau" label="Haguenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q79815" start="1321" end="1329" title="Mulhouse" label="Mulhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14825" start="1343" end="1352" title="Memmingen" label="Memmingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832" start="1357" end="1367" title="Ravensburg" label="Ravensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="1377" end="1383" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="1438" end="1443" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="1445" end="1453" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="1455" end="1462" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="1466" end="1476" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="2400" end="2416" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="3148" end="3164" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Duchy of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="3363" end="3382" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q314739" start="3503" end="3516" title="German mediatization" label="mediatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q878842" start="3895" end="3925" title="Imperial Register" label="Imperial military tax register"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="4063" end="4082" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282872" start="5134" end="5139" title="Diet (assembly)" label="diets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507115" start="5253" end="5269" title="Imperial State" label="Imperial Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="5277" end="5290" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="5413" end="5421" title="prince-elector" label="electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="5520" end="5527" title="Rhineland" label="Rhenish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="5536" end="5542" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878842" start="5631" end="5645" title="Imperial Register" label="Reichsmatrikel"/>
<link wikidata="Q284667" start="6419" end="6424" title="Electorate of Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794352" start="6426" end="6431" title="Electorate of Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904317" start="6433" end="6440" title="Electorate of Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="6442" end="6452" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="6454" end="6460" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="6462" end="6473" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227570" start="6492" end="6503" title="Duchy of Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="6511" end="6519" title="Duchy of Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q513446" start="7535" end="7539" title="Isny im Allgäu" label="Isny"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="7561" end="7587" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314768" start="7973" end="7996" title="Perpetual Imperial Diet" label="Perpetual Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q536989" start="8196" end="8209" title="Aulic Council" label="Aulic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="9027" end="9037" title="oligarchic" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117020" start="9546" end="9555" title="Free Imperial City of Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="11745" end="11763" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q182783" start="11808" end="11824" title="Three Bishoprics" label="Three Bishoprics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="11828" end="11832" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="11834" end="11840" title="Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q154728" start="11845" end="11849" title="Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="11851" end="11860" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948485" start="11912" end="11931" title="Chambers of Reunion" label="Chambers of Reunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="11943" end="11953" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="12003" end="12024" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="12169" end="12174" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="12176" end="12180" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="12182" end="12189" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="12191" end="12201" title="St. Gallen" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009" start="12203" end="12215" title="Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q68965" start="12217" end="12226" title="Solothurn" label="Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="12232" end="12238" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="12283" end="12303" title="French Revolution" label="Revolutionary France"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="12549" end="12564" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q314739" start="12618" end="12638" title="German Mediatisation" label="German Mediatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="12677" end="12684" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209" start="12686" end="12692" title="Bremen (state)" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="12694" end="12700" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="12713" end="12721" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="12727" end="12736" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="12991" end="12998" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q704312" start="13039" end="13063" title="Grand Duchy of Frankfurt" label="Grand Duchy of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="13078" end="13090" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q258081" start="13196" end="13216" title="Continental System" label="Continental Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="13337" end="13357" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="13381" end="13399" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="13591" end="13598" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="13641" end="13660" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="13735" end="13748" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="13915" end="13930" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="13940" end="13952" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="13969" end="13975" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="14106" end="14113" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q509333" start="14147" end="14166" title="Greater Hamburg Act" label="Greater Hamburg Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="14218" end="14245" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="14338" end="14344" title="states of Germany" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="14393" end="14399" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="14553" end="14563" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="14592" end="14605" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q260633" start="14817" end="14828" title="St. Emmeram&amp;#x27;s Abbey" label="St. Emmeram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="14851" end="14869" title="Imperial immediacy" label="immediate entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="14970" end="14980" title="City-state" label="City-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500203" start="14983" end="15014" title="Free city (classical antiquity)" label="Free city (classical antiquity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="15017" end="15035" title="Imperial immediacy" label="Imperial immediacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571171" start="15038" end="15066" title="List of Free Imperial Cities" label="List of Free Imperial Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q686235" start="15069" end="15079" title="Lübeck law" label="Lübeck law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702" start="15082" end="15097" title="Royal free city" label="Royal free city"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220359" wikidata="Q3376887" url="?curid=220359" title="Peter Sotos">
<text>Peter Sotos (born April 17, 1960) is an American author and musician. As an author, Sotos has 31 published books with several translated into foreign languages. In his books, Sotos writes about sadistic sexual criminals and sexually violent pornography in great detail, particularly involving children. His books tend to be first-person narratives, taking on the point of view of the sexual predator in order to portray sadistic and pedophilic sexual impulses. His writings are seen by some as potent social criticism, highlighting the often hypocritical ways in which media deals with these issues. As a musician, Sotos is well known as a former member of the British noise music band Whitehouse. Sotos was arrested in 1985 on child pornography charges due to content that was published within an issue of his zine &quot;Pure&quot;.

==Biography==
=== Education ===
Sotos is a graduate of Holy Cross High School. He attended Northern Illinois University for one year and studied at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago for four years.

=== Career ===

=== Books ===
*&quot;Lazy&quot; (1999) examines the public fascination with sex crimes and their influence on art works such as the painting &quot;Myra&quot; by Marcus Harvey.
*&quot;Selfish, Little&quot; (2004) recounts the murder of Lesley Ann Downey by British Moors Murderers Ian Brady and Myra Hindley in 1964.
*&quot;Predicate&quot; (2005) explores the Dunblane massacre in Scotland in 1996 and the motives and life of its perpetrator, Thomas Watt Hamilton. Other topics covered include Operation Ore, Operation Cathedral, Russian orphanages, Megan&#x27;s Law, and non-nude teen websites.
*&quot;Comfort and Critique&quot; (2005) explores the hidden motives of reporters and citizens as shown by their reactions to sexual crimes.
*&quot;Show Adult&quot; (2007) investigates the experience of pornography. The book also analyzes the TV shows &quot;Supernanny&quot; and &quot;To Catch a Predator&quot; as publicly acceptable forms of child pornography.
*&quot;Lordotics&quot; (2008) deals with sex offenders and the art of photography.
*&quot;Pure Filth&quot; (2012) details transcripts of the gonzo movies porn star Jamie Gillis produced during the 1990s. Gillis adds an introduction to each transcript. Sotos, who was a friend of Gillis, brings his own perspective to these records. The book was completed a few days before Gillis died in February 2010.
*&quot;Desistance&quot; (2014) is focused on the works of French photographer Antoine D&#x27;Agata.
*&quot;Ingratitude&quot; (2018) is a monologue.
*&quot;Lionel Maunz Peter Sotos&quot; (2021) is a collaboration with the titular contemporary artist.

=== Musical and artistic endeavors ===

From 1983 to 2003, Sotos was a member of the British power electronics trio Whitehouse, where he performed using an EDP WASP synthesizer.

In 1992, Sotos released the solo album &quot;Buyer&#x27;s Market&quot;, which consisted of sound collages of spoken word samples from parents, law enforcement officers, and victims of sex crimes, including child sexual abuse. The album was produced by Steve Albini. Sotos also released &quot;Proxy&quot; and &quot;Waitress&quot; in 2005.

Peter Sotos makes video collages and notably presented &quot;Waitress I&quot;, &quot;II&quot;, and &quot;III&quot; at the Palais de Tokyo in April 2005. 

In 2012 Sotos joined Dennis Cooper for a lecture at the Centre Georges Pompidou.

A selection of Sotos&#x27; paper archives was shown for the first time in 2017 at the New Galerie in Paris.

=== Legal issues ===
In 1984, while the day-care sex-abuse hysteria phenomenon was sweeping the nation and while attending the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Sotos began producing the controversial magazine &quot;Pure&quot;, notable as the first zine dedicated to serial killer lore. The original publications are now collectors&#x27; items.

In addition to offering many details about the crimes of serial killers and pedophiles, the text in the magazine praises them, describing them using such terms as &quot;genius,&quot; &quot;glorious,&quot; &quot;exemplary,&quot; and &quot;illustrious&quot; and stating that child abuse is a &quot;sublime pleasure.&quot; The text is juxtaposed with pictures and newspaper clippings relevant to the crimes discussed. A short manifesto introducing the first issue says the magazine &quot;satiates and encourages true lusts.&quot;

A photocopy from a magazine of child pornography was used as the cover of issue #2 of &quot;Pure&quot;, which led to Sotos pleading guilty to possession of child pornography in 1985 and receiving a suspended sentence. A copy of the magazine was found by Scotland Yard in Edinburgh, in the home of a suspect in a series of child abductions, murders, and grave robberies, which led to Sotos&#x27; arrest.

=== Personal life ===
Sotos cites radical feminist Andrea Dworkin and French writer Marquis de Sade as his main literary influences.

Steve Albini, who produced the album &quot;Buyer&#x27;s Market&quot; for Sotos, described Sotos as a friend and a former influence while speaking to &quot;MEL Magazine&quot; in 2021. He said, &quot;A lot of his writing is extremely difficult to read. It&#x27;s repellent. You&#x27;re brought into the mind of a sadist, pretty convincingly. And I feel like that experience, reading that stuff, is shocking to your core in the way that the horrors of the reality of those things should be.&quot; Jamie Stewart from Xiu Xiu has mentioned Sotos as an influence.

== Works ==

* Pure, 1984–1985, Self-published and released two issues, with a third having been completed before controversy of publication led to a now-infamous trial.
* Parasite, 1993–1995, Self-published twenty issues.
* Total Abuse: Collected Writings, 1984–1995: Pure, Tool, Parasite, 1995 (Goad to Hell Enterprises, )
* Index, 1996, Printed in 1998 (Creation Books, )
* Special, 1998 (Rude Shape, )
* Lazy, 1999 (Creation Books, )
* Tick, 2000 (Creation Books, )
* Selfish, Little: The Annotated Lesley Ann Downey, 2004 (Void Books, )
* Proxy: Peter Sotos Pornography 1991–2000, 2005 (Creation Books, ). A compendium of five of Sotos&#x27; works (&quot;Tool&quot;, &quot;Special&quot;, &quot;Tick&quot;, &quot;Index&quot; and &quot;Lazy&quot;). First edition, with CD by Sotos and Steve Albini.
* Comfort and Critique, 2005 (Void Books, )
* Predicate, 2005 (Creation Books, )
* Waitress, 2005 (Creation Books). Came as an extra for those who preordered a copy of &quot;Predicate&quot; from Creation Books.
* Show Adult, 2007 (Creation Books, )
* Waitress, 2007 (Creation Books). Separate volume from the one included with &quot;Predicate&quot;. Came with orders of &quot;Show Adult&quot; in hardcover.
* Lordotics, 2008 (Creation Books, )
* Perfect: The Collected Peter Sotos Volume One, 2009 (Creation Books, )
* Waitress, 2009 (Creation Books). Third in a series of additional material offered in limited editions from Creation. Came with pre orders of &quot;Perfect&quot;.
* Public: The Collected Peter Sotos Volume Two, 2009 (Creation Books, )
* Waitress, 2009 (Creation Books) Fourth in a series of additional material offered in limited editions from Creation. Came with pre orders of &quot;Public&quot;.
* Private: The Collected Peter Sotos Volume Three, 2009 (Creation Books, )
* Waitress, 2009 (Creation Books). Fifth in a series of additional material offered in limited editions from Creation. Came with pre orders of &quot;Private&quot;.
* Kept: The Collected Peter Sotos Volume Four, 2010 (Creation Books, )
* Waitress, 2010 (Creation Books). Sixth in a series of additional material offered in limited editions from Creation. Came with pre orders of &quot;Kept&quot;.
* Mine, 2011 (Creation Books, reprinted in paperback by Nine-Banded Books in 2013, )
* Pure Filth, 2012 (Feral House, ) with Jamie Gillis.
* Tool, 2013 (Nine-Banded Books, ). First printing as a stand-alone volume.
* Home, 2013 (Kiddiepunk) with images by Michael Salerno.
* Desistance, 2014 (Nine-Banded Books, )
* Ingratitude, 2018 (Nine-Banded Books, )
*Lionel Maunz Peter Sotos, 2021 (Nine-Banded Books &amp; Amphetamine Sulphate, )
*Missed. Better Still., 2022 (Amphetamine Sulphate, )
*1. Obviates: Predicate, Show Adult (2004–2006), 2023 (Amphetamine Sulphate, )
*Kee MacFarlane, 2024 (Nine-Banded Books)

==Discography==

== In popular culture ==

In the 2015 film &quot;Love&quot; (2015), director Gaspar Noé shows &quot;Lazy&quot;, one of Sotos&#x27; books, on the hero&#x27;s bookshelves. The American writer is also thanked in the closing credits.

==References==
== External links ==
* Nine-Banded Books
* Feral House
* Laurence Viallet
* Peter Sotos: A Case Study in Lust and the Unconditioned by Michael Lujan
* Fucked in the Head by Travis Jeppesen
* Peter Sotos : Aucun autre crime que l&#x27;amour du crime by Christophe Bourseiller
* Instinct, Drive, and Reality: An Interview with Peter Sotos (&quot;The Hoover Hog&quot;)
* Peter Sotos Day by Dennis Cooper
* Interview with Peter Sotos by Brandon Stosuy (&quot;Fanzine&quot;)
* Tesco Fest 2011, Brooklyn NY
* &quot;Natt&amp;Dag&quot; (May 2011)
* The Putrid Voyeurisms of Peter Sotos by Blake Butler (&quot;Vice&quot;)
* Basilica Soundscape 2013, Hudson NY (&quot;Pitchfork&quot;)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3376887" start="0" end="11" title="Peter Sotos" label="Peter Sotos"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="60" end="68" title="musician" label="musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="194" end="202" title="Sadomasochism" label="sadistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075388" start="203" end="219" title="Sex and the law" label="sexual criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="224" end="240" title="Sexual abuse" label="sexually violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="241" end="252" title="pornography" label="pornography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="363" end="376" title="Narration#Point of view" label="point of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207313" start="384" end="399" title="sexual predator" label="sexual predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8388" start="433" end="443" title="Pedophilia" label="pedophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q734907" start="686" end="696" title="Whitehouse (band)" label="Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097912" start="728" end="753" title="Child pornography laws in the United States" label="child pornography charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="811" end="815" title="zine" label="zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885252" start="890" end="912" title="Holy Cross High School (River Grove, Illinois)" label="Holy Cross High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191344" start="926" end="954" title="Northern Illinois University" label="Northern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432601" start="987" end="1025" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago" label="School of the Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948087" start="1200" end="1216" title="Myra (painting)" label="&amp;quot;Myra&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495776" start="1220" end="1233" title="Marcus Harvey" label="Marcus Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="1323" end="1338" title="Moors murders" label="Moors Murderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="1339" end="1348" title="Ian Brady" label="Ian Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="1353" end="1365" title="Myra Hindley" label="Myra Hindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153159" start="1418" end="1435" title="Dunblane massacre" label="Dunblane massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097354" start="1552" end="1565" title="Operation Ore" label="Operation Ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096877" start="1567" end="1586" title="Operation Cathedral" label="Operation Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231737" start="1608" end="1624" title="Megan&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Megan&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q819092" start="1912" end="1922" title="Supernanny" label="Supernanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121677" start="1939" end="1958" title="To Catch a Predator" label="To Catch a Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765226" start="2157" end="2162" title="gonzo pornography" label="gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q725962" start="2180" end="2192" title="Jamie Gillis" label="Jamie Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856822" start="2497" end="2517" title="Antoine D&amp;#x27;Agata" label="Antoine D&amp;#x27;Agata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687544" start="2763" end="2780" title="Power electronics (music)" label="power electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q734907" start="2786" end="2796" title="Whitehouse (band)" label="Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358244" start="2826" end="2834" title="Electronic Dream Plant" label="EDP WASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744304" start="2940" end="2953" title="sound collage" label="sound collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="3055" end="3073" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="3101" end="3113" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535247" start="3310" end="3325" title="Palais de Tokyo" label="Palais de Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3526" end="3531" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242773" start="3574" end="3601" title="day-care sex-abuse hysteria" label="day-care sex-abuse hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432601" start="3661" end="3699" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago" label="School of the Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="3807" end="3820" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8388" start="3962" end="3971" title="pedophile" label="pedophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q46337" start="4309" end="4318" title="manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="4445" end="4462" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="4668" end="4681" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="4685" end="4694" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914207" start="4852" end="4868" title="radical feminism" label="radical feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q241398" start="4869" end="4883" title="Andrea Dworkin" label="Andrea Dworkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="4902" end="4917" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="4952" end="4964" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q100768649" start="5107" end="5119" title="MEL Magazine" label="MEL Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147513" start="5446" end="5459" title="Jamie Stewart (American musician)" label="Jamie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758193" start="5465" end="5472" title="Xiu Xiu" label="Xiu Xiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="6299" end="6311" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q265577" start="7805" end="7816" title="Feral House" label="Feral House"/>
<link wikidata="Q725962" start="7825" end="7837" title="Jamie Gillis" label="Jamie Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404696" start="7929" end="7939" title="Kiddiepunk" label="Kiddiepunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829024" start="8373" end="8389" title="Love (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;Love&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q347950" start="8407" end="8417" title="Gaspar Noé" label="Gaspar Noé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836284" start="8749" end="8764" title="Travis Jeppesen" label="Travis Jeppesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966124" start="8828" end="8850" title="Christophe Bourseiller" label="Christophe Bourseiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189056" start="8963" end="8976" title="Dennis Cooper" label="Dennis Cooper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220361" wikidata="Q2918279" url="?curid=220361" title="Cigar Aficionado">
<text>Cigar Aficionado is an American lifestyle magazine that is dedicated to enjoying the “good life” and the world of cigars. It is a publication of M. Shanken Communications, which also publishes &quot;Wine Spectator&quot;, &quot;Whisky Advocate&quot;, &quot;Market Watch&quot;, &quot;Shanken News Daily&quot; and &quot;IMPACT Newsletter&quot;. 

The magazine reaches a total brand footprint of over 2.7 million. 

Launched in 1992, the magazine is known for its profiles on celebrities, including Michael Jordan, Jack Nicholson, The Rock, Demi Moore, Robert De Niro, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Usher, Nick Jonas, Tom Selleck, Hugh Jackman, Wayne Gretzky, Charles Barkley, Mark Wahlberg, Michael Strahan, and Steve Harvey; for its cigar ratings and reviews; and the latest coverage on cigars, Cuba, gambling, golf, beer, spirits, and more.

David Savona is executive editor.

==Origins and history==

&quot;Cigar Aficionado&quot; magazine debuted in the fall of 1992, launched in New York City by Marvin R. Shanken, longtime publisher of &quot;Wine Spectator&quot; magazine. Prior to launching the publication, Shanken engaged in extensive market research, collecting more than 1,300 four-page surveys of cigar smokers which detailed their occupation, income, net worth, travel tendencies, as well as their drinking and smoking habits. Survey results revealed a well-heeled and dedicated male demographic, with survey respondents professing an average household income of $194,000 and a net worth of $1.54 million and claiming to smoke on average ten cigars per week. Shanken launched a large-format glossy magazine aimed at corralling these readers and advertisers of products targeted to this audience.

&quot;Cigar Aficionado&quot; began as a lifestyle magazine, including coverage of wine, spirits, travel, gambling, and antiques, in addition to interviews with leading personalities in the cigar industry and feature articles relating to the cigarmaking industry. From the beginning the magazine emphasized celebrity profiles, including cover stories on Rush Limbaugh, Jack Nicholson, and Arnold Schwarzenegger. The new magazine&#x27;s successful blending of lifestyle reports and celebrity glitz has been credited with contributing to the 1990s cigar boom.

The publication scored its first great journalistic coup on February 4, 1994, when editor and publisher Shanken met Fidel Castro in Havana for a two-hour interview. During this interview Castro recounted the story behind the establishment of the Cohiba brand, told stories of the importance of cigars to his life as a revolutionary in the mountains of Cuba, and explained his decision to give up cigar smoking in August 1986 as part of a national campaign against tobacco use. In addition to these topics of special interest to cigar smokers, the interview touched upon bilateral relations between the United States and Cuba, during the course of which Castro accused the United States of repeatedly &quot;moving the goalposts back&quot; for ending the Cuban economic embargo and said that &quot;no other country has as unblemished behavior about human rights&quot; as Cuba.

==Events==

&quot;Cigar Aficionado&quot; hosts the annual Big Smoke Las Vegas, which has drawn cigar-loving visitors from around the world since the early 90s, when Marvin R. Shanken held the first Big Smoke event, which took place in New York City. Big Smoke attendees enjoy premium cigars, spirits and food, and participate in cigar and tasting seminars. 

&quot;Cigar Aficionado&quot; and sister publication &quot;Whisky Advocate&quot; together co-host Big Smoke Meets WhiskyFest, an annual event held in Hollywood, Florida since 2021.

==Ratings==

From its inception, &quot;Cigar Aficionado&quot; has made use of blind taste testing of cigars, comparing the merits of one brand to another, expressed on the basis of a 100-point scale similar to the one used in sister publication &quot;Wine Spectator.&quot;

The publication annually releases its Top 25 list, where editors select the best cigars of the year. The full list and rankings are a product of a year-long journey and hundreds of reviewed cigars. The Top 25 includes the Cigar of the Year honor.

===Cigar of the Year===
==See also==
*Tobacco

==References==
==External links==
*Cigar Aficionado web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6545508" start="32" end="50" title="lifestyle magazine" label="lifestyle magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576" start="114" end="120" title="cigars" label="cigars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918279" start="145" end="170" title="Cigar Aficionado" label="M. Shanken Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918681" start="199" end="213" title="Wine Spectator" label="Wine Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q123468310" start="227" end="242" title="Whisky Advocate" label="Whisky Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="495" end="509" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="511" end="525" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="527" end="535" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="537" end="547" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="549" end="563" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="565" end="586" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="588" end="593" title="Usher (musician)" label="Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q201656" start="595" end="605" title="Nick Jonas" label="Nick Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213706" start="607" end="618" title="Tom Selleck" label="Tom Selleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q129591" start="620" end="632" title="Hugh Jackman" label="Hugh Jackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="634" end="647" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q192707" start="649" end="664" title="Charles Barkley" label="Charles Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="666" end="679" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q573258" start="681" end="696" title="Michael Strahan" label="Michael Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347009" start="702" end="714" title="Steve Harvey" label="Steve Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="786" end="790" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="973" end="986" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778481" start="990" end="1007" title="Marvin Shanken" label="Marvin R. Shanken"/>
<link wikidata="Q32090" start="1739" end="1748" title="Lifestyle (sociology)" label="lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="1781" end="1785" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="1787" end="1794" title="distilled beverage" label="spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q61509" start="1796" end="1802" title="travel" label="travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="1804" end="1812" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="1818" end="1826" title="antiques" label="antiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q319072" start="2052" end="2065" title="Rush Limbaugh" label="Rush Limbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119808" start="2238" end="2254" title="1990s cigar boom" label="1990s cigar boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="2373" end="2385" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="2389" end="2395" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q513070" start="2503" end="2515" title="Cohiba (cigar brand)" label="Cohiba brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244473" start="2963" end="2983" title="moving the goalposts" label="moving the goalposts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334972" start="3010" end="3032" title="United States embargo against Cuba" label="Cuban economic embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906622" start="3751" end="3767" title="blind taste test" label="blind taste test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="4233" end="4240" title="Tobacco" label="Tobacco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220362" wikidata="Q1366712" url="?curid=220362" title="Historical school of economics">
<text>The German historical school of economics. was an [[economic methodology|approach] to academic [[economics]] and to [[public administration]] that emerged in the 19th century in Germany, and held sway there until well into the 20th century. The professors involved compiled massive economic histories of Germany and Europe. Numerous Americans were their students. The school was opposed by theoretical economists. Prominent leaders included [[Gustav von Schmoller]] (1838–1917), and [[Max Weber]] (1864–1920) in Germany, and [[Joseph Schumpeter]] (1883–1950) in Austria and the United States.

== Tenets ==
The historical school held that [[history]] was the key source of knowledge about human actions and economic matters, since economics was culture-specific, and hence not generalizable over space and time. The Historical School of Economics, in addition to rejecting the universal validity of economic theorems and emphasizing an empirical and historical approach, drew significant methodological influence from the [[historism]] of [[Leopold von Ranke]]. Although von Ranke was not an economist, his insistence on rigorous, source-based analysis to understand societal development profoundly shaped the school&#x27;s approach. Wilhelm Roscher, a leading figure of the Older Historical School, studied under von Ranke and incorporated his focus on historical and cultural specificity into the analysis of economic phenomena. This legacy reinforced the school&#x27;s view that economics could not be abstracted from its historical and cultural context, further distancing it from universal theories and mathematical models.The school rejected the universal validity of economic [[theorem]]s. They saw economics as resulting from careful empirical and historical analysis instead of from logic and mathematics. The school also rejected [[mathematical model]]ling.

Most members of the school were also &quot;Sozialpolitiker&quot; (social policy advocates), i.e. concerned with social reform and improved conditions for the common man during a period of heavy [[industrialization]]. They were more disparagingly referred to as &quot;Kathedersozialisten&quot;, rendered in English as &quot;socialists of the chair&quot; (compare [[armchair revolutionary]]), due to their positions as professors.

The historical school can be divided into three tendencies:
* the Older, led by [[Wilhelm Roscher]], [[Karl Knies]], and [[Bruno Hildebrand]];
* the Younger, led by [[Gustav von Schmoller]], and also including [[Étienne Laspeyres]], [[Karl Bücher]], [[Adolph Wagner]], [[Georg Friedrich Knapp]] and to some extent [[Lujo Brentano]];
* the Youngest, led by [[Werner Sombart]] and including, to a very large extent, [[Max Weber]].

Predecessors included [[Friedrich List]] and [[Adam Müller]], (although it is important to note that both Müller and List are considered part of the [[Romanticism and economics|romantic tradition of economics]).

The historical school largely controlled appointments to chairs of economics in German universities, as many of the advisors of [[Friedrich Althoff]], head of the university department in the [[Prussia]]n Ministry of Education 1882–1907, had studied under members of the school. Moreover, Prussia was the intellectual powerhouse of Germany, so dominated academia, not only in central Europe, but also in the [[United States]] until about 1900, because the American economics profession was led by holders of German PhDs. The historical school was involved in the &quot;[[Methodenstreit]]&quot; (&quot;strife over method&quot;) with the [[Austrian school]], whose orientation was more theoretical and aprioristic. 

== Influence in Britain and the United States ==
The historical school had a significant impact on Britain, 1860s–1930s. [[Thorold Rogers]] (1823–1890) was the Tooke Professor of Statistics and Economic Science at King&#x27;s College London, from 1859 until his death. He is best known for compiling the monumental &quot;A History of Agriculture and Prices in England from 1259 to 1793&quot; (7 vol. 1866–1902), which is still useful to scholars. [[William Ashley (economic historian)|William Ashley]] (1860–1927) introduced British scholars to the historical school as developed in Germany. In the United States the school influenced the institutional economists, such as [[Thorstein Veblen]] (1857–1929) and especially the Wisconsin school of labor history led by [[John R. Commons]] (1862–1945). More importantly, numerous aspiring economists undertook graduate studies at German universities, including [[John Bates Clark]], [[Richard T. Ely]], [[Jeremiah Jenks]], [[Simon Patten]], and [[Frank William Taussig]].

Canadian scholars influenced by the school were led by [[Harold Innis]] (1894–1952) at Toronto. His [[staples thesis]] holds that Canada&#x27;s culture, political history and economy have been decisively influenced by the exploitation and export of a series of &quot;staples&quot; such as [[fur trade|fur]], fishing, lumber, wheat, mined metals and coal. The staple thesis dominated economic history in Canada 1930s–1960s, and is still used by some.

After 1930 the historical school declined or disappeared in most economics departments. It lingered in history departments and business schools. The major influence in the 1930s and 1940s was [[Joseph Schumpeter]] with his dynamic, change-oriented, and innovation-based economics. Although his writings could be critical of the school, Schumpeter&#x27;s work on the role of innovation and entrepreneurship can be seen as a continuation of ideas originated by the historical school, especially the work of von Schmoller and Sombart. [[Alfred D. Chandler, Jr.]] (1918–2007), had a major impact on approaching business issues through historical studies.

== Members of the school ==

* [[Karl Bücher]]
* [[Bruno Hildebrand]]
* [[Georg Friedrich Knapp]]
* [[Karl Knies]]
* [[Étienne Laspeyres]]
* [[Wilhelm Roscher]]
* [[Gustav von Schmoller]]
* [[Werner Sombart]]
* [[Adolph Wagner]]
* [[Max Weber]]
* [[Karl Polanyi]]
* [[Joseph Schumpeter]]
== English school ==

Although not nearly as famous as its German counterpart, there was also an [[English historical school of economics|English historical school]], whose figures included [[Francis Bacon]] and [[Herbert Spencer]]. This school heavily critiqued the deductive approach of the classical economists, especially the writings of [[David Ricardo]]. This school revered the inductive process and called for the merging of historical fact with those of the present period. Included in this school are: [[William Whewell]], [[Richard Jones (economist)|Richard Jones]], [[Walter Bagehot]], [[Thorold Rogers]], [[Arnold Toynbee (historian, born 1852)|Arnold Toynbee]], and [[William Cunningham (economist)|William Cunningham]], to name a few.

== See also ==

* [[Freiburg school]]
* [[Historism]]
* [[Institutional economics]], a related school developed in the United States
* [[German Historical School|German Historical School of Law]]
* [[Productivity improving technologies (historical)]]

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Avtonomov, Vladimir, and Georgy Gloveli. (2015) &quot;The influence of the German Historical School on economic theory and economic thought in Russia.&quot; &quot;The German Historical School and European Economic Thought&quot;: 185+.
* Bücher, Karl (1927). &quot;Industrial Evolution.&quot; 6th ed. New York, NY: Holt.
* Backhaus, Jürgen G. (1994), ed. &quot;Gustav Schmoller and the Problems of Today&quot;. &quot;History of Economic Ideas&quot;, vols. I/1993/3, II/1994/1.
* Backhaus, Jürgen G. (1997), ed. &quot;Essays in Social Security and Taxation. Gustav von Schmoller and Adolph Wagner Reconsidered.&quot; Marburg: Metropolis.
* Backhaus, Jürgen G. (2000), ed. &quot;Karl Bücher: Theory – History – Anthropology – Non Market Economies.&quot; Marburg: Metropolis.
* Balabkins, Nicholas W. (1988). &quot;Not by theory alone...: The Economics of Gustav von Schmoller and Its Legacy to America.&quot; (Berlin: Duncker &amp; Humblot).
* Campagnolo, Gilles, and Christel Vivel. &quot;Before Schumpeter: forerunners of the theory of the entrepreneur in 1900s German political economy – Werner Sombart, Friedrich von Wieser.&quot; &quot;European Journal of the History of Economic Thought&quot; 19.6 (2012): 908–43.
* [[Ha Joon Chang|Chang, Ha-Joon]] (2002). &quot;Kicking Away the Ladder. Development Strategy in Historical Perspective.&quot; London: Anthem.
* Dorfman, Joseph. &quot;The role of the German historical school in American economic thought.&quot; &quot;American Economic Review&quot; (1955): 17–28. in JSTOR
* Grimmer-Solem, Erik (2003). &quot;The Rise of Historical Economics and Social Reform in Germany, 1864–1894.&quot; (Oxford University Press).
* Grimmer-Solem, Erik, and Roberto Romani. &quot;The historical school, 1870–1900: A cross-national reassessment.&quot; &quot;History of European Ideas&quot; 24.4–5 (1998): 267–99.
* Hauk, A. M. (2012) &quot;Methodology of the Social Sciences, Ethics, and Economics in the Newer Historical School: From Max Weber and Rickert to Sombart and Rothacker&quot; Ed. Peter Koslowski. Springer Science &amp; Business Media.
* Hodgson, Geoffrey M. (2001). &quot;How economics forgot history. The problem of historical specificity in social science.&quot; London – New York: Routledge.
* Kadish, Alon (2012). &quot;Historians, Economists, and Economic History&quot; pp. 3–35 excerpt
* Koslowski, Peter, ed. (2013). &quot;The Theory of Capitalism in the German Economic Tradition: Historism, Ordo-Liberalism, Critical Theory, Solidarism&quot;. Springer Science &amp; Business Media.
* Lindenfeld, David F. (1993). &quot;The Myth of the Older Historical School of Economics.&quot; &quot;Central European History&quot; 26#4: 405–16.
* Pearson, Heath. &quot;Was there really a German historical school of economics?.&quot; &quot;History of Political Economy&quot; 31.3 (1999): 547–62.
* Reinert, Erik (2007). &quot;How Rich Countries Got Rich ... and Why Poor Countries Stay Poor&quot;. New York: Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers.
* Roscher, Wilhelm. &quot;Principles of Political Economy.&quot; 2 vols. From the 13th (1877) German edition. Chicago: Callaghan.
* Schumpeter, J. A. (1984). &quot;History of Economic Analysis&quot;. London: Routledge.
* Seligman, Edwin A. (1925). &quot;Essays in Economics.&quot; New York: Macmillan.
* Shionoya, Yuichi (2001), ed. &quot;The German Historical School: The Historical and Ethical Approach to Economics.&quot; (Routledge).
* Shionoya, Yuichi (2005), &quot;The Soul of the German Historical School&quot;. Springer.
* Tribe, Keith (1988) &quot;Governing Economy. The Reformation of German Economic Discourse&quot; (Cambridge University Press).
* Tribe, Keith (1995) &quot;Strategies of Economic Order. German Economic Discourse 1750–1950&quot; (Cambridge University Press) (Republished 2006)

== External links ==
* New School for Social Research</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1366712" start="4" end="41" title="Historical school of economics" label="German historical school of economics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220363" wikidata="Q219218" url="?curid=220363" title="TI">
<text>TI, ti, and variants may refer to:
== Arts and entertainment ==
* Ti/Si, the seventh syllable in the solfège technique
* The International (&quot;Dota 2&quot;), an esports tournament
* &quot;Twilight Imperium&quot;, a game

==Businesses and organizations==
* TI-class supertankers, ships operated by Tankers International 
* Texas Instruments, an American electronics company
* Telecom Italia, an Italian telecommunications company
* TI Group, previously Tube Investments, an English engineering company 
* Therapeutics Initiative, a medication evaluation organization
* Tiger Inn, a Princeton University eating club
* Toastmasters International, a public speaking organization
* Former Tol Air, IATA code
* Tailwind Airlines, IATA code
* Transparency International, anti-corruption organisation
* Treasure Island Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, US

==People==
* Ti, a high-status official during the Fifth Dynasty of Egypt
* Ti. for Tiberius, a Roman given name
* T.I. (born 1980), American rapper
* TI, post-nominal initials used by awardees of Tamgha-e-Imtiaz, a Pakistani honour
* &quot;Targeted individual&quot;, person claiming to be subject to &quot;gang stalking&quot;
* Ti, Bonnie Nettles, religious leader

==Places==
* Ti, Oklahoma, US
* Thursday Island, Torres Strait
* Ticino, a canton (federated state) of Switzerland

==Science, technology, and mathematics==

===Biology and medicine===
* Ti or Tī, a generic name in Polynesian languages for plants of the genus &quot;Cordyline&quot;, including:
** &quot;Cordyline fruticosa&quot;, Tī, Tī pore (Māori), Kī (Hawaiian)
** &quot;Cordyline australis&quot; (Tī kōuka or Cabbage tree, New Zealand)
** &quot;Cordyline banksii&quot; (Tī ngahere or Forest cabbage tree, New Zealand)
** &quot;Cordyline indivisa&quot; (Tī toī, tōī or Mountain cabbage tree, New Zealand)
** &quot;Cordyline obtecta&quot; (Tī, Norfolk Island cabbage tree, Three Kings cabbage tree, Norfolk Island and New Zealand)
** &quot;Cordyline pumilio&quot; (Tī rauriki, Tī koraha or Dwarf cabbage tree, New Zealand)
* Therapeutic index

===Computing===
* Ti (prefix symbol), of interim unit tebi; e.g. Tib for tebibit

===Other uses in science, technology, and mathematics===
* Topological insulator
* Titanium, symbol Ti, a chemical element
* Truncated icosahedron

==Other uses==
* Ti (concept), a term meaning &quot;substance&quot; (體) in Chinese
* TI (cuneiform), a sign in cuneiform writing
* Ti, Old Swedish spelling of Týr, deity of Norse mythology
* Tigrinya language (ISO 639-1 code &quot;ti&quot;)
* ti (digraph), the characters 
* Tenant inducement, in commercial real estate

==See also==

* Di (disambiguation) for several Chinese concepts; &quot;Ti&quot; is the Wade–Giles equivalent of &quot;Di&quot;
* TL (disambiguation)
* T1 (disambiguation)
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219218" start="0" end="2" title="TI" label="TI"/>
<link wikidata="Q219218" start="4" end="6" title="TI" label="ti"/>
<link wikidata="Q159563" start="101" end="108" title="solfège" label="solfège"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334740" start="121" end="159" title="The International (Dota 2)" label="The International (&amp;quot;Dota 2&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542535" start="191" end="208" title="Twilight Imperium" label="Twilight Imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q132297" start="259" end="279" title="TI-class supertanker" label="TI-class supertanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="325" end="342" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q144617" start="378" end="392" title="Telecom Italia" label="Telecom Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670476" start="434" end="442" title="TI Group" label="TI Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190823" start="507" end="530" title="Therapeutics Initiative" label="Therapeutics Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801420" start="571" end="580" title="Tiger Inn" label="Tiger Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q917036" start="619" end="645" title="Toastmasters International" label="Toastmasters International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814076" start="687" end="694" title="Tol Air" label="Tol Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q660062" start="708" end="725" title="Tailwind Airlines" label="Tailwind Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="739" end="765" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360313" start="798" end="830" title="Treasure Island Hotel and Casino" label="Treasure Island Hotel and Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q269237" start="898" end="920" title="Fifth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Fifth Dynasty of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21485162" start="931" end="939" title="Tiberius (praenomen)" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q214227" start="962" end="966" title="T.I." label="T.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q7492141" start="1044" end="1059" title="Tamgha-e-Imtiaz" label="Tamgha-e-Imtiaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q95395615" start="1154" end="1167" title="gang stalking" label="gang stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942418" start="1180" end="1194" title="Bonnie Nettles" label="Bonnie Nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799961" start="1227" end="1239" title="Ti, Oklahoma" label="Ti, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q556632" start="1246" end="1276" title="Thursday Island, Torres Strait" label="Thursday Island, Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="1279" end="1285" title="Ticino" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543189" start="1480" end="1489" title="Cordyline" label="Cordyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717614" start="1517" end="1536" title="Cordyline fruticosa" label="Cordyline fruticosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379130" start="1588" end="1607" title="Cabbage tree (New Zealand)" label="Cordyline australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997170" start="1663" end="1680" title="Cordyline banksii" label="Cordyline banksii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170117" start="1745" end="1763" title="Cordyline indivisa" label="Cordyline indivisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170116" start="1831" end="1848" title="Cordyline obtecta" label="Cordyline obtecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170120" start="1956" end="1973" title="Cordyline pumilio" label="Cordyline pumilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q659446" start="2041" end="2058" title="Therapeutic index" label="Therapeutic index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="2078" end="2096" title="Ti (prefix symbol)" label="Ti (prefix symbol)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488689" start="2201" end="2222" title="Topological insulator" label="Topological insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="2225" end="2233" title="Titanium" label="Titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q499980" start="2267" end="2288" title="Truncated icosahedron" label="Truncated icosahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799975" start="2307" end="2319" title="Ti (concept)" label="Ti (concept)"/>
<link wikidata="Q87556496" start="2375" end="2389" title="TI (cuneiform)" label="TI (cuneiform)"/>
<link wikidata="Q172713" start="2449" end="2452" title="Týr" label="Týr"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="2481" end="2498" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14932387" start="2533" end="2545" title="ti (digraph)" label="ti (digraph)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742575" start="2565" end="2582" title="Tenant inducement" label="Tenant inducement"/>
<link wikidata="Q224258" start="2627" end="2646" title="Di (disambiguation)" label="Di (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="2699" end="2709" title="Wade–Giles" label="Wade–Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q224448" start="2741" end="2760" title="TL (disambiguation)" label="TL (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q297294" start="2763" end="2782" title="T1 (disambiguation)" label="T1 (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220366" wikidata="Q1193295" url="?curid=220366" title="Methodenstreit">
<text>Methodenstreit (German for &quot;method dispute&quot;), in intellectual history beyond German-language discourse, was an economics controversy commenced in the 1880s and persisting for more than a decade, between that field&#x27;s Austrian School and the (German) Historical School. The debate concerned the place of general theory in social science and the use of history in explaining the dynamics of human action. It also touched on policy and political issues, including the roles of the individual and state. Nevertheless, methodological concerns were uppermost and some early members of the Austrian School also defended a form of welfare state, as prominently advocated by the Historical School.

When the debate opened, Carl Menger developed the Austrian School&#x27;s standpoint, and Gustav von Schmoller defended the approach of the Historical School.

(In German-speaking countries, the original of this Germanism is not specific to the one controversy—which is likely to be specified as &quot;Methodenstreit der Nationalökonomie&quot;, i.e. &quot;&quot;Methodenstreit&quot; of national economics&quot;.)

== History ==

=== Background ===
The Historical School contended that economists could develop new and better social laws from the collection and study of statistics and historical materials, and distrusted theories not derived from historical experience. Thus, the German Historical School focused on specific dynamic institutions as the largest variable in changes in political economy. The Historical School were themselves reacting against materialist determinism, the idea that human action could, and would (once science advanced enough), be explained as physical and chemical reactions.

The Austrian School, beginning with the work of Carl Menger in the 1860s, argued against this (in &quot;Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre&quot;, English title: &quot;Principles of Economics&quot;), that economics was the work of philosophical logic and could only ever be about developing rules from first principles — seeing human motives and social interaction as far too complex to be amenable to statistical analysis — and purporting to deduce universally valid precepts from human actions.

=== Menger and the German Historical School ===
The first move was when Carl Menger attacked Schmoller and the German Historical School, in his 1883 book &quot;Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences, with Special Reference to Political Economics (Untersuchungen über die Methode der Socialwissenschaften, und der politischen Ökonomie insbesondere).&quot; Menger thought the best method of studying economics was through reason and finding general theories which applied to broad areas. Menger, as did the other Austrians, concentrated upon the subjective, atomistic nature of economics. He argued that the foundations for economics were built upon assumption of self-interest, evaluation on the margin, and incomplete knowledge. He said aggregative, collective ideas could not have adequate foundation unless they rested upon individual components.

The direct attack on the German Historical School lead Schmoller to respond quickly with an unfavourable and quite hostile review of Menger&#x27;s book. Menger accepted the challenge and replied in a passionate pamphlet, written in the form of letters to a friend, in which he (according to Hayek) &quot;ruthlessly demolished Schmoller&#x27;s position&quot;. The encounter between the masters was soon imitated by their disciples. A degree of hostility not often equaled in scientific controversy developed.

== Consequences ==

The term &quot;Austrian school of economics&quot; came into existence as a result of the &quot;Methodenstreit,&quot; when Schmoller used it in an unfavourable review of one of Menger&#x27;s later books, intending to convey an impression of backwardness and obscurantism of Austria compared to the more modern Prussians. A serious consequence of the hostile debate was that Schmoller went so far as to declare publicly that members of the &quot;abstract&quot; school were unfit to fill a teaching position in a German university, and his influence was quite sufficient to make this equivalent to a complete exclusion of all adherents to Menger&#x27;s doctrines from academic positions in Germany. The result was that even thirty years after the close of the controversy Germany was still less affected by the new ideas now spreading elsewhere, than any other academically important country in the world.

== See also ==
* Economic methodology
* Philosophy of mathematics
* Philosophy of science
* Positive economics
* Unreasonable ineffectiveness of mathematics
* Positivismusstreit
* Werturteilsstreit

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;Principles of Economics&quot; by Carl Menger
* &quot;Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences with Special Reference to Economics&quot; by Carl Menger
* &quot;Epistemological Problems of Economics&quot; by Ludwig von Mises
* &quot;The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics&quot; by Ludwig von Mises</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="121" end="130" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="231" end="246" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366712" start="264" end="281" title="Historical school of economics" label="Historical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="637" end="650" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q84177" start="728" end="739" title="Carl Menger" label="Carl Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q62833" start="793" end="813" title="Gustav von Schmoller" label="Gustav von Schmoller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614050" start="867" end="892" title="List of countries and territories where German is an official language" label="German-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q764974" start="915" end="924" title="List of German expressions in English" label="Germanism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1562" end="1585" title="Determinism#Determinism in Western tradition" label="materialist determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q84177" start="1761" end="1772" title="Carl Menger" label="Carl Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338113" start="1882" end="1905" title="Principles of Economics (Menger)" label="Principles of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q84177" start="2284" end="2295" title="Carl Menger" label="Carl Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q910816" start="2904" end="2928" title="marginalism" label="evaluation on the margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q370163" start="3863" end="3875" title="obscurantism" label="obscurantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="3879" end="3886" title="Cisleithania" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="3915" end="3922" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473359" start="4527" end="4547" title="Economic methodology" label="Economic methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180536" start="4550" end="4575" title="Philosophy of mathematics" label="Philosophy of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="4578" end="4599" title="Philosophy of science" label="Philosophy of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233295" start="4602" end="4620" title="Positive economics" label="Positive economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897351" start="4623" end="4666" title="Unreasonable ineffectiveness of mathematics" label="Unreasonable ineffectiveness of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363695" start="4669" end="4687" title="Positivismusstreit" label="Positivismusstreit"/>
<link wikidata="Q918562" start="4690" end="4707" title="Werturteilsstreit" label="Werturteilsstreit"/>
<link wikidata="Q84177" start="4788" end="4799" title="Carl Menger" label="Carl Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="4974" end="4990" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Ludwig von Mises"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220368" wikidata="Q32919983" url="?curid=220368" title="Muenster">
<text>Muenster may refer to:

* Münster, Germany
* Muenster, Saskatchewan
* Muenster, Texas
* Muenster cheese

== See also ==
* Munster (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q32919983" start="0" end="8" title="Muenster" label="Muenster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="26" end="33" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201181" start="45" end="67" title="Muenster, Saskatchewan" label="Muenster, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q981829" start="70" end="85" title="Muenster, Texas" label="Muenster, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931973" start="88" end="103" title="Muenster cheese" label="Muenster cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q225163" start="122" end="146" title="Munster (disambiguation)" label="Munster (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220369" wikidata="Q558759" url="?curid=220369" title="Ignacio Zaragoza">
<text>Ignacio Zaragoza Seguín (March 24, 1829 – September 8, 1862) was a Mexican Army officer and politician. He is best known for leading a Mexican army of 3,791 men which defeated a 5,730-strong force of French troops at the battle of Puebla on May 5, 1862 during the second French intervention in Mexico. The Mexican victory is celebrated annually as Cinco de Mayo.

==Early life==

Zaragoza was born in the Mexican province of Texas, in the village of Bahía del Espíritu Santo, in the state of Coahuila y Tejas (now Goliad, Texas, in the United States) on March 24, 1829. He was the son of Miguel G. Zaragoza and María de Jesús Seguín, who was a niece of Erasmo Seguín and cousin of Juan Seguín. His father met his mother while on duty and stationed at Bexar in 1825. This was not a particularly wealthy upbringing for Zaragoza, until the year 1830, when Miguel decided to capitalize on the U.S. government&#x27;s land sale in what would later become the state of Texas. Miguel was able to procure the land and begin life as a rancher, which at the time was more lucrative than his average military job. The Zaragoza family moved to Matamoros in 1834 and then to Monterrey in 1844, where young Ignacio entered a seminary. By 1846, Zaragoza grew tired of his seminary life, instead wishing to pursue his military endeavors as a cadet for the Mexican army in the Mexican American War. Prior to joining the military, he married Maria Rosa de la Riva Palacio, daughter of lawyer and politician Mariano Riva Palacio and granddaughter of Vicente Guerrero, the second president of Mexico, in 1851. They had one son, Ignacio Esteban de Zaragoza y Riva Palacio (1853–1911).

==Military career==
At this point in history, Mexico had already declared war on the United States for admitting Texas as a State, which had earlier achieved her independence from Mexico (with independence later being achieved by also Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua. Seeing this, Zaragoza volunteered to be a cadet for the Mexican army in this conflict. The Mexican army rejected his offer and as a result of this he was unable to enlist. Despite this rejection, Zaragoza was not deterred. Between the years 1846 and 1850, Zaragoza spent his time working in the mercantile business. In 1852, as a member of the Mexican Liberal Party, Zaragoza got his first government opportunity when he was offered a position in the national guard. Following this, in 1853, Zaragoza was able to join a militia branch of the Mexican army and in doing so obtained the rank of sergeant. Zaragoza joined the army supporting the cause of the Liberal Party, in opposition to dictator Antonio López de Santa Anna.

Zaragoza’s first major experience as a captain in the military was when he led the liberal army against general Santa Anna in 1854. This conflict was known as the liberal Revolution of Ayutla, and it lasted until 1856. Zaragoza and the Mexican liberals were successful in defeating Santa Anna in this revolution. This was the first significant victory of Zaragoza’s military career. This victory of Zaragoza’s, led to significant political reform in Mexico, and usurping in a new democratic form of rule. The re-establishment of a constitutional democratic government in Mexico fueled the increase in political turmoil that took place from 1856 to 1857. By the beginning of 1857, Zaragoza was fighting in a Mexican civil war against conservative party leaders, Leandro Márquez and Miguel Miramón. Zaragoza was so committed to his cause that he even missed his wedding, in order to stay and lead his army to victory. After this promising string of military victories, Zaragoza won the war on December 22, 1860, by defeating the conservative forces in the battle of Calpulalpan. Soon after this victory, Zaragoza took up a political position after being offered one by Mexican president Benito Juárez.

=== Political career ===
In the year 1861, through appointment by then president of Mexico Benito Juárez, Zaragoza served as the minister of war and navy for the liberal party in the Mexican parliament. The role of the minister of war and navy entailed controlling where and how the Mexican military and navy was deployed around the globe, and for what reasons and in what capacity. With his success in the military, Zaragoza was recognizably good at this job. During his short time in office, Zaragoza was able to help president Juárez negotiate a two year moratorium on Mexico’s debt to France. In 1862, with the abrupt death of his wife and the need for generals in the military to help his country fight France in the Mexican east, Zaragoza decided to resign in order to lead the Army of the East (&quot;Ejército de Oriente&quot;) against the Europeans, in particular the French, who were using the Mexican external debt as a pretext under the Treaty of London concluded earlier that year to invade Mexico. After this resignation, Zaragoza would never again hold political office.

When the forces of Napoleon III invaded in the French intervention in Mexico, Zaragoza had sole command over Mexican forces for the first time and battled the French at Acultzingo on April 28, 1862, where he was forced to withdraw in the face of superior forces.

===Defense at Puebla===
The Battle of Puebla is the most important and influential part of Zaragoza’s legacy. This battle was a struggle that took place on May 5, 1862. On this day, in Puebla, Mexico, Napoleon III of France had deployed part of his army to take this part of Mexico as a satellite state of France. In response, Liberal president of Mexico Benito Juárez deployed Zaragoza and his forces. Zaragoza fell back to the favorable defensive forts outside of the city of Puebla, and with his ragtag army, beat back repeated French assaults upon the Mexican positions at Fort Loreto and Fort Guadalupe. He held firm ordering several counter attacks and held the gates to the capital. He then took the initiative and ordered a general counter attack pushing the French in a general retreat to Orizaba with Zaragoza&#x27;s men in pursuit. After all was said and done, Zaragoza and his forces won the day-long battle, losing approximately ninety men compared to the estimated 1,000 French casualties. After this victory, Zaragoza was quickly elevated to the status of Mexican war hero. This victory led to the establishment of the renowned holiday Cinco De Mayo.

==Death==
Shortly after his famous victory, Zaragoza was struck with typhoid fever, of which he died at the age of 33. His army would never have a commander equal to him as they suffered defeats later on. He was buried in San Fernando Cemetery in Mexico City. He was later exhumed and transferred to Puebla, while his former tomb became a monument. When the French left Mexico in defeat, Zaragoza became a legend as one of the few Mexican generals to have success in battle against the then-greatest army in the world.

==Legacy==

His famous quotation, &quot;Las armas nacionales se han cubierto de gloria&quot; (&quot;The national arms have been covered with glory&quot;), is used to remember the battle, and comes from the single-line letter he wrote to his superior, President Juárez, informing him of the victory. The quotation was included, along with Zaragoza&#x27;s likeness, on Mexican 500-peso banknotes from 1995 to 2010 (Series D).

There is a municipality in the Mexican state of Chihuahua that is named after Zaragoza.

There are urban localities named after Zaragoza in the Mexican states of Chiapas, Chihuahua, Puebla, and Tlaxcala.

Most Mexican states have at least one rural locality named after Zaragoza; there are at least 52 rural localities named after Zaragoza as of 2021.

Calzada Ignacio Zaragoza is one of the main avenues of Mexico City, crossing the city from center to the southeast, and at its intersection with Avenida Río Churubusco it becomes Mexican Federal Highway 150D. There is also a subway station on Line 1 of the Mexico City Metro named after Zaragoza.

In the film &quot;Cinco de Mayo La Batalla&quot; (2013), Zaragoza was portrayed by Kuno Becker.

==See also==
* Benito Juárez

==References==
==Sources==
*Texas General Land Office, “The Texas Hero of Cinco De Mayo: Ignacio Zaragoza, and the Origins of the Celebration.” Medium, Medium, April 29, 2020
*Strong, W.F. &quot;The Hero of Cinco De Mayo&quot;. &quot;Texas Co-op Power Magazine&quot;, May 2021.
*Herz, May, et al. &quot;General Ignacio Zaragoza: Cinco de Mayo Hero&quot;. &quot;Inside Mexico&quot;, January 1, 1962.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q558759" start="0" end="23" title="Ignacio Zaragoza" label="Ignacio Zaragoza Seguín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862975" start="67" end="79" title="Mexican Army" label="Mexican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="200" end="206" title="Second French Empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061228" start="221" end="237" title="battle of Puebla" label="battle of Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="264" end="300" title="second French intervention in Mexico" label="second French intervention in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q660447" start="348" end="361" title="Cinco de Mayo" label="Cinco de Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315810" start="405" end="430" title="Mexican Texas" label="Mexican province of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241532" start="450" end="474" title="Presidio La Bahia" label="Bahía del Espíritu Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="492" end="508" title="Coahuila y Tejas" label="Coahuila y Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982494" start="514" end="527" title="Goliad, Texas" label="Goliad, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="536" end="549" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384934" start="653" end="666" title="Erasmo Seguín" label="Erasmo Seguín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011803" start="681" end="692" title="Juan Seguín" label="Juan Seguín"/>
<link wikidata="Q738353" start="1131" end="1140" title="Matamoros, Tamaulipas" label="Matamoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="1161" end="1170" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="1210" end="1218" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="1359" end="1379" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762392" start="1488" end="1508" title="Mariano Riva Palacio" label="Mariano Riva Palacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q315618" start="1530" end="1546" title="Vicente Guerrero" label="Vicente Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="2002" end="2007" title="cadet" label="cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540915" start="2615" end="2628" title="Liberalism in Mexico" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="2656" end="2683" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q538766" start="2857" end="2877" title="Revolution of Ayutla" label="Revolution of Ayutla"/>
<link wikidata="Q900406" start="3116" end="3132" title="political reform" label="political reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="3393" end="3410" title="Reform War" label="Mexican civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="3871" end="3884" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366487" start="4049" end="4062" title="Liberal Party (Mexico)" label="liberal party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484825" start="4070" end="4088" title="Congress of the Union" label="Mexican parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996272" start="4835" end="4851" title="Treaty of London (1861)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q168559" start="4954" end="4970" title="Political officer (military)" label="political office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="4992" end="5004" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="5020" end="5049" title="Second French intervention in Mexico" label="French intervention in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q286349" start="5142" end="5152" title="Acultzingo" label="Acultzingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="5715" end="5721" title="Puebla, Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q59664403" start="5814" end="5825" title="Fort Loreto" label="Fort Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q59684009" start="5830" end="5844" title="Fort Guadalupe" label="Fort Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q993904" start="6035" end="6042" title="Orizaba" label="Orizaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q660447" start="6388" end="6401" title="Cinco de Mayo" label="Cinco De Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="6473" end="6486" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405275" start="6626" end="6647" title="Panteón de San Fernando" label="San Fernando Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="6651" end="6662" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="7291" end="7298" title="Mexican peso" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="7303" end="7307" title="Mexican peso" label="peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991362" start="7360" end="7372" title="Ignacio Zaragoza Municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912963" start="7380" end="7393" title="List of states of Mexico" label="Mexican state"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="7397" end="7406" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="7511" end="7518" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79923" start="7531" end="7537" title="Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q82681" start="7543" end="7551" title="Tlaxcala" label="Tlaxcala"/>
<link wikidata="Q28816470" start="7881" end="7909" title="Mexican Federal Highway 150D" label="Mexican Federal Highway 150D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356989" start="7927" end="7941" title="Zaragoza metro station (Mexico City)" label="subway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q735042" start="7959" end="7976" title="Mexico City Metro" label="Mexico City Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q374038" start="8083" end="8094" title="Kuno Becker" label="Kuno Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="8112" end="8125" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220378" wikidata="Q242270" url="?curid=220378" title="Hecataeus of Miletus">
<text>Hecataeus of Miletus (; ; c. 550 – c. 476 BC), son of Hegesander, was an early Greek historian and geographer.

== Biography ==

Hailing from a very wealthy family, he lived in Miletus, then under Persian rule in the satrapy of Lydia. He was active during the time of the Greco-Persian Wars. After having travelled extensively, he settled in his native city, where he occupied a high position, and devoted his time to the composition of geographical and historical works. When Aristagoras, acting tyrant of Miletus, held a council of leading Ionians at Miletus to organize a revolt against Persian rule, Hecataeus tried in vain to dissuade his countrymen from the undertaking. In 494 BC, when the defeated Ionians were obliged to sue for terms, he was one of the ambassadors to the Persian satrap Artaphernes, whom he persuaded to restore the constitution of the Ionic cities. Hecataeus is the first known Greek historian and was one of the first classical writers to mention the Celtic and Illyrian peoples.
He is known as the &quot;Father of Geography&quot;.

==Works==

Two works by Hecateus are known: Περίοδος γῆς (&quot;Periodos ges&quot;, &quot;Journey round the Earth&quot; or &quot;World Survey&quot;) and Γενεαλογίαι (&quot;Genealogiai&quot;) or the Ἱστορία (&quot;Historia&quot;). However, they only survive in fragments.

=== &quot;Periodos ges&quot; ===

&quot;Periodos ges&quot; was written in two books, the first on Europe, the second on Asia, in which he included Africa. The book is a comprehensive work on geography beginning at the Straits of Gibraltar and going clockwise ending at the Atlantic coast of Morocco following the coast of the Mediterranean and Black Sea. Hecataeaus provides information about the people and places that would be encountered on a coastal voyage between these points, as well as the inhabitants of the various Mediterranean islands, the Scythians, Persia, India, Egypt and Nubia. Over 300 fragments of this work are preserved, mostly as citations for place names in the work of Stephanus of Byzantium.

=== &quot;Genealogies&quot; ===

Hecataeus&#x27;s other work was a book on mythography in four books. Less than forty fragments remain. He applied a more skeptical approach to the traditions of families who claimed to be descended from gods.

One fragment that has survived is the opening &quot;Hecataeus of Miletus thus speaks: I write what I deem true; for the stories of the Greeks are manifold and seem to me ridiculous.&quot;

Herodotus (II, 143) tells a story of a visit by Hecataeus to an Egyptian temple at Thebes. It recounts how the priests showed Hecataeus a series of statues in the temple&#x27;s inner sanctum, each one supposedly set up by the high priest of each generation. Hecataeus, says Herodotus, had seen the same spectacle, after mentioning that he traced his descent, through sixteen generations, from a god. The Egyptians compared his genealogy to their own, as recorded by the statues; since the generations of their high priests had numbered three hundred and forty-five, all mortal men, they refused to believe Hecataeus&#x27;s claim of descent from a god. Historian James Shotwell has called this encounter with the antiquity of Egypt an influence on Hecataeus&#x27;s scepticism: he recognized that oral history is untrustworthy.

=== Map ===

Besides his written works, Hecataeus is also credited with improving the map of Anaximander, which he saw as a disc encircled by Oceanus.

== Summary ==

He was probably the first of the logographers to attempt a serious prose history and to employ critical method to distinguish myth from historical fact, though he accepts Homer and other poets as trustworthy authorities. Herodotus, though he contradicts his statements at least once, is indebted to Hecataeus for the concept of a prose history.

==References ==
==Sources==
*&quot;Hecataei Milesii Fragmenta&quot;: Scylacis Caryandensis Periplus 1831 edition of Hecateus fragments from Google Books

Attribution

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q242270" start="0" end="20" title="Hecataeus of Miletus" label="Hecataeus of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="79" end="84" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="85" end="94" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q901402" start="99" end="109" title="geographer" label="geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="177" end="184" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="197" end="204" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832039" start="228" end="233" title="Lydia (satrapy)" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="272" end="290" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Greco-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q318627" start="477" end="488" title="Aristagoras" label="Aristagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="542" end="547" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208261" start="575" end="581" title="Ionian Revolt" label="revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="790" end="796" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q312893" start="797" end="808" title="Artaphernes" label="Artaphernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="912" end="921" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="980" end="984" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="991" end="999" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="1552" end="1572" title="Straits of Gibraltar" label="Straits of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16726164" start="1583" end="1592" title="clockwise" label="clockwise"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1607" end="1621" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1625" end="1632" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1660" end="1673" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1678" end="1687" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q530253" start="1859" end="1880" title="Mediterranean islands" label="Mediterranean islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="1886" end="1895" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1897" end="1903" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1905" end="1910" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1912" end="1917" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="1922" end="1927" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="2000" end="2011" title="place names" label="place names"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="2027" end="2049" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="2127" end="2138" title="mythography" label="mythography"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2484" end="2493" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2548" end="2556" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="2567" end="2573" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236629" start="3146" end="3160" title="James Shotwell" label="James Shotwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42458" start="3404" end="3415" title="Anaximander" label="Anaximander"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="3453" end="3460" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133078" start="3511" end="3523" title="Logographer (history)" label="logographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3649" end="3654" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220379" wikidata="Q3306168" url="?curid=220379" title="C. Everett Koop">
<text>Charles Everett Koop (October 14, 1916 – February 25, 2013) was an American pediatric surgeon and public health administrator who served as the 13th surgeon general of the United States under President Ronald Reagan from 1982 to 1989. According to the Associated Press, &quot;Koop was the only surgeon general to become a household name&quot; due to his frequent public presence around the HIV/AIDS crisis of the 1980s.

Koop was known for his work on tobacco use, AIDS, and abortion, and for his support of the rights of children with disabilities.

==Early life and education==
Koop was born in Brooklyn, New York, the only child of John Everett Koop (1883–1972), a banker and descendant of 17th-century Dutch settlers, and Helen (née Apel) Koop (1894–1970). He attended and graduated from Flatbush School. In 1937, he earned his Bachelor of Arts in zoology degree from Dartmouth College, where he was given the nickname &quot;Chick&quot; (occasionally used for his first name, Charles, but here an allusion to a chicken coop). His interest in medicine followed a year in the hospital after a childhood skiing accident and brain hemorrhage. He earned his MD degree from Cornell Medical College in 1941 and Doctor of Science degree in medicine from the University of Pennsylvania in 1947.

==Medical career==
From 1946 to 1981, Koop was the surgeon-in-chief at the Children&#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). Koop was able to establish the nation&#x27;s first neonatal surgical intensive care unit there in 1956. He helped establish the biliary atresia program at CHOP when Japanese surgeon Morio Kasai came to work with him in the 1970s. He also established the pediatric surgery fellowship training program at CHOP. During his tenure there he graduated 35 residents and 14 foreign fellows, many of whom went on to become professors of pediatric surgery, directors of divisions of pediatric surgery, and surgeons-in-chief of children&#x27;s hospitals.

Koop became a professor of pediatric surgery in 1959 and professor of pediatrics in 1971 at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.

While a surgeon in Philadelphia, Koop performed groundbreaking surgical procedures on conjoined twins, invented techniques which today are commonly used for infant surgery, and saved the lives of countless children who otherwise might have been allowed to die. He invented anesthetic and surgical techniques for small bodies and metabolisms and participated in the separation of several sets of conjoined twins whose condition other physicians at the time considered hopeless. He first gained international recognition in 1957 by the separation of two female pygopagus infants (conjoined at the pelvis) and then, again, in 1974 by the separation of two ischiopagus twins (conjoined at the spine) sharing a liver, colon, and parts of the intestines with their entire trunks merged.

Koop was active in publishing articles in the medical literature. Koop later wrote that: Koop helped rectify this by publishing his own findings and results. Additionally, he became the first editor of the &quot;Journal of Pediatric Surgery&quot; when it was founded in 1966.

In contrast to his years as surgeon general, when it was his policies and speeches that had bearing on other people, his years as an operating pediatric surgeon involved a more individualized, direct, hands-on effect on others. During the course of his long career, for example, he performed some seventeen thousand inguinal hernia repairs and over seven thousand orchidopexies (surgery for correcting undescended testicle). He developed new procedures, such as the colon interposition graft for correcting esophageal atresia (congenital lack of continuity of the esophagus) or ventriculoperitoneal shunts for treatment of hydrocephalus (accumulation of excessive cerebral spinal fluid in and around the brain causing neurological problems). He also tackled many difficult cases ranging from childhood cancer to surgeries done on conjoined twins, of which he and his colleagues operated upon ten pairs during his 35-year tenure. In all he operated on many children and babies with congenital defects &#x27;incompatible with life but amenable to surgical correction&#x27;.

In 1976, Koop wrote &quot;The Right to Live, The Right to Die&quot;, setting down his strong opposition to abortion and euthanasia. Koop also took some time off from his surgical practice to make a series of films with conservative Christian apologists Frank Schaeffer and his father Francis Schaeffer in 1978, entitled &quot;Whatever Happened to the Human Race?&quot; based on the book of the same title that was previously written by the elder Schaeffer. Frank Schaeffer and his associate, Jim Buchfuehrer provided a private, five hour screening to U.S. Rep. Jack Kemp and wife Joanne on their home that, according to Frank Schaeffer&#x27;s account of the late evening and early morning event in his book &quot;Crazy for God&quot;, led to both the Schaeffers and Koop obtaining &quot;...access to everyone in the Republican Party&quot;.

President Ronald Reagan, shortly after his first inauguration, appointed Koop Deputy Assistant Secretary for Health in February 1981. It was understood that Reagan would later nominate Koop to be surgeon general.

==Surgeon General of the United States==

As expected, Koop was nominated to be Surgeon General of the United States by Reagan later in 1981. Many liberal politicians and women&#x27;s groups opposed the nomination because of Koop&#x27;s very conservative views and strong anti-abortion beliefs. His nomination was confirmed by the United States Senate on November 16, 1981, by a vote of 60–24. He was sworn into office on January 21 the following year.

===Abortion===
Although Koop was opposed to abortion on personal and religious grounds, he declined to state that abortion procedures performed by qualified medical professionals posed a substantial health risk to the women whose pregnancies were being terminated, despite political pressure to endorse such a position.

====Koop Report====
Koop, an opponent of abortion, resisted pressure from the Reagan administration in 1987 to prepare a report stating that abortion was psychologically harmful to women. He said it was not a public health issue but a moral one. Koop assigned an assistant, George Walter, the task of researching the matter. Walter obtained a list of articles from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), authored mainly by CDC abortion-surveillance staff, and consulted with Alan Guttmacher Institute personnel. Walter wrote a draft report on his findings and gave it to Koop.

In a January 10, 1989, letter to Reagan, Koop said there was insufficient evidence to substantiate issuing the finding desired by the administration. He also commented about how some of the president&#x27;s advisers thought that &quot;it was a foregone conclusion that the negative health effects of abortion on women were so overwhelming that the evidence would force the reversal of &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;&quot;.

Koop did not present the draft report to Reagan and claimed he never approved it. In March 1989, the &quot;Koop Report&quot; became public after it was subpoenaed and became part of a Congressional subcommittee hearing. Although there were allegations that the report had not been released previously because it was biased, the document contained all arguments on both sides of the issue.

===Tobacco===
In his 1988 &quot;Report of the Surgeon General&quot;, it was reported that nicotine has an addictiveness similar to that of heroin or cocaine. Koop&#x27;s report was somewhat unexpected, especially by those who expected him to maintain the status quo in regard to his office&#x27;s position on tobacco products. During his tenure, in 1984, Congress passed legislation providing new, rotated health warning labels on cigarette packs and required advertising to include the labels. Those labels remain unchanged today. The FDA announced new labels containing graphic depictions of smoking-caused illness and death, but they were put on hold pending the outcome of the tobacco industry&#x27;s legal challenges. Koop challenged Americans in 1984 to &quot;create a smoke-free society in the United States by the year 2000.&quot; As Surgeon General, he released eight reports on the health consequences of tobacco use, including the first report on the health consequences of involuntary tobacco smoke exposure. During Koop&#x27;s tenure as Surgeon General, smoking rates in the United States declined significantly from 38% to 27%.

===AIDS===

Koop was Surgeon General when public health authorities first began to take notice of AIDS. For his first four years in office, Koop, the nation&#x27;s top health officer, was prevented from addressing this health crisis for reasons he insisted were never apparent to him but that were no doubt political. Koop wrote the official U.S. policy on the disease, and in 1988 he took unprecedented action in mailing AIDS information to every U.S. household. Health advocates and organizations expressed dissatisfaction with the focus on same-sex activity and anal sexual intercourse as primary vectors for disease transmission. Surgeon General Koop maintained that these activities posed significantly higher risks than other transmission methods. In addition, some religious groups raised concerns about the pamphlet’s candid discussion of sexual practices and its promotion of condom use, leading to calls for Koop&#x27;s resignation. Koop also infuriated some former supporters by advocating sex education in schools, possibly as early as the third grade, including later instruction regarding the proper use of condoms to combat the spread of AIDS. While a straightforward telling to the public about the disease was controversial, Koop was also criticized by some health activists who claimed that his office had not gone far enough to develop a cure or vaccine, reducing his office&#x27;s role in educating the public on health concerns.

===Disability===
In April 1982, a child born in Bloomington, Indiana, was diagnosed with Down syndrome as well as esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula. Six days later, after court involvement and parental discussion involving disagreement among physicians about whether or not to treat the baby or let him die, the baby died, having been denied surgical treatment to correct his esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. Baby Doe, as he would be known, became a symbol for newborns with congenital disabilities, children with disabilities, and the debate over infanticide. Koop was not initially involved with the Baby Doe case but had a special interest in it. As a pediatric surgeon in Philadelphia, he and his colleagues had operated on 475 such babies during his 35 years there, with ever-increasing survival rates. During his last eight years in active practice, Koop never lost a full-term baby upon whom he had operated to correct esophageal atresia. Due to this background, he became actively involved in championing policies to protect the rights of newborns with disabilities, which led to Congress passing the Baby Doe Amendment.

=== Style ===
These four issues, combined with Koop&#x27;s personality and his willingness to make use of mass media, brought to the office of Surgeon General a higher public profile than it previously had; he is, for instance, the first Surgeon General to have been the subject of a popular song: &quot;Promiscuous&quot; by Frank Zappa. He was interviewed by Ali G for comedic effect.

Koop was well known for his mustache-less beard and colorful bow ties. He was a vice admiral in the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps (U.S. PHSCC). During much of his day-to-day work, Koop wore the surgeon general&#x27;s U.S. PHSCC uniform, a uniform similar to that of a vice admiral&#x27;s in the U.S. Navy. During his tenure, he re-instated the daily wearing of the PHS uniform by the officers of the PHS.

==Later career==
Following his career as Surgeon General, Koop was on The Firestorm Solutions Expert Council. Koop hosted a documentary series in 1991, simply titled &quot;C. Everett Koop, M.D.&quot; It aired for six episodes on NBC.

Koop and other investors established drkoop.com in 1997, during the dot-com bubble. This medical information website was one of the first major online sources of health information. Critical review of the site content revealed that many of the private care listings, medicinal recommendations, and medical trial referrals were paid advertisements. The company went bankrupt in 2001. Koop continued to endorse Life Alert bracelets for the elderly.

In 1999, while testifying before Congress, Koop minimized concerns from health groups about the severity of allergies relating to the use of latex gloves. It was later discovered that a company that manufactured latex gloves had previously paid Koop $650,000 for consulting work.

Koop held three professorships at Dartmouth Medical School, where he was also the senior scholar at the C. Everett Koop Institute.

==Personal life==
In early 1968, Koop&#x27;s son David was killed in a rock climbing accident on Cannon Mountain during his junior year at Dartmouth College. Koop later wrote that because of his son&#x27;s death, he thought, &quot;I might be better able to help parents of dying children, but for quite a while I felt less able, too emotionally involved. And from that time on, I could rarely discuss the death of a child without tears welling up into my eyes.&quot; Years later, he and his wife wrote a book called &quot;Sometimes Mountains Move&quot; to help others who had lost a child. Koop&#x27;s son, the Reverend Norman Koop, attended Eastern Baptist College (now Eastern University) and graduated in 1969. The following year, the elder Koop was elected to the board of trustees, becoming the first non-Baptist member of the board.

In February 2007, Elizabeth Koop, his wife of nearly 70 years, died. On April 17, 2010, he married Cora Hogue, a former staff member of Tenth Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia.

==Death and legacy==
At a November 2010 news conference, Koop spoke from a wheelchair and said that he was &quot;very, very deaf&quot; and legally blind. Koop died on February 25, 2013, at the age of 96 at his home in Hanover, New Hampshire. According to a Koop aide, he had been ill for several months and had suffered kidney failure the previous week. No official determination of cause of death has yet been announced.

Remarking on Koop&#x27;s death, American Medical Association president Jeremy Lazarus commented, &quot;Because of what he did, and the way he did it, he had a dramatic impact on public health.&quot; The Associated Press called his impact &quot;great&quot;, while &quot;The Philadelphia Inquirer&quot; called him &quot;a courageous and brilliant pediatric surgeon who pioneered techniques ... and became an outspoken surgeon general&quot;. Writing for &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, Michael Specter said, &quot;I don&#x27;t think I have ever met anyone for whom I had more respect... In this era, during which progress, facts, and science are under unrelenting siege, it is thrilling to remember that even ideologues can love the truth.&quot;

==In popular culture==
*In &quot;The Simpsons&quot; season 5, episode 1, &quot;Homer&#x27;s Barbershop Quartet&quot;, Koop is mentioned in the episode as the subject of a song sung by Homer&#x27;s group. &quot; The Simpsons &quot; season 12, episode 16 &quot;Bye Bye Nerdie&quot; features Koop as a member of the audience in the final scene, where Lisa demonstrates her findings about bullies.
* In &quot;Futurama&quot; season 4, episode 16, &quot;Three Hundred Big Boys&quot;, a brand of cigars known as &quot;Royal Kooparillo&quot; shows the likeness of Koop. Koop&#x27;s likeness appears again in season 8, episode 9, &quot;Fry Am the Egg Man&quot;, as the head on Fry&#x27;s Pez dispenser of heart attack medicine.
* In &quot;Seinfeld&quot; season 3, episode 18, &quot;The Boyfriend (Seinfeld)&quot;, Part II, Jerry likens Elaine to C. Everett Koop, because she breaks up with Keith Hernandez for being a smoker.
* In &quot;King of the Hill&quot; season 1, episode 6, &quot;Hank&#x27;s Unmentionable Problem&quot;, Peggy watches an advertisement on TV featuring C. Everett Koop. Later she dreams of Hank&#x27;s funeral, in which C. Everett Koop is giving the eulogy. In season 9, episode 3, &quot;Death Buys a Timeshare&quot;, Cotton asks Bill who he thinks is uglier, Hank&#x27;s wife or C. Everett Koop
* In &quot;Psych&quot; season 2, episode 7, &quot;If You&#x27;re So Smart, Then Why Are You Dead?&quot;, the Headmaster of a prestigious high school explains that Shawn and Gus beat out C. Everett Koop for the position of annual guest lecturer, in which they taught a class on paranormal studies. According to the Headmaster, &quot;[Koop] was crushed he didn&#x27;t get it.&quot;
*In Golden Girls season 4, episode 15, “Valentine’s Day”

==Awards and honors==

* Public Health Service Distinguished Service Medal
* Public Health Service Meritorious Service Medal
* Surgeon General&#x27;s Medallion
* Surgeon General&#x27;s Exemplary Service Medal
* Public Health Service Citation Medal
* Public Health Service Outstanding Unit Citation
* Presidential Medal of Freedom (1995)
* Public Health Service Foreign Duty Award
* Public Health Service Regular Corps Ribbon
* Légion d&#x27;Honneur (1980)
* Order of Merit of Duarte, Sánchez and Mella, the highest award of the Dominican Republic
* Association of Military Surgeons of the United States with gold star
* Denis Brown Gold Medal by the British Association of Paediatric Surgeons
* William E. Ladd Gold Medal of the American Academy of Pediatrics
* Fellow of the American College of Surgeons (FACS)
* Royal College of Surgeons of England (1982)
* Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow (1987)
* Royal Society of Medicine (1997)
* Honorary Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh (HonFRCS) (2009)
* U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official (1988 Jefferson Award)
* Public Welfare Medal from the National Academy of Sciences (1990)
* Albert Schweitzer Prize for Humanitarianism (1991)
* Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement (1991)
*Emmy Award in the News and Documentary category for &quot;C. Everett Koop, MD,&quot; a five-part series on health care reform (1991)
* The 2nd Annual Heinz Award in Public Policy (1996)
* Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1990)
* Member of the American Philosophical Society (1992)

==Publications==
* 
* &quot;Sometimes Mountains Move&quot; by C. Everett Koop and Elizabeth Koop. Tyndale, 1974. (revised edition published by Zondervan in 1994, )
* &quot;Visible &amp; Palpable Lesions in Children&quot; by C. Everett Koop. Grune &amp; Stratton, 1976. 
* &quot;The Right to Live, the Right to Die&quot; by C. Everett Koop. Tyndale, 1976. 
* &quot;Whatever Happened to the Human Race?&quot; by Francis A. Schaeffer and C. Everett Koop. F.H. Revell, 1979. (revised edition published by Crossway Books in 1983, )
* &quot;Koop: The Memoirs of America&#x27;s Family Doctor&quot; by C. Everett Koop. Random House, 1991. 
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Talk: An Honest Conversation on Critical Issues: Abortion, Euthanasia, AIDS, Health Care&quot; by C. Everett Koop and G. Timothy Johnson. Zondervan, 1992. 
* 
* &quot;Critical Issues in Global Health&quot; by C. Everett Koop, Clarence E. Pearson, and M. Roy Schwarz. Jossey-Bass, 2001. 

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Soul Survivor: How Thirteen Unlikely Mentors Helped My Faith Survive the Church&quot; by Philip Yancey. Galilee/Doubleday, 2003. 
* Petro, Anthony, &quot;After the Wrath of God: AIDS, Sexuality, and American Religion&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2015) 

==External links==
* C. Everett Koop Papers (1933–2005) – National Library of Medicine finding aid
* The C. Everett Koop papers – Profiles in Science, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health
* Biography from the C. Everett Koop Institute at Dartmouth College
* C. Everett Koop (1982–1989) – biography from the Office of the
* C. Everett Koop – His Legacy at LifeStory.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3306168" start="0" end="20" title="C. Everett Koop" label="Charles Everett Koop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430816" start="76" end="93" title="pediatric surgeon" label="pediatric surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434880" start="149" end="185" title="surgeon general of the United States" label="surgeon general of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="202" end="215" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="252" end="268" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025875" start="452" end="463" title="Tobacco in the United States" label="tobacco use"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099260" start="465" end="469" title="HIV/AIDS in the United States" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q283681" start="475" end="483" title="Abortion in the United States" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q814493" start="512" end="548" title="Disability rights movement" label="rights of children with disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="597" end="605" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="872" end="889" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q861182" start="1015" end="1027" title="chicken coop" label="chicken coop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="1125" end="1141" title="brain hemorrhage" label="brain hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="1157" end="1159" title="Doctor of Medicine" label="MD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567094" start="1172" end="1195" title="Weill Cornell Medical College" label="Cornell Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="1208" end="1225" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120165" start="1254" end="1280" title="Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569202" start="1366" end="1406" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q659033" start="1543" end="1558" title="biliary atresia" label="biliary atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15437548" start="1597" end="1608" title="Morio Kasai" label="Morio Kasai"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="2030" end="2040" title="pediatrics" label="pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120165" start="2056" end="2101" title="Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216866" start="2190" end="2205" title="conjoined twins" label="conjoined twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="2699" end="2705" title="Human pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="2793" end="2798" title="Vertebral column" label="spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144039" start="3479" end="3494" title="inguinal hernia" label="inguinal hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759591" start="3527" end="3540" title="Orchiopexy" label="orchidopexies"/>
<link wikidata="Q966052" start="3565" end="3585" title="undescended testicle" label="undescended testicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q298233" start="3670" end="3688" title="esophageal atresia" label="esophageal atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="3786" end="3799" title="hydrocephalus" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216866" start="3993" end="4008" title="conjoined twins" label="conjoined twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489433" start="4489" end="4504" title="Frank Schaeffer" label="Frank Schaeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q958594" start="4520" end="4537" title="Francis Schaeffer" label="Francis Schaeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q357676" start="4787" end="4806" title="Jack Kemp" label="U.S. Rep. Jack Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="5621" end="5641" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="5788" end="5796" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="6143" end="6164" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="6434" end="6476" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121433" start="6555" end="6580" title="Alan Guttmacher Institute" label="Alan Guttmacher Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="7049" end="7060" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="7227" end="7235" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="7259" end="7272" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Congressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="7555" end="7563" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="7614" end="7621" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="8706" end="8710" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811935" start="9022" end="9070" title="Understanding AIDS" label="mailing AIDS information to every U.S. household"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="10107" end="10127" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="10148" end="10161" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q298233" start="10173" end="10191" title="esophageal atresia" label="esophageal atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831319" start="10197" end="10222" title="tracheoesophageal fistula" label="tracheoesophageal fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838255" start="11201" end="11219" title="Baby Doe Amendment" label="Baby Doe Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11526" end="11537" title="Broadway the Hard Way#Music and lyrics" label="Promiscuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="11547" end="11558" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751029" start="11582" end="11587" title="Ali G" label="Ali G"/>
<link wikidata="Q942900" start="11637" end="11656" title="Shenandoah (beard)" label="mustache-less beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14125" start="11670" end="11677" title="bow tie" label="bow tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925090" start="11689" end="11701" title="Vice admiral (United States)" label="vice admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632308" start="11709" end="11754" title="U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps" label="U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925090" start="11893" end="11905" title="Vice admiral (United States)" label="vice admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="11920" end="11929" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006434" start="12203" end="12224" title="C. Everett Koop, M.D." label="C. Everett Koop, M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="12260" end="12263" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="12334" end="12348" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544714" start="12675" end="12685" title="Life Alert" label="Life Alert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530214" start="13029" end="13053" title="Dartmouth Medical School" label="Dartmouth Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032778" start="13224" end="13239" title="Cannon Mountain (New Hampshire)" label="Cannon Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330550" start="13769" end="13792" title="Eastern University (United States)" label="Eastern Baptist College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700879" start="14103" end="14128" title="Tenth Presbyterian Church" label="Tenth Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="14286" end="14299" title="legally blind" label="legally blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q131908" start="14365" end="14387" title="Hanover, New Hampshire" label="Hanover, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="14467" end="14481" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="14602" end="14630" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q600111" start="14839" end="14864" title="The Philadelphia Inquirer" label="The Philadelphia Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="15027" end="15041" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356503" start="15049" end="15064" title="Michael Specter" label="Michael Specter"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="15343" end="15355" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660469" start="15389" end="15420" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Barbershop Quartet" label="Homer&amp;#x27;s Barbershop Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="15521" end="15533" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q542739" start="15569" end="15583" title="Bye Bye Nerdie" label="Bye Bye Nerdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="15715" end="15723" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994595" start="15758" end="15780" title="Three Hundred Big Boys" label="Three Hundred Big Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039043" start="15937" end="15955" title="Fry Am the Egg Man" label="Fry Am the Egg Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="16040" end="16048" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719707" start="16083" end="16107" title="The Boyfriend (Seinfeld)" label="The Boyfriend (Seinfeld)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135966" start="16238" end="16254" title="King of the Hill" label="King of the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48758" start="16630" end="16635" title="Psych" label="Psych"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257411" start="17082" end="17131" title="Public Health Service Distinguished Service Medal" label="Public Health Service Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716933" start="17134" end="17181" title="Public Health Service Meritorious Service Medal" label="Public Health Service Meritorious Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646183" start="17184" end="17216" title="Surgeon General&amp;#x27;s Medallion" label="Surgeon General&amp;#x27;s Medallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25005028" start="17219" end="17265" title="Surgeon General&amp;#x27;s Exemplary Service Medal" label="Surgeon General&amp;#x27;s Exemplary Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865065" start="17268" end="17304" title="Public Health Service Citation Medal" label="Public Health Service Citation Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560688" start="17307" end="17354" title="Public Health Service Outstanding Unit Citation" label="Public Health Service Outstanding Unit Citation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="17357" end="17386" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805118" start="17396" end="17436" title="Public Health Service Foreign Duty Award" label="Public Health Service Foreign Duty Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q123553958" start="17439" end="17481" title="Public Health Service Regular Corps Ribbon" label="Public Health Service Regular Corps Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="17484" end="17505" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q93869" start="17515" end="17558" title="Order of Merit of Duarte, Sánchez and Mella" label="Order of Merit of Duarte, Sánchez and Mella"/>
<link wikidata="Q16783710" start="17606" end="17659" title="Association of Military Surgeons of the United States" label="Association of Military Surgeons of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q463720" start="17819" end="17861" title="Fellow of the American College of Surgeons" label="Fellow of the American College of Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584160" start="17871" end="17907" title="Royal College of Surgeons of England" label="Royal College of Surgeons of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q304192" start="17917" end="17968" title="Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow" label="Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446034" start="17978" end="18003" title="Royal Society of Medicine" label="Royal Society of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631327" start="18022" end="18065" title="Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons" label="Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175374" start="18198" end="18213" title="Jefferson Awards for Public Service" label="Jefferson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811818" start="18217" end="18237" title="Public Welfare Medal" label="Public Welfare Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="18247" end="18275" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711197" start="18285" end="18328" title="Albert Schweitzer Prize for Humanitarianism" label="Albert Schweitzer Prize for Humanitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892257" start="18338" end="18379" title="Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement" label="Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="18388" end="18398" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700571" start="18538" end="18549" title="Heinz Award" label="Heinz Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="18590" end="18627" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="18651" end="18681" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079171" start="19672" end="19751" title="Soul Survivor (book)" label="Soul Survivor: How Thirteen Unlikely Mentors Helped My Faith Survive the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="20110" end="20139" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220381" wikidata="Q5178427" url="?curid=220381" title="Court of record">
<text>A court of record is a trial court or appellate court in which a record of the proceedings is captured and preserved, for the possibility of appeal. A court clerk or a court reporter takes down a record of oral proceedings. That written record (and all other evidence) is preserved at least long enough for all appeals to be exhausted, or for some further period of time provided by law (for example, in some U.S. states, death penalty statutes provide that all evidence must be preserved for an extended period of time).

Most courts of record have rules of procedure (see rules of evidence, rules of civil procedure, and rules of criminal procedure) and therefore they require that most parties be represented by counsel (specifically, attorneys holding a license to practice law before the specific tribunal).

In contrast, in courts not of record, oral proceedings are not recorded, and the judge makes his or her decision based on notes and memory. In most &quot;not of record&quot; proceedings, the parties may appear personally, without lawyers. For example, most small claims courts, traffic courts, justice courts presided over by justices of the peace, many administrative tribunals that make initial governmental administrative decisions such as government benefit determinations, and the like, are not courts of record.

== India ==
The Constitution of India, under Article 129 states that the Supreme Court of India shall be a Court of record with powers to punish for contempt of itself. Similarly, Art 215 declares all High Courts of India to be a Court of Record.

== United Kingdom ==

=== In England and Wales ===
Courts of record are loosely defined in English law. They have been defined as:

# Courts that must keep records of proceedings under the Criminal Procedure Rules 2015
# Courts that set precedent
# Courts with inherent (ie not specifically given in statute) powers to charge contempt

As such, the following may be defined as courts of record:

Under an alternative definition, courts or tribunals may be designated by statute as &quot;courts of record&quot; irrespective of any of the three above criteria, such as the County Court under section 1A of the County Courts Act 1984 or the First-Tier Tribunal pursuant to section 3 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Using a broader definition, the majority of courts in the UK keep records of proceedings. This includes the county court and most independent tribunals, e.g. the Investigatory Powers Tribunal.

=== In Scotland ===
Courts of record are not defined in Scots law.

However, both the High Court of Justiciary and Court of Session keep record of all proceedings and as such may be generally termed courts of record.

== United States ==

&quot;Of record&quot; and &quot;not of record&quot; are two polar extremes of a spectrum, and there is a transition zone between them. Many proceedings have an intermediate character, with some &quot;of record&quot; characteristics but not others. For example, in some agencies of the U.S. government, oral arguments in intra-agency appeals are transcribed by a reporter as a matter of the agency&#x27;s choice, but since the record is not required by statute, other guarantees of 5 U.S.C. §§ 554, 556, and 557 do not apply. For example, in proceedings before executive branch agencies of the U.S. federal government, fully-formal proceedings of record are governed by the &quot;formal adjudication&quot; or &quot;on the record&quot; provisions of §§ 554, 556, and 557, but informal proceedings or &quot;not on the record&quot; proceedings are governed by § 555.

However, powers available to the tribunal turn on the tribunal having full &quot;of record&quot; characteristics. For example, in many states, statutes provide that the power to fine or imprison lies only with courts of record. Similarly, for a court to punish for contempt, there must be a record of exactly what was said by whom and so the power to punish for contempt requires the tribunal have at least a court reporter taking down all proceedings. The rationale is that criminal penalties or contempt penalties may not be imposed unless there is a right of appeal, and an appeal is only meaningful if the trial-level court kept a record of its proceedings.

In some classes of cases, after a determination by an inferior or lower tribunal not of record, a party may take a first-level appeal to a tribunal that is of record. For example, many government administrative agencies delegate initial decisions to a single person who acts informally, typically with a title like &quot;clerk&quot; or &quot;examiner,&quot; such as a Social Security claims examiner or a patent examiner. Then, the agency provides a first-level of intra-agency review before a board of appeals that conducts its proceedings on a more formal basis than the proceedings before the initial hearing officer. In most cases, the first level appeal is &quot;trial &quot;de novo&quot;&quot; (or a &#x27;hearing &quot;de novo&quot;&#x27;). The intra-agency appeal may be of record or not or somewhere between, depending on the agency. That is not an appeal as such but a new proceeding, which completely supersedes the result of the prior agency determination. Often, the review tribunal will not permit introduction of new evidence, or may have evidentiary rules that are quite restrictive. When the first-level adjudication is made by an executive branch agency, and after all intra-agency procedures are exhausted, it is often possible to go to a court to seek judicial review of the judgment of the agency.

The primary function of the record is to serve as the basis for appellate review of the agency- or trial-level proceedings. The record from a trial court includes the evidence introduced by the parties and some form of record of the proceeding itself, which includes copies of all papers filed by the parties and a transcript of any trial, and it may include an audio or videotape of hearings, appearances, or arguments of motions. Exhibits introduced in evidence are maintained in the court record at least for a certain period of time after the case has been tried, when the evidence may be returned to the parties or destroyed. If either party takes an appeal, the lower court produces a copy certified by a unique seal to authenticate the formal record.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5178427" start="2" end="17" title="Court of record" label="court of record"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125101" start="23" end="34" title="trial court" label="trial court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="38" end="53" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301203" start="79" end="90" title="Legal case" label="proceedings"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="141" end="147" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q641208" start="151" end="162" title="court clerk" label="court clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178440" start="168" end="182" title="court reporter" label="court reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="409" end="420" title="U.S. states" label="U.S. states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="422" end="444" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="death penalty statutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q176763" start="574" end="591" title="rules of evidence" label="rules of evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q206937" start="602" end="617" title="civil procedure" label="civil procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="632" end="650" title="criminal procedure" label="criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="738" end="747" title="Lawyer" label="attorneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116200" start="769" end="781" title="Practice of law" label="practice law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178427" start="830" end="850" title="Court of record" label="courts not of record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916251" start="1071" end="1089" title="small claims court" label="small claims court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832495" start="1092" end="1105" title="traffic court" label="traffic court"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="1108" end="1121" title="justice court" label="justice court"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="1140" end="1161" title="justice of the peace" label="justices of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="1168" end="1191" title="administrative court" label="administrative tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="1349" end="1370" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="1406" end="1428" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840882" start="1534" end="1554" title="High Courts of India" label="High Courts of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="1672" end="1683" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="1818" end="1827" title="precedent" label="precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="1907" end="1915" title="Contempt of court" label="contempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754298" start="2152" end="2164" title="County Court (England and Wales)" label="County Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452210" start="2219" end="2238" title="First-tier Tribunal" label="First-Tier Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137280" start="2421" end="2433" title="county court" label="county court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060729" start="2475" end="2504" title="Investigatory Powers Tribunal" label="Investigatory Powers Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128540" start="2593" end="2617" title="High Court of Justiciary" label="High Court of Justiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="2622" end="2638" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="3788" end="3792" title="fine (penalty)" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="3796" end="3804" title="prison" label="imprison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412224" start="4345" end="4353" title="tribunal" label="tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q455310" start="4941" end="4966" title="trial de novo" label="trial &amp;quot;de novo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="5545" end="5560" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="5657" end="5673" title="appellate review" label="appellate review"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125101" start="5735" end="5746" title="trial court" label="trial court"/>
<link wikidata="Q176763" start="5760" end="5768" title="evidence (law)" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="5926" end="5931" title="trial (law)" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917734" start="6016" end="6022" title="motion (legal)" label="motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q176763" start="6048" end="6056" title="evidence (law)" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="6311" end="6315" title="seal (device)" label="seal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220386" wikidata="Q408941" url="?curid=220386" title="Phaser">
<text>Phaser may refer to:
* Raytheon Phaser, a directed-energy weapon
* Phaser (fictional weapon), a gun in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; universe
* Phaser (effect), in electronics, an audio signal processor used to phase-shift the signal
* Light Phaser, a lightgun for the Master System console
* Xerox Phaser, a brand of printers
* Personnel Halting and Stimulation Response rifle (PHASR), a dazzler weapon
* Phaser, an insecticide containing the active ingredient endosulfan
* Phaser Digital Power Transducer from Second Wind
* Phaser (band), a Washington, D.C. rock band
* Phaser (game framework), HTML5 game creation framework

==See also==

*Phase (disambiguation)
*Phasor (disambiguation)
*FASOR (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408941" start="0" end="6" title="Phaser" label="Phaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796172" start="23" end="38" title="Raytheon Phaser" label="Raytheon Phaser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67" end="92" title="List of weapons in Star Trek#Phaser" label="Phaser (fictional weapon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551588" start="140" end="155" title="Phaser (effect)" label="Phaser (effect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="232" end="244" title="Light Phaser" label="Light Phaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043906" start="289" end="301" title="Xerox Phaser" label="Xerox Phaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880295" start="325" end="373" title="Personnel Halting and Stimulation Response rifle" label="Personnel Halting and Stimulation Response rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q424208" start="458" end="468" title="endosulfan" label="endosulfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489206" start="508" end="519" title="Second Wind (company)" label="Second Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180986" start="522" end="535" title="Phaser (band)" label="Phaser (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851432" start="568" end="591" title="Phaser (game framework)" label="Phaser (game framework)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555" start="639" end="661" title="Phase (disambiguation)" label="Phase (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181043" start="663" end="686" title="Phasor (disambiguation)" label="Phasor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424479" start="688" end="710" title="FASOR (disambiguation)" label="FASOR (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220388" wikidata="Q340843" url="?curid=220388" title="Eight Immortals">
<text>The Eight Immortals () are a group of legendary &quot;xian (immortals)&quot; in Chinese mythology. Each immortal&#x27;s power can be transferred to a vessel () that can bestow life or destroy evil. Together, these eight vessels are called the &quot;Covert Eight Immortals&quot; (). Most of them are said to have been born in the Tang or Song Dynasty. They are revered by the Taoists and are also a popular element in secular Chinese culture. They are said to live on a group of five islands in the Bohai Sea, which includes Mount Penglai.

The Immortals are:
* He Xiangu (), in modern context generally seen as the only female of the group, often depicted holding a lotus flower.
* Cao Guojiu (), related to a Song dynasty emperor before he became an immortal.
* Li Tieguai (), considered to be mentally disturbed and associated with medicine and easing the suffering of the sick and needy, identified by his iron crutch and calabash bottle.
* Lan Caihe (), originally pictured as female; later developed an ambiguous or (more accurately) a &quot;transformative&quot; gender and is considered the patron of florists and gardeners.
* Lü Dongbin (), a scholar and poet considered to be the leader of the Eight Immortals.
* Han Xiangzi (), a flute artist.
* Zhang Guolao (), a &quot;fangshi&quot; symbol of longevity.
* Zhongli Quan (), associated with death and the power to create silver and gold, often depicted holding a fan.

In literature before the 1970s, they were sometimes translated as the Eight [[Jinn|Genie]]s. Some stories had them all &quot;cheerfully addicted to wine&quot;, so they were called the &quot;Jiu-zhong Ba Xian&quot; or &quot;Eight Drunken Immortals&quot;. First described in the Yuan Dynasty, they were probably named after the Eight Immortal Scholars of the Han.

==In art==

While cults dedicated to various Taoist immortals date back to the Han dynasty, the popular and well-known Eight Immortals first appeared in the Jin dynasty. The wall murals and sculptures in the Jin tombs, created during the 12th and 13th centuries, depicts a group of eight Taoist immortals. The term &quot;Eight Immortals&quot; became commonplace after the popularization of the Taoist group of writers and artists known as the Complete Realization (Quanshen). The most famous art depiction of the Eight Immortals from this period is a mural of them in the Eternal Joy Temple (Yongle Gong) at Ruicheng.

The Eight Immortals are considered to be signs of prosperity and longevity, so they are popular themes in ancient and medieval art. They were frequent adornments on celadon vases. They were also common in sculptures owned by the nobility. Many silk paintings, wall murals, and wood block prints remain of the Eight Immortals. They were often depicted either together in one group, or alone to give more homage to that specific immortal.

An interesting feature of early Eight Immortal artwork is that they are often accompanied by jade hand maidens, which are commonly depicted as servants of the higher ranked deities, and depictions commonly include other images showing their great spiritual power. During the Ming and Qing dynasties, the Eight Immortals were frequently associated with other prominent spiritual deities in artwork. There are numerous paintings with them and the Three Stars (the gods of longevity, prosperity, and good fortune) together. Also, other deities such as the Queen Mother of the West are commonly seen in the company of the Eight Immortals and she is also popularly thought to have blessed them with their supernatural abilities.

The artwork of the Eight Immortals is not limited to paintings or other visual arts. They are quite prominent in written works too. Authors and playwrights have written numerous stories and plays on the Eight Immortals. One famous story that has been rewritten many times and turned into several plays (the most famous written by Mu Zhiyuan in the Yuan Dynasty) is The Yellow-Millet Dream, which is the story of how Lǚ Dòngbīn met Zhongli Quan and began his path to immortality.

==In literature==
The Immortals are the subject of many artistic creations, such as paintings and sculptures. Examples of writings about them include:

* &quot;The Yueyang Tower&quot; by Ma Zhiyuan
* &quot;The Bamboo-leaved Boat&quot; () by Fan Zi&#x27;an ()
* &quot;The Willow in the South of the City&quot; () by Gu Zijing ()
* The most significant is &quot;The Eight Immortals Depart and Travel to the East&quot; () by Wu Yuantai () in the Ming Dynasty.
* There is another work, also made during the Ming (c. 14th–15th centuries), by an anonymous writer, called &quot;The Eight Immortals Cross the Sea&quot; (). It is about the Immortals on their way to attend the Conference of the Magical Peach () when they encounter an ocean. Instead of relying on their clouds to get them across, Lü Dongbin suggested that they each should exercise their unique powers to get across. Derived from this, the Chinese proverb &quot;The Eight Immortals cross the sea, each reveals its divine powers&quot; () indicates the situation that everybody shows off their skills and expertise to achieve a common goal.

==In qigong and martial arts==
The Eight Immortals have been linked to the initial development of &quot;qigong&quot; exercises such as the Eight Piece Brocade. There are also some Chinese martial arts styles named after them, which use fighting techniques that are attributed to the characteristics of each immortal. Some drunken boxing styles make extensive use of the Eight Immortals archetypes for conditioning, qigong/meditation and combat training. One subsection of &quot;ba ying quan()&quot; drunken fist training includes methodologies for each of the eight immortals.

==Worship==
Established in the Song Dynasty, the Xi&#x27;an temple Eight Immortals Palace (), formerly Eight Immortals Nunnery (), has a collection of statues depicting the Immortals in what is called the Hall of Eight Immortals (). There are many other shrines dedicated to them throughout China and Taiwan. In Singapore, the Xian&#x27;gu Temple () is dedicated to the Immortal Lady He from the group as its focus of devotion.

Overall though, in the Sinosphere, the Eight Immortals are depicted as deities who are very often not seen as such, being more like folk heroes and saints to most who venerate them. However, to these people, the Immortals often &quot;represent ... the close ties between the living and the deceased, since the spirits of the deceased are always within reach when help in needed&quot; in some branches of Chinese folk religion and their existence is seen as being similar to ghosts as well.

==Depictions in popular culture==
The Immortals are the subject of many depictions in popular culture, including:
* In Jackie Chan&#x27;s films &quot;Drunken Master&quot; and &quot;Drunken Master II&quot;, there are eight &quot;drunken&quot; Chinese martial arts forms that are said to be originated from the Eight Immortals. At first, the protagonist did not want to learn the Immortal Lady He form because he saw it as feminine, but he eventually created his own version of it.
* The 1998–99 Singaporean television series &quot;Legend of the Eight Immortals&quot; was based on stories of the Eight Immortals and adapted from the novel &quot;Dong You Ji&quot;.
* The Eight Immortals play an important part in the plot of the video game &quot;Fear Effect 2&quot;.
* In the Andy Seto graphic novel series &quot;Saint Legend&quot;, the Eight Immortals reappear to protect the Buddhist faith from evil spirits set on destroying it.
* In the &quot;X-Men&quot; comic book, the Eight Immortals appear to protect China along with the Collective Man when the mutant Xorn caused a massacre in one small village.
* In the &quot;Immortal Iron Fist&quot; comic book, there are seven supreme kung fu practitioners, called the Seven Immortal Weapons. They each hail from other-dimensional cities and must fight for their city&#x27;s chance to appear on Earth. Aside from being named the &quot;Immortal&quot; Weapons, the most overt reference to the Eight Immortals is that one Immortal Weapon, Fat Cobra, hails from and represents a city called &quot;Peng Lai Island&quot;.
* In the roleplaying game &quot;Feng Shui&quot;, the Eight Immortals appear in the sourcebook &quot;Thorns of the Lotus&quot;.
* The Eight Immortals played a role in the animated show &quot;Jackie Chan Adventures&quot;. In the show, the Immortals were said to be the ones who defeated the Eight Demon Sorcerers and sealed them away in the netherworld using items that symbolized their powers. They then crafted the Pan&#x27;ku box as a key to opening the portals that lead into the demons&#x27; prison. Later on in the series, the items the Immortals used to seal away the demons the first time are revealed to have absorbed some of the demons&#x27; chi and become the targets of Drago, the son of Shendu (one of the Demon Sorcerers), to enhance his own powers.
* In &quot;The Forbidden Kingdom&quot;, Jackie Chan plays the character Lu Yan, who is supposed to be one of the Eight Immortals, as revealed by the director in the movie&#x27;s special feature, &quot;The Monkey King and The Eight Immortals&quot;.
* In the Tales of the Dragon expansion for &quot;Age of Mythology&quot;, the Eight Immortals are hero units for the Chinese.
* In &quot;The Iron Druid Chronicles,&quot; Zhang Guolao joins the party journeying to Asgard to slay Thor in vengeance for the Norse gods crimes. Zhang Guolao&#x27;s grudge stems from Thor killing his donkey in a trick.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Lai, T. C., &quot;The Eight Immortals&quot; (Swindon Book Co., 1972).
* Mantak Chia, Johnathon Dao, &quot;The Eight Immortal Healers: Taoist Wisdom for Radiant Health&quot; (Simon and Schuster).

==External links==
* Stories and Myths of Eight Immortals. A collection of Eight Immortals stories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q340843" start="4" end="19" title="Eight Immortals" label="Eight Immortals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207451" start="54" end="70" title="Xian (Taoism)" label="xian (immortals)"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="80" end="97" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="329" end="333" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="337" end="349" title="Song dynasty" label="Song Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="375" end="381" title="Taoism" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="425" end="440" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q181969" start="498" end="507" title="Bohai Sea" label="Bohai Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q798391" start="524" end="537" title="Mount Penglai" label="Mount Penglai"/>
<link wikidata="Q970809" start="561" end="570" title="He Xiangu" label="He Xiangu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034103" start="682" end="692" title="Cao Guojiu" label="Cao Guojiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="710" end="722" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473554" start="763" end="773" title="Li Tieguai" label="Li Tieguai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277255" start="925" end="933" title="calabash" label="calabash"/>
<link wikidata="Q599475" start="944" end="953" title="Lan Caihe" label="Lan Caihe"/>
<link wikidata="Q637125" start="1107" end="1115" title="Floristry" label="florists"/>
<link wikidata="Q698314" start="1133" end="1143" title="Lü Dongbin" label="Lü Dongbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q971072" start="1221" end="1232" title="Han Xiangzi" label="Han Xiangzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q197181" start="1255" end="1267" title="Zhang Guolao" label="Zhang Guolao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395637" start="1280" end="1287" title="fangshi" label="fangshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q197866" start="1317" end="1329" title="Zhongli Quan" label="Zhongli Quan"/>
<link wikidata="Q340843" start="1498" end="1519" title="Eight Immortals" label="Eight [[Jinn|Genie]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="1705" end="1717" title="Yuan Dynasty" label="Yuan Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348986" start="1754" end="1788" title="Eight Immortals of Huainan" label="Eight Immortal Scholars of the Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1870" end="1881" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="1948" end="1959" title="Jin Dynasty, 1115–1234" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054559" start="2575" end="2582" title="celadon" label="celadon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="3123" end="3127" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="3132" end="3146" title="Qing dynasties" label="Qing dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633257" start="3293" end="3304" title="Fu Lu Shou" label="Three Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064059" start="3401" end="3425" title="Queen Mother of the West" label="Queen Mother of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="3548" end="3560" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3938" end="3961" title="Lü Dongbin#Yellow Millet Dream" label="The Yellow-Millet Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="4137" end="4145" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="4151" end="4160" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="4175" end="4182" title="writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195796" start="4217" end="4230" title="Yueyang Tower" label="Yueyang Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634921" start="4240" end="4250" title="Ma Zhiyuan" label="Ma Zhiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="4496" end="4508" title="Ming Dynasty" label="Ming Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157685" start="4739" end="4752" title="Peaches of Immortality" label="Magical Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="4779" end="4784" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210892" start="4951" end="4966" title="Chinese proverb" label="Chinese proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q204368" start="5255" end="5261" title="qigong" label="qigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q797439" start="5290" end="5309" title="Baduanjin qigong" label="Eight Piece Brocade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629468" start="5331" end="5358" title="Styles of Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts styles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5473" end="5494" title="Drunken boxing#Daoist style" label="drunken boxing styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="5760" end="5772" title="Song Dynasty" label="Song Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="5778" end="5788" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6041" end="6050" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="6181" end="6191" title="Sinosphere" label="Sinosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="6229" end="6236" title="deities" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="6290" end="6301" title="Folk hero" label="folk heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="6306" end="6312" title="Saint" label="saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="6562" end="6583" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874548" start="6632" end="6638" title="Ghosts in Chinese culture" label="ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q36970" start="6768" end="6779" title="Jackie Chan" label="Jackie Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q838514" start="6799" end="6813" title="Drunken Master" label="Drunken Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261372" start="6830" end="6847" title="Drunken Master II" label="Drunken Master II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="6891" end="6911" title="Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q970809" start="7027" end="7043" title="Immortal Woman He" label="Immortal Lady He"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402151" start="7179" end="7208" title="Legend of the Eight Immortals" label="Legend of the Eight Immortals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052915" start="7392" end="7405" title="Fear Effect 2" label="Fear Effect 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q383454" start="7422" end="7431" title="Andy Seto" label="Andy Seto"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="7593" end="7598" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406998" start="7676" end="7690" title="Collective Man" label="Collective Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297125" start="7707" end="7711" title="Xorn" label="Xorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741486" start="7767" end="7785" title="Immortal Iron Fist" label="Immortal Iron Fist"/>
<link wikidata="Q679434" start="8241" end="8250" title="Feng Shui (role-playing game)" label="Feng Shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q777464" start="8399" end="8421" title="Jackie Chan Adventures" label="Jackie Chan Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q176568" start="8982" end="9003" title="The Forbidden Kingdom" label="The Forbidden Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36970" start="9011" end="9022" title="Jackie Chan" label="Jackie Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q698314" start="9043" end="9049" title="Lü Dongbin" label="Lu Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11773777" start="9176" end="9187" title="Monkey King" label="Monkey King"/>
<link wikidata="Q271062" start="9268" end="9284" title="Age of Mythology" label="Age of Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838373" start="9355" end="9380" title="The Iron Druid Chronicles" label="The Iron Druid Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178182" start="9431" end="9437" title="Asgard" label="Asgard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="9446" end="9450" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220390" wikidata="Q1822539" url="?curid=220390" title="Li Bo (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Li Bai]] or Li Bo (701–762) was a Tang dynasty Chinese poet.

Li Bo or Bo Li may also refer to:

*Bo Li, Chinese-American geostatistician and paleoclimatologist
*Lee Bo, one of the missing booksellers of Causeway Bay Books in Hong Kong
*Li Bo (ecologist) (1929–1998), Chinese phytoecologist

==Sports==
*Li Bo (sport shooter), participated in Shooting at the 2010 Asian Games
*Li Bo (footballer) for Guangxi Longguida F.C.
*Li Bo (skier), Cross-country skiing at the 2010 Winter Paralympics – Men&#x27;s 10 km Classic
*Bo Li (athlete) from 2005 World Youth Championships in Athletics
*Li Bo (referee) from 2009 Guangzhou Pharmaceutical F.C. season
*Haku Ri for Toray Arrows Shizuoka

==See also==
*Libo (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1822539" start="0" end="10" title="Li Bo (disambiguation)" label="[[Li Bai]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822539" start="14" end="19" title="Li Bo (disambiguation)" label="Li Bo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822539" start="64" end="69" title="Li Bo (disambiguation)" label="Li Bo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822539" start="73" end="78" title="Li Bo (disambiguation)" label="Bo Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q102408613" start="100" end="105" title="Bo Li (statistician)" label="Bo Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q21980597" start="164" end="170" title="Lee Bo" label="Lee Bo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538654" start="239" end="256" title="Li Bo (ecologist)" label="Li Bo (ecologist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q86756916" start="306" end="327" title="Li Bo (sport shooter)" label="Li Bo (sport shooter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364015" start="345" end="377" title="Shooting at the 2010 Asian Games" label="Shooting at the 2010 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="379" end="397" title="Li Bo (footballer)" label="Li Bo (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27966737" start="402" end="424" title="Guangxi Longguida F.C." label="Guangxi Longguida F.C."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="426" end="439" title="Li Bo (skier)" label="Li Bo (skier)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188149" start="441" end="519" title="Cross-country skiing at the 2010 Winter Paralympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 10 km Classic" label="Cross-country skiing at the 2010 Winter Paralympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 10 km Classic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="521" end="536" title="Bo Li (athlete)" label="Bo Li (athlete)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703088" start="542" end="585" title="2005 World Youth Championships in Athletics" label="2005 World Youth Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="587" end="602" title="Li Bo (referee)" label="Li Bo (referee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613916" start="608" end="649" title="2009 Guangzhou Pharmaceutical F.C. season" label="2009 Guangzhou Pharmaceutical F.C. season"/>
<link wikidata="Q38276566" start="651" end="658" title="Haku Ri" label="Haku Ri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532210" start="663" end="684" title="Toray Arrows Shizuoka" label="Toray Arrows Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q352419" start="700" end="721" title="Libo (disambiguation)" label="Libo (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220401" wikidata="Q37134" url="?curid=220401" title="Frederick William III of Prussia">
<text>&lt;noinclude&gt;

Frederick William III (; 3 August 1770 – 7 June 1840) was King of Prussia from 16 November 1797 until his death in 1840. He was concurrently Elector of Brandenburg in the Holy Roman Empire until 6 August 1806, when the empire was dissolved.

Frederick William III ruled Prussia during the times of the Napoleonic Wars. The king reluctantly joined the Sixth Coalition against Napoleon in the German campaign of 1813. Following Napoleon&#x27;s defeat, he took part in the Congress of Vienna, which assembled to settle the political questions arising from the new, post-Napoleonic order in Europe. His primary interests were internal – the reform of Prussia&#x27;s Protestant churches. He was determined to unify the Protestant churches to homogenize their liturgy, organization, and architecture. The long-term goal was to have fully centralized royal control of all the Protestant churches in the Prussian Union of Churches. 

The king was said to be extremely shy and indecisive. His wife Queen Louise (1776–1810) was his most important political advisor. She led a mighty group that included Baron Heinrich Friedrich Karl vom und zum Stein, Prince Karl August von Hardenberg, Gerhard von Scharnhorst, and Count August Neidhardt von Gneisenau. They set about reforming Prussia&#x27;s administration, churches, finance, and military. He was the dedicatee of Beethoven&#x27;s Ninth Symphony in 1824.

==Early life==
Frederick William was born in Potsdam on 3 August 1770 as the son of Frederick William II of Prussia and Frederica Louisa of Hesse-Darmstadt. He was considered to be a shy and reserved boy, which became noticeable in his particularly reticent conversations, distinguished by the lack of personal pronouns. This manner of speech subsequently came to be considered entirely appropriate for military officers. He was neglected by his father during his childhood and suffered from an inferiority complex his entire life.

As a child, Frederick William&#x27;s father (under the influence of his mistress, Wilhelmine Enke, Countess of Lichtenau) had him handed over to tutors, as was quite normal for the period. He spent part of the time living at Paretz, the estate of the old soldier, Count Hans von Blumenthal, who was a tutor and guardian of his brother, Prince Henry. They thus grew up partly with the count&#x27;s son, who accompanied them on their Grand Tour in the 1780s. Frederick William was happy at Paretz, and for this reason, in 1795, he bought it from his boyhood friend and turned it into an important royal country retreat. He was a melancholy boy, but he grew up pious and honest. His tutors included the dramatist Johann Jakob Engel.

As a soldier, he received the usual training of a Prussian prince, obtained his lieutenancy in 1784, became a lieutenant colonel in 1786, a colonel in 1790, and took part in the campaigns against France of 1792–1794. On 24 December 1793, Frederick William married Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, with whom he had ten children. In the (Crown Prince&#x27;s Palace) in Berlin, Frederick William lived a civil life with a problem-free marriage, which did not change even when he became King of Prussia in 1797. His wife Louise was particularly loved by the people of Prussia, which boosted the popularity of the whole House of Hohenzollern, including the King himself.

==Reign==
Frederick William succeeded to the throne on 16 November 1797. He also became, in personal union, the sovereign prince of the Principality of Neuchâtel (1797–1806 and again 1813–1840). At once, the new king showed that he was earnest of his good intentions by cutting down the royal establishment&#x27;s expenses, dismissing his father&#x27;s ministers, and reforming the most oppressive abuses of the late reign. He had the Hohenzollern determination to retain personal power but not the Hohenzollern genius for using it. Too distrustful to delegate responsibility to his ministers, he greatly reduced the effectiveness of his reign since he was forced to assume the roles he did not delegate. This is the main factor of his inconsistent rule.

Disgusted with his father&#x27;s court (in both political intrigues and sexual affairs), Frederick William&#x27;s first and most successful early endeavor was to restore his dynasty&#x27;s moral legitimacy. The eagerness to restore dignity to his family went so far that it nearly caused sculptor Johann Gottfried Schadow to cancel the expensive and lavish project, which was commissioned by the previous monarch Frederick William II. He was quoted as saying the following, which demonstrated his sense of duty and peculiar manner of speech:

Every civil servant has a dual obligation: to the sovereign and the country. It can occur that the two are not compatible; then, the duty to the country is higher.

At first, Frederick William and his advisors attempted to pursue a neutrality policy in the Napoleonic Wars. Although they succeeded in keeping out of the Third Coalition in 1805, eventually, Frederick William was swayed by the queen&#x27;s attitude, who led Prussia&#x27;s pro-war party and entered into the war in October 1806. On 14 October 1806, at the Battles of Jena-Auerstädt, the French effectively decimated the Prussian Army&#x27;s effectiveness and functionality; led by Frederick William, the Prussian army collapsed entirely soon after. Napoleon occupied Berlin in late October. The royal family fled to Memel, East Prussia, where they fell on the mercy of Emperor Alexander I of Russia.
Alexander, too, suffered defeat at the hands of the French, and at Tilsit on the Niemen France made peace with Russia and Prussia. Napoleon dealt with Prussia very harshly, despite the pregnant queen&#x27;s interview with the French emperor, which was believed to soften the defeat. Instead, Napoleon took much less mercy on the Prussians than what was expected. Prussia lost many of its Polish territories and all territory west of the Elbe and had to finance a large indemnity and pay French troops to occupy key strong points within the kingdom.Although the ineffectual king himself seemed resigned to Prussia&#x27;s fate, various reforming ministers, such as Heinrich Friedrich Karl vom und zum Stein, Prince Karl August von Hardenberg, Gerhard Johann David von Scharnhorst, and Count August von Gneisenau, set about reforming Prussia&#x27;s administration and military, with the encouragement of Queen Louise (who died, greatly mourned, in 1810). After bereavement, Frederick William fell under the influence of a &#x27;substitute family&#x27; of courtiers, among whom included Friedrich Ancillon, a Huguenot preacher that provided the king with strong ideological support against political reforms that might restrain monarchical power, Sophie Marie von Voß, an older woman with conservative views and Prince Wilhelm zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein.

In 1813, following Napoleon&#x27;s defeat in Russia and pressured by the Convention of Tauroggen, Frederick William turned against France and signed an alliance with Russia at Kalisz. However, he had to flee Berlin, still under French occupation. Prussian troops played a crucial part in the victories of the allies in 1813 and 1814, and the king himself traveled with the main army of Karl Philipp Fürst zu Schwarzenberg, along with Alexander of Russia and Francis of Austria.

At the Congress of Vienna, Frederick William&#x27;s ministers succeeded in securing significant territorial increases for Prussia. However, they failed to obtain the annexation of all of Saxony, as they had wished. Following the war, Frederick William turned towards political reaction, abandoning the promises he had made in 1813 to provide Prussia with a constitution.

===Prussian Union of Churches===

Frederick William was determined to unify the Protestant churches to homogenize their liturgy, organization, and architecture. The long-term goal was to have fully centralized royal control of all the Protestant churches in the Prussian Union of Churches. The merging of the Lutheran and Calvinist (Reformed) confessions to form the United Church of Prussia was highly controversial. Angry responses included a large and well-organized opposition. Especially the &quot;Old Lutherans&quot; in Silesia refused to abandon their liturgical traditions. The crown responded by attempting to silence protest. The stubborn Lutheran minority was coerced by military force, their churches&#x27; confiscation, and their pastors&#x27; imprisonment or exile. By 1834 outward union was secured based on common worship but separate symbols—the opponents of the measure being forbidden to form communities of their own. Many left Prussia, settling in South Australia, Canada, and the United States. The king&#x27;s unsuccessful counterattack worsened tensions at the highest levels of government. The crown&#x27;s aggressive efforts to restructure religion were unprecedented in Prussian history. In a series of proclamations over several years, the &quot;Church of the Prussian Union&quot; was formed, bringing together the majority group of Lutherans and the minority group of Reformed Protestants. The main effect was that the government of Prussia had full control over church affairs, with the king himself recognized as the leading bishop.

In 1824 Frederick William III married for the second time, to Countess Auguste von Harrach zu Rohrau und Thannhausen. At the time of their marriage, the House of Harrach was still not recognized as equal to other European royal families for dynastic purposes. The marriage was therefore morganatic and she was created Princess of Liegnitz. They had no children.

In 1838 the king distributed large parts of his farmland at Erdmannsdorf Estate to 422 Protestant refugees from the Austrian Zillertal, who built Tyrolean style farmhouses in the Silesian village.

===Death===
Frederick William III died on 7 June 1840 in Berlin, from a fever, survived by his second wife. His eldest son, Frederick William IV, succeeded him. Frederick William III is buried at the Mausoleum in Schlosspark Charlottenburg, Berlin.

==Issue==
==Honours==
&quot;&quot; is a German march dedicated to Frederick William III, it was written by a local residence in Torgau for his royal visit on 24 June 1817.

==Ancestry==
==Siblings==
* Frederica Charlotte (1767–1820), who became Duchess of York by her marriage to Frederick, Duke of York
* Christine (1772–73)
* Louis Charles (1773–96)
* Frederica Louisa Wilhelmina (1774–1837), wife of William of Orange, afterward King William I of the Netherlands
* Augusta (1780–1841), wife of William II, Elector of Hesse
* Henry (1781–1846)
* William (1783–1851)

==Works==

===Marches===
* , 1806

==References==
==Further reading==
* Clark, Christopher. &quot;Iron Kingdom: The Rise and Downfall of Prussia, 1600–1947&quot; (2006) pp 298–320.
* Richardson, Constance. &quot;Memoirs of the Private Life and Opinions of Louisa, Queen of Prussia, Consort of Frederick William III&quot; (London, R. Bentley, 1847) online.
* Sheehan, James J. &quot;German History, 1770–1866&quot; (1989).
* Wright, Constance. &quot;Beautiful Enemy: A biography of Queen Louise of Prussia&quot; (Dodd, Mead, 1969) online.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37134" start="19" end="40" title="Frederick William III of Prussia" label="Frederick William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770786" start="77" end="92" title="King of Prussia" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313536" start="160" end="182" title="Elector of Brandenburg" label="Elector of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="190" end="207" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="321" end="336" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q138107" start="370" end="385" title="Sixth Coalition" label="Sixth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q814235" start="410" end="433" title="German campaign of 1813" label="German campaign of 1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="489" end="507" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q163202" start="915" end="941" title="Prussian Union of Churches" label="Prussian Union of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q156723" start="1014" end="1020" title="Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q213542" start="1118" end="1159" title="Heinrich Friedrich Karl vom und zum Stein" label="Heinrich Friedrich Karl vom und zum Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q213645" start="1168" end="1194" title="Karl August von Hardenberg" label="Karl August von Hardenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170340" start="1196" end="1219" title="Gerhard von Scharnhorst" label="Gerhard von Scharnhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q165519" start="1231" end="1261" title="August Neidhardt von Gneisenau" label="August Neidhardt von Gneisenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="1376" end="1385" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11989" start="1393" end="1407" title="Symphony No. 9 (Beethoven)" label="Ninth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="1463" end="1470" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q152229" start="1502" end="1533" title="Frederick William II of Prussia" label="Frederick William II of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235663" start="1538" end="1573" title="Frederica Louisa of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Frederica Louisa of Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q319763" start="1913" end="1932" title="inferiority complex" label="inferiority complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q70769" start="2033" end="2071" title="Wilhelmine, Gräfin von Lichtenau" label="Wilhelmine Enke, Countess of Lichtenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q314195" start="2176" end="2182" title="Paretz" label="Paretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q727594" start="2230" end="2240" title="von Blumenthal" label="Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q115282" start="2287" end="2299" title="Prince Henry of Prussia (1781–1846)" label="Prince Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="2383" end="2393" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="2609" end="2614" title="Piety" label="pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q71442" start="2661" end="2679" title="Johann Jakob Engel" label="Johann Jakob Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="2762" end="2773" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="2822" end="2829" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156723" start="2946" end="2976" title="Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770786" start="3164" end="3179" title="King of Prussia" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="3245" end="3252" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="3296" end="3317" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="House of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="3440" end="3454" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12738" start="3484" end="3509" title="Principality of Neuchâtel" label="Principality of Neuchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="3783" end="3795" title="Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184065" start="3900" end="3908" title="delegation" label="delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51989" start="4401" end="4425" title="Johann Gottfried Schadow" label="Johann Gottfried Schadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="4904" end="4919" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q249232" start="4967" end="4982" title="Third Coalition" label="Third Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q154426" start="5169" end="5194" title="Battle of Jena–Auerstedt" label="Battles of Jena-Auerstädt"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="5200" end="5206" title="French First Empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="5233" end="5246" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079568" start="5362" end="5386" title="Fall of Berlin (1806)" label="Napoleon occupied Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q776965" start="5429" end="5434" title="Klaipėda" label="Memel"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="5436" end="5448" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="5490" end="5511" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647" start="5580" end="5586" title="Tilsit" label="Tilsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622" start="5594" end="5600" title="Niemen" label="Niemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="5624" end="5630" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="5644" end="5652" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="5950" end="5954" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213542" start="6176" end="6217" title="Heinrich Friedrich Karl vom und zum Stein" label="Heinrich Friedrich Karl vom und zum Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q213645" start="6226" end="6252" title="Karl August von Hardenberg" label="Karl August von Hardenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170340" start="6254" end="6290" title="Gerhard Johann David von Scharnhorst" label="Gerhard Johann David von Scharnhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q165519" start="6302" end="6322" title="August von Gneisenau" label="August von Gneisenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q643868" start="6596" end="6614" title="Friedrich Ancillon" label="Friedrich Ancillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292563" start="6756" end="6776" title="Sophie Marie von Voß" label="Sophie Marie von Voß"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417921" start="6828" end="6867" title="Wilhelm zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein" label="Wilhelm zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="6905" end="6921" title="French invasion of Russia" label="defeat in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736806" start="6943" end="6966" title="Convention of Tauroggen" label="Convention of Tauroggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q638329" start="7046" end="7052" title="Treaty of Kalisz (1813)" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q163755" start="7256" end="7291" title="Karl Philipp Fürst zu Schwarzenberg" label="Karl Philipp Fürst zu Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130834" start="7328" end="7346" title="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="7356" end="7374" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="7536" end="7542" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q163202" start="7983" end="8009" title="Prussian Union of Churches" label="Prussian Union of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416716" start="8224" end="8237" title="Old Lutherans" label="Old Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204150" start="8690" end="8705" title="German settlement in Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030929" start="8707" end="8713" title="German Canadians" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981543" start="8723" end="8736" title="Saxon Lutheran immigration of 1838–39" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q66525" start="9348" end="9402" title="Auguste von Harrach" label="Countess Auguste von Harrach zu Rohrau und Thannhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q689050" start="9439" end="9455" title="Harrach family" label="House of Harrach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9484" end="9489" title="Mediatised Houses#List of Comital mediatised houses (Erlaucht)" label="equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494968" start="9499" end="9522" title="Monarchies in Europe" label="European royal families"/>
<link wikidata="Q210761" start="9573" end="9583" title="morganatic marriage" label="morganatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18244" start="9604" end="9612" title="Fürst" label="Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q106274" start="9616" end="9624" title="Legnica" label="Liegnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q490118" start="9709" end="9721" title="Mysłakowice" label="Erdmannsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q203139" start="9774" end="9783" title="Zillertal" label="Zillertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153809" start="9795" end="9800" title="Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q57180" start="9971" end="9991" title="Frederick William IV" label="Frederick William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q154996" start="10072" end="10086" title="Charlottenburg Palace" label="Charlottenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q241238" start="10298" end="10329" title="Princess Frederica Charlotte of Prussia" label="Frederica Charlotte (1767–1820)"/>
<link wikidata="Q213573" start="10377" end="10400" title="Frederick, Duke of York" label="Frederick, Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q675258" start="10425" end="10448" title="Prince Louis Charles of Prussia" label="Louis Charles (1773–96)"/>
<link wikidata="Q236978" start="10451" end="10490" title="Wilhelmine of Prussia, Queen of the Netherlands" label="Frederica Louisa Wilhelmina (1774–1837)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="10534" end="10562" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="William I of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q257612" start="10565" end="10584" title="Princess Augusta of Prussia" label="Augusta (1780–1841)"/>
<link wikidata="Q543865" start="10594" end="10622" title="William II, Elector of Hesse" label="William II, Elector of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q115282" start="10625" end="10642" title="Prince Henry of Prussia (1781–1846)" label="Henry (1781–1846)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62022" start="10645" end="10664" title="Prince Wilhelm of Prussia (1783–1851)" label="William (1783–1851)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220406" wikidata="Q1025714" url="?curid=220406" title="Kangasniemi">
<text>Kangasniemi is a municipality in the Southern Savonia region, Finland. The municipality has a population of () and covers an area of of which is water. The population density is .

Kangasniemi is located on the Finnish national road 13, northwest of Mikkeli and southeast of Jyväskylä. Distance to the national capital, Helsinki is . Its neighbour municipalities are Hankasalmi, Hirvensalmi, Joutsa, Mikkeli, Pieksämäki and Toivakka.

There are almost 3600 (May 2014) summer houses, and summer guests redouble the number of inhabitants during the summer months.

The municipality is unilingually Finnish.

==History==
The municipality was founded in 1867.

==Nature==
There are more than of shoreline. The largest lakes are Puulavesi and Kyyvesi. Other lakes include Mallos and Synsiä. In 1997, Kangasniemi was voted the most beautiful municipality in Finland by television show.

==Economy==
Kangasniemi has large forest resources, approximately , and the yearly growth is approximately . There is also &quot;Puula golf field&quot;.
==Famous natives==

*Emilie Björkstén, poet
*Hilding Ekelund, architect
*Otto Manninen, writer, poet and translator
*Tepa Reinikainen, shot putter
*Hiski Salomaa, singer and songwriter
*Virpi Sarasvuo, née Kuitunen, cross-country skier
*Sami Sarjula, actor
*Martti Tolamo, athlete

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Kangasniemi Church

==References==
==External links==
*Municipality of Kangasniemi – Official website
*The Finnish Association for Persons with Intellectual Disabilities Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1025714" start="0" end="11" title="Kangasniemi" label="Kangasniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693" start="37" end="53" title="Southern Savonia" label="Southern Savonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193512" start="54" end="60" title="regions of Finland" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="62" end="69" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="156" end="174" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q742208" start="211" end="235" title="Highways in Finland" label="Finnish national road 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q190583" start="250" end="257" title="Mikkeli" label="Mikkeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q134620" start="275" end="284" title="Jyväskylä" label="Jyväskylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="320" end="328" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q543717" start="367" end="377" title="Hankasalmi" label="Hankasalmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q607778" start="379" end="390" title="Hirvensalmi" label="Hirvensalmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q993058" start="392" end="398" title="Joutsa" label="Joutsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190583" start="400" end="407" title="Mikkeli" label="Mikkeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q613701" start="409" end="419" title="Pieksämäki" label="Pieksämäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q580534" start="424" end="432" title="Toivakka" label="Toivakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5787273" start="468" end="480" title="summer house" label="summer house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="596" end="603" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318014" start="724" end="733" title="Puulavesi" label="Puulavesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795204" start="738" end="745" title="Kyyvesi" label="Kyyvesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="863" end="873" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939333" start="1055" end="1071" title="Emilie Björkstén" label="Emilie Björkstén"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410996" start="1079" end="1094" title="Hilding Ekelund" label="Hilding Ekelund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115482" start="1107" end="1120" title="Otto Manninen" label="Otto Manninen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984172" start="1151" end="1167" title="Tepa Reinikainen" label="Tepa Reinikainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166592" start="1182" end="1195" title="Hiski Salomaa" label="Hiski Salomaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q232654" start="1220" end="1248" title="Virpi Sarasvuo" label="Virpi Sarasvuo, née Kuitunen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319155" start="1271" end="1283" title="Sami Sarjula" label="Sami Sarjula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881356" start="1292" end="1305" title="Martti Tolamo" label="Martti Tolamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869586" start="1342" end="1360" title="Kangasniemi Church" label="Kangasniemi Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220409" wikidata="Q849934" url="?curid=220409" title="Heinola">
<text>Heinola () is a town and a municipality of inhabitants () located in the eastern part of the Päijänne Tavastia region, Finland, near the borders of the South Savonia region and the Kymenlaakso region. It is the third largest municipality in the region in terms of population after Lahti and Hollola. The neighbour municipalities of Heinola are Asikkala, Hartola, Iitti, Kouvola, Mäntyharju, Nastola, Pertunmaa and Sysmä.

In the coat of arms of Heinola, the Tavastia&#x27;s provincial animal, the Eurasian lynx, crosses a fess resembling an arch bridge; it refers to the Jyränkö Bridge (&quot;Jyrängönsilta&quot;) from 1932, which crosses &quot;Jyrängönvirta&quot;, the smaller part of the Kymi River. The coat of arms was designed by Gustaf von Numers and approved by the Heinola Town Council at its meeting on 23 September 1958. The coat of arms was approved for use by the Ministry of the Interior on 11 November of the same year.

In June 2024, Heinola was included in &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper&#x27;s list of 30 attractive summer destinations where people can vacation without the oppressive heat.

==History==
Heinola used to be a remote village of then larger Hollola until it gained significance in 1776 when Gustav III of Sweden promoted it to be the governmental center of the province in which it was then located. The grid plan of the city center is from that era. Heinola also became a center of commerce for nearby regions.

When Finland became a part of Russia in 1809, the capital of the province was moved eastwards with the state border. To compensate this, Heinola was granted town rights on December 26, 1839 by Czar Nicholas I. Before World War II, Heinola was widely known as a spa town, and until 1972 it served as a location for an institute (seminaari) that taught elementary school teachers. These both were established in the 1890s and played an important role in the town life.

Heinolan maalaiskunta was merged into Heinola in 1997.

==Geography==

Heinola is largely situated between two lakes, Ruotsalainen and Konnivesi. A waterway connecting the lakes crosses the town and is, along with an esker also crossing the town, a characterising geographical feature of Heinola.
A motorway (Finnish national road 4/E75) connects Heinola to Lahti (distance ) and Helsinki (distance ); it also acrosses Lake Ruotsalainen on the Tähtiniemi Bridge in the northern part of town. Heinola is also southern head of the Finnish national road 5, which goes over 900 kilometres to the north through the cities Kuopio and Kajaani to Sodankylä.
==Climate==
Heinola has a subarctic climate (&quot;Dfc&quot;) bordering on a humid continental climate (&quot;Dfb&quot;). 

==Economy==
After World War II Heinola has been economically an industrial town, mainly due to its wood processing industry. Industry remained the largest source of employment until the 1970s, when the trade and services sector grew larger, following a national trend.

Volkswagen Beetles were built in Heinola.

Heinola has been hit hard by Late-2000s recession. UPM-Kymmene, that used to be the largest employer after the public sector, reported closing down its sawmill and plywood mill in Heinola during 2010.

==Sights==

The bird zoo is located just next to the old bus station. The founding idea of the bird zoo is to offer help for birds that have injured themselves in the traffic, power lines and glass surfaces, and to rehabilitate them back to the nature. The birds that remain in the care, and the ones that are not capable of returning to the nature, but are considered to maintain a meaningful life in capture, are available for spectators to see. For school groups and tourists, this can be a good opportunity to identify some of the species that are not so easily spotted in the wild. In the summer, tropical birds that spend the winter inside are also to be seen.

==Culture==
===Food===
In the 1980s, Heinola&#x27;s traditional parish dishes were &quot;tappaiskeitto&quot; (&quot;butchery soup&quot;) and pancakes.

==International relations==
===Twin towns — sister cities===
Heinola is twinned with:
* Karlshamn, Sweden 
* Peine (district), Germany
* Piešťany, Slovakia

== See also ==
* Heinolan Peliitat
* Lusi (Heinola)
* Vierumäki

== References ==
==External links==

*Town of Heinola – official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q849934" start="0" end="7" title="Heinola" label="Heinola"/>
<link wikidata="Q183443" start="16" end="20" title="List of cities and towns in Finland" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q856076" start="27" end="39" title="Municipalities of Finland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708" start="93" end="117" title="Päijänne Tavastia" label="Päijänne Tavastia region"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="119" end="126" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693" start="152" end="172" title="South Savo" label="South Savonia region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698" start="181" end="199" title="Kymenlaakso" label="Kymenlaakso region"/>
<link wikidata="Q28911" start="281" end="286" title="Lahti" label="Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q990578" start="291" end="298" title="Hollola" label="Hollola"/>
<link wikidata="Q730285" start="344" end="352" title="Asikkala" label="Asikkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010494" start="354" end="361" title="Hartola (Finland)" label="Hartola"/>
<link wikidata="Q853673" start="363" end="368" title="Iitti" label="Iitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q204382" start="370" end="377" title="Kouvola" label="Kouvola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641649" start="379" end="389" title="Mäntyharju" label="Mäntyharju"/>
<link wikidata="Q369576" start="391" end="398" title="Nastola" label="Nastola"/>
<link wikidata="Q979535" start="400" end="409" title="Pertunmaa" label="Pertunmaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q988280" start="414" end="419" title="Sysmä" label="Sysmä"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="429" end="441" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q475244" start="458" end="466" title="Tavastia (historical province)" label="Tavastia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375" start="497" end="510" title="Eurasian lynx" label="Eurasian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088484" start="522" end="526" title="fess" label="fess"/>
<link wikidata="Q158438" start="541" end="552" title="arch bridge" label="arch bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q890526" start="690" end="700" title="Kymi River" label="Kymi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q245981" start="735" end="752" title="Gustaf von Numers" label="Gustaf von Numers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357767" start="876" end="900" title="Ministry of the Interior (Finland)" label="Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="979" end="988" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q990578" start="1173" end="1180" title="Hollola" label="Hollola"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="1223" end="1243" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="Gustav III of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="1336" end="1345" title="grid plan" label="grid plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1475" end="1481" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="1602" end="1613" title="town rights" label="town rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="1643" end="1653" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1662" end="1674" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946461" start="1706" end="1714" title="spa town" label="spa town"/>
<link wikidata="Q11861973" start="1913" end="1934" title="Heinolan maalaiskunta" label="Heinolan maalaiskunta"/>
<link wikidata="Q533040" start="2031" end="2043" title="Ruotsalainen (lake)" label="Ruotsalainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781821" start="2048" end="2057" title="Konnivesi" label="Konnivesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q332784" start="2130" end="2135" title="esker" label="esker"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="2212" end="2220" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006658" start="2222" end="2245" title="Finnish national road 4" label="Finnish national road 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q638912" start="2246" end="2249" title="European route E75" label="E75"/>
<link wikidata="Q28911" start="2271" end="2276" title="Lahti" label="Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="2293" end="2301" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491948" start="2357" end="2374" title="Tähtiniemi Bridge" label="Tähtiniemi Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q892019" start="2442" end="2465" title="Finnish national road 5" label="Finnish national road 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q162279" start="2530" end="2536" title="Kuopio" label="Kuopio"/>
<link wikidata="Q193180" start="2541" end="2548" title="Kajaani" label="Kajaani"/>
<link wikidata="Q502175" start="2552" end="2561" title="Sodankylä" label="Sodankylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="2589" end="2606" title="subarctic climate" label="subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="2640" end="2665" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2705" end="2717" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609891" start="2786" end="2801" title="wood processing" label="wood processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="2957" end="2974" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="3029" end="3049" title="Late-2000s recession" label="Late-2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890664" start="3051" end="3062" title="UPM (company)" label="UPM-Kymmene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331388" start="3959" end="3972" title="tappaiskeitto" label="tappaiskeitto"/>
<link wikidata="Q329737" start="3986" end="3994" title="butchery" label="butchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q44541" start="4011" end="4018" title="pancake" label="pancake"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="4094" end="4101" title="Town twinning" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q510223" start="4110" end="4119" title="Karlshamn Municipality" label="Karlshamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045" start="4131" end="4147" title="Peine (district)" label="Peine (district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q321074" start="4159" end="4167" title="Piešťany" label="Piešťany"/>
<link wikidata="Q938189" start="4196" end="4213" title="Heinolan Peliitat" label="Heinolan Peliitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11879899" start="4216" end="4230" title="Lusi (Heinola)" label="Lusi (Heinola)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001775" start="4233" end="4242" title="Vierumäki" label="Vierumäki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220413" wikidata="Q211020" url="?curid=220413" title="Imatra">
<text>Imatra is a town in Finland, located in the southeastern interior of the country. Imatra is located in the region of South Karelia, on Lake Saimaa, the River Vuoksi. The population of Imatra is approximately , while the sub-region has a population of approximately . It is the most populous municipality in Finland.

Imatra lies on the border with Russia. On the other side of the border, away from the centre of Imatra, lies the Russian town of Svetogorsk. The city of St. Petersburg is situated to the southeast, the Finnish capital Helsinki is away and Lappeenranta, the nearest Finnish town, is away. 

The main employers are the pulp and paper manufacturer Stora Enso Oyj, the town of Imatra, the engineering steel manufacturer Ovako Bar Oy Ab and the Finnish Border Guard. , the total number of employees was 12,423. , 1,868 people were employed by the City of Imatra. The town&#x27;s nicknames include Imis, Ibiza and Nahkalippis City (leather baseball cap city). Due to its location close to the border, Russian tourists are a common sight in the town, and Russian tourism is a boon to the local economy. Most people shop in Imatra, and Imatra&#x27;s tax-free sales are the third largest among Finnish cities (only Helsinki and Lappeenranta are ahead).

The name of Imatra is thought to derive from a pre-Finno-Ugric language. The lightning symbols on Imatra&#x27;s coat of arms refer to the power plants that were built in the early 1920s at the Tainionskoski and Imatrankoski rapids. The coat of arms was designed by and approved by the Imatra Town Council on 9 August 1950. The Ministry of the Interior approved the coat of arms for use on 25 October of the same year.

==History==

An Art Nouveau or Jugend style castle, currently known as Imatran Valtionhotelli (&quot;Imatra State Hotel&quot;), was built near the rapids in 1903 as a hotel for tourists from the Russian Imperial capital Saint Petersburg.

During the Continuation War, Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim met with Adolf Hitler in secrecy near the town for the former&#x27;s 75th birthday.

Imatra was founded in 1948 on the territory of three municipalities – Jääski, Ruokolahti and Joutseno. Finland ceded 9% of its territory to the Soviet Union after the Winter War. Jääski lost 85% of its territory and it was decided that a new municipality, Imatra, should be established on the remaining 15% of Jääski and some areas of Ruokolahti and Joutseno. This is why the Imatra coat of arms has three flashes – in honour of those previous municipalities that granted areas to it. It gained its municipal charter in 1971.

==Sport==

PaSa Bandy is a bandy club in Imatra.

The men&#x27;s pesäpallo club Imatran Pallo-Veikot competes in the Superpesis national league, playing at Ukonniemi Stadium.

Ice hockey club Imatran Ketterä plays in second-tier Mestis. Imatra is the birthplace of National Hockey League players Jussi Markkanen and Petteri Nokelainen. 

In motorsport history, Imatra is best known for its road races (former TT-race) from 1963 to 1986. From 1962 to 1982 it was the home of the Finnish motorcycle Grand Prix. Racing on the Imatra road circuit ended after fatal accident during the 1986 European Championship event. Racing resumed in 2016 as an International Road Racing Championship event.

There is an annual indoor rowing race at Imatra, which attracts competitors from across Finland.

==Culture==

The Black &amp; White Theatre has produced more than 20 performances, the movie &quot;Murderer&quot; and organized from 2004 Black &amp; White Theatre Festival in Imatra. More information https://blackandwhitetheatre.fi/.

== Transport ==

The national road 6, running from Koskenkylä in Loviisa to Kajaani via Kouvola, Lappeenranta, and Joensuu passes through Imatra. Also in Imatra is a crossing point over the Russian border, which is also the ending point of primary road 62 from Mikkeli.

The Kouvola–Joensuu railway passes through Imatra, and the Imatra railway station serves both passenger and freight transport. From the rail yard of this station is a fork onto the railway towards Kamennogorsk via Vyborg. The planning of the initiation of regular international passenger traffic between Imatra and Saint Petersburg has stopped due to Russia&#x27;s war against Ukraine.

The closest airport to Imatra is the Lappeenranta Airport, which is used by Ryanair on several routes as well as irregular passenger flights to the Canary Islands and cargo flights to Russia. The Immola Airfield is also present, serving the Finnish Border Guard as well as hobbyist aviation activities.

== Notable people ==
* Marlo Koponen, ice hockey player
* Jarmo Koski, actor
* Arvo Kyllönen, wrestler
* Jussi Markkanen, ice hockey player
* Petteri Nokelainen, ice hockey player
* Lilli Paasikivi, artistic director
* Jouni Pellinen, skier
* Jarmo Sandelin, professional golfer
* Anneli Taina, politician
* Taiska, singer

==International relations==
Twin towns:
* Ludvika, Sweden 
* Salzgitter, Germany 
* Zvolen, Slovakia 
* Tikhvin, Russia (frozen since 2022 due to Russia attacking Ukraine) 
* Szigetvár, Hungary 
* Narva-Jõesuu, Estonia
* Jiaxing, China
Sister cities:
* Beihai, China
Co-operation cities:
* Nizhyn, Ukraine

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Imatra shooting
* Svetogorsk

== References ==
== External links ==
*
*Town of Imatra – Official site
*goSaimaa.com – Travel information about Imatra</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211020" start="0" end="6" title="Imatra" label="Imatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="12" end="16" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="20" end="27" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691" start="117" end="130" title="South Karelia" label="South Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400464" start="135" end="146" title="Saima" label="Lake Saimaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q819448" start="152" end="164" title="River Vuoksi" label="River Vuoksi"/>
<link wikidata="Q296196" start="220" end="230" title="Imatra sub-region" label="sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q856076" start="291" end="303" title="Municipalities of Finland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q495735" start="336" end="354" title="Finland–Russia border" label="border with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15306" start="446" end="456" title="Svetogorsk" label="Svetogorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="470" end="484" title="Saint Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="535" end="543" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q181854" start="556" end="568" title="Lappeenranta" label="Lappeenranta"/>
<link wikidata="Q747265" start="662" end="676" title="Stora Enso" label="Stora Enso Oyj"/>
<link wikidata="Q10613540" start="733" end="738" title="Ovako" label="Ovako"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418075" start="757" end="777" title="Finnish Border Guard" label="Finnish Border Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1073" end="1080" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054456" start="1159" end="1167" title="tax-free shopping" label="tax-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167333" start="1309" end="1333" title="Pre-Finno-Ugric substrate" label="pre-Finno-Ugric language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418090" start="1473" end="1485" title="Imatrankoski" label="Imatrankoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1498" end="1510" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357767" start="1589" end="1613" title="Ministry of the Interior (Finland)" label="Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1901" end="1917" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="1931" end="1947" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1949" end="1998" title="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim#Visit by Adolf Hitler" label="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim met with Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892" start="2132" end="2138" title="Jääski" label="Jääski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009622" start="2140" end="2150" title="Ruokolahti" label="Ruokolahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q829851" start="2155" end="2163" title="Joutseno" label="Joutseno"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="2229" end="2239" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2600" end="2610" title="PaSa Bandy" label="PaSa Bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="2616" end="2621" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295867" start="2654" end="2663" title="pesäpallo" label="pesäpallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864754" start="2669" end="2689" title="Imatran Pallo-Veikot" label="Imatran Pallo-Veikot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678345" start="2706" end="2716" title="Superpesis" label="Superpesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30116284" start="2745" end="2762" title="Ukonniemi Stadium" label="Ukonniemi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="2765" end="2775" title="Ice hockey" label="Ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310777" start="2781" end="2796" title="Imatran Ketterä" label="Imatran Ketterä"/>
<link wikidata="Q750918" start="2818" end="2824" title="Mestis" label="Mestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="2854" end="2876" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q327655" start="2885" end="2900" title="Jussi Markkanen" label="Jussi Markkanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063063" start="2905" end="2923" title="Petteri Nokelainen" label="Petteri Nokelainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="2930" end="2940" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404296" start="2979" end="2989" title="road racing" label="road races"/>
<link wikidata="Q967220" start="3031" end="3035" title="1962 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q428831" start="3039" end="3043" title="1982 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080406" start="3067" end="3096" title="Finnish motorcycle Grand Prix" label="Finnish motorcycle Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3233" end="3271" title=":fi:International Road Racing Championship" label="International Road Racing Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3635" end="3650" title="Finnish national road 6" label="national road 6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3665" end="3675" title="Koskenkylä" label="Koskenkylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q748513" start="3679" end="3686" title="Loviisa" label="Loviisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193180" start="3690" end="3697" title="Kajaani" label="Kajaani"/>
<link wikidata="Q204382" start="3702" end="3709" title="Kouvola" label="Kouvola"/>
<link wikidata="Q181854" start="3711" end="3723" title="Lappeenranta" label="Lappeenranta"/>
<link wikidata="Q186237" start="3729" end="3736" title="Joensuu" label="Joensuu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3854" end="3869" title="Finnish primary road 62" label="primary road 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q190583" start="3875" end="3882" title="Mikkeli" label="Mikkeli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3889" end="3912" title="Kouvola–Joensuu railway" label="Kouvola–Joensuu railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864759" start="3944" end="3966" title="Imatra railway station" label="Imatra railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264" start="4082" end="4094" title="Kamennogorsk" label="Kamennogorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="4099" end="4105" title="Vyborg" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="4200" end="4216" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q254039" start="4309" end="4329" title="Lappeenranta Airport" label="Lappeenranta Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="4348" end="4355" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="4420" end="4434" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016782" start="4468" end="4483" title="Immola Airfield" label="Immola Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418075" start="4513" end="4533" title="Finnish Border Guard" label="Finnish Border Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8839194" start="4599" end="4612" title="Marlo Koponen" label="Marlo Koponen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319152" start="4634" end="4645" title="Jarmo Koski" label="Jarmo Koski"/>
<link wikidata="Q23008549" start="4655" end="4668" title="Arvo Kyllönen" label="Arvo Kyllönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q327655" start="4681" end="4696" title="Jussi Markkanen" label="Jussi Markkanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063063" start="4718" end="4736" title="Petteri Nokelainen" label="Petteri Nokelainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548064" start="4758" end="4773" title="Lilli Paasikivi" label="Lilli Paasikivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q52395" start="4795" end="4809" title="Jouni Pellinen" label="Jouni Pellinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q303735" start="4819" end="4833" title="Jarmo Sandelin" label="Jarmo Sandelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981949" start="4857" end="4869" title="Anneli Taina" label="Anneli Taina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676436" start="4884" end="4890" title="Taiska" label="Taiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q503184" start="4942" end="4949" title="Ludvika Municipality" label="Ludvika"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4951" end="4957" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200" start="4961" end="4971" title="Salzgitter" label="Salzgitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4973" end="4980" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="4984" end="4990" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="4992" end="5000" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15336" start="5004" end="5011" title="Tikhvin" label="Tikhvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5013" end="5019" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373542" start="5075" end="5084" title="Szigetvár" label="Szigetvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="5086" end="5093" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q723372" start="5097" end="5109" title="Narva-Jõesuu" label="Narva-Jõesuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="5111" end="5118" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58178" start="5121" end="5128" title="Jiaxing" label="Jiaxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5130" end="5135" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q210365" start="5153" end="5159" title="Beihai" label="Beihai"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5161" end="5166" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q952457" start="5190" end="5196" title="Nizhyn" label="Nizhyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="5198" end="5205" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27956602" start="5238" end="5253" title="Imatra shooting" label="Imatra shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15306" start="5256" end="5266" title="Svetogorsk" label="Svetogorsk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220414" wikidata="Q327018" url="?curid=220414" title="Interrogation">
<text>Interrogation (also called questioning) is interviewing as commonly employed by law enforcement officers, military personnel, intelligence agencies, organized crime syndicates, and terrorist organizations with the goal of eliciting useful information, particularly information related to suspected crime. Interrogation may involve a diverse array of techniques, ranging from developing a congenial rapport with the subject to torture.

==Techniques==
===Deception===
Deception can form an important part of effective interrogation. In the United States, there is no law or regulation that forbids the interrogator from lying about the strength of their case, from making misleading statements or from implying that the interviewee has already been implicated in the crime by someone else. See case law on trickery and deception (&quot;Frazier v. Cupp&quot;).

In 2021, Illinois became the first state to ban police officers from lying to minors during interrogations.

As noted above, traditionally the issue of deception is considered from the perspective of the interrogator engaging in deception towards the individual being interrogated. By the 2000s, information began appearing in research studies on effective interview methods used to gather information from individuals who score in the medium to high range on measures of psychopathology, and who exhibit deception with interrogators.

===Verbal and non-verbal cues===
The major aim of this technique is to investigate to what extent verbal and non-verbal features of liars&#x27; and truth-tellers&#x27; behaviour change during the course of repeated interrogations. It has shown that liars display significantly fewer smiles, self-manipulations, pauses, and less gaze aversion than truth-tellers. According to Granhag &amp; Strömwall, there are three approaches to non-verbal deceptive behavior. The first is the emotional approach, which suggests that liars will alter their behaviors based on their own emotional feelings. For example, if a subject is lying and they begin to experience guilt, they will shift their gaze. The second approach is the cognitive approach, which suggests that lying requires more thought than telling the truth, which in turn, may result in a liar making more errors in speech. Lastly, the attempted control approach suggests a subject who is lying will attempt to be seemingly normal or honest, and will try to adjust their behaviors to make themselves believable.

===Good cop/bad cop===

Good cop/bad cop is a psychological tactic used in negotiation and interrogation, in which a team of two interrogators take apparently opposing approaches to the subject. One adopts a hostile or accusatory demeanor, emphasizing threats of punishment, while the other adopts a more sympathetic demeanor, emphasizing reward, in order to convince the subject to cooperate.

=== Rotating interrogators ===
In the People&#x27;s Republic of China, the &quot;wheel battle&quot; (&quot;chelunzhan&quot;) tactic involves &quot;unrelenting continuous interrogation by multiple rotating interrogators&quot;.

===Mind-altering drugs===
The use of drugs in interrogation is both ineffective and illegal. The Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment (adopted by the UN General Assembly as resolution 43/173 of 9 December 1988) forbids &quot;methods of interrogation which impair the capacity of decision of judgment.&quot; Furthermore, the World Medical Association and American Medical Association, for example, both forbid participation by physicians in interrogations.

===Torture===

The history of the state use of torture in interrogations extends over more than 2,000 years in Europe. It was recognized early on that information extracted under duress was deceptive and untrustworthy. The Roman imperial jurist Ulpian in the third century AD remarked that there is &quot;no means of obtaining the truth&quot; from those who have the strength to resist, while those unable to withstand the pain &quot;will tell any lie rather than suffer it.&quot;

The use of torture as an investigative technique waned with the rise of Christianity since it was considered &quot;antithetical to Christ&#x27;s teachings,&quot; and in 866 Pope Nicholas I banned the practice. But after the 13th century many European states such as Germany, France, Portugal, Italy, and Spain began to return to physical abuse for religious inquisition, and for secular investigations. By the 18th century the spreading influence of the Enlightenment led European nations to abandon officially state-sanctioned interrogation by torture. By 1874 Victor Hugo could plausibly claim that &quot;torture has ceased to exist.&quot; Yet in the 20th century authoritarian states such as Mussolini&#x27;s Fascist Italy, Hitler&#x27;s Third Reich, and Lenin&#x27;s and Stalin&#x27;s Soviet Union once again resumed the practice, and on a massive scale.

During the Cold War, the American Central Intelligence Agency was a significant influence among world powers regarding torture techniques in its support of anti-Communist regimes. The CIA adopted methods such as waterboarding, sleep deprivation, and the use of electric shock, which were used by the Gestapo, KGB, and North Koreans from their involvement in the Korean War. The CIA also researched &#x27;no-touch&#x27; torture, involving sensory deprivation, self-inflicted pain, and psychological stress. The CIA taught its refined techniques of torture through police and military training to American-supported regimes in the Middle East, in Southeast Asia during the bloody Phoenix Program, and throughout Latin America during Operation Condor. In some Asian and South Pacific nations, such as Malaysia and the Philippines, torture for interrogating and terrorizing opponents became widespread. &quot;In its pursuit of torturers across the globe for the past forty years,&quot; writer Alfred McCoy notes, &quot;Amnesty International has been, in a certain sense, following the trail of CIA programs.&quot;

After the revelation of CIA sponsored torture in the 1970s and the subsequent outcry, the CIA largely stopped its own interrogations under torture. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, it &quot;outsourced&quot; such interrogation through renditions of prisoners to third world allies, often called torture-by-proxy. But in the furor over the September 11 attacks, American authorities cast aside scruples, legally authorizing some forms of interrogation by torture under euphemisms such as &quot;enhanced interrogation techniques&quot; or &quot;interrogation in depth&quot; to collect intelligence on Al Qaeda, starting in 2002. Ultimately the CIA, the US military, and their contract employees tortured untold thousands at Abu Ghraib, Bagram, and other secret CIA black site prisons scattered around the globe, according to the Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture and the bipartisan U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee report Whether these interrogations under torture produced useful information is hotly disputed.

The administration of President Barack Obama prohibited so-called enhanced interrogation in 2009, and as of March 2012 there is no longer a nation which openly admits to deliberate abuse of prisoners for purposes of interrogation.

==By country==
===United Kingdom===
Statutory law and regulatory law, various legal precedents called &#x27;case law&#x27; also impact interrogation techniques and procedures. One of the first attempts by British Courts to guide and set standards for police officers interrogating suspects was the declaration of the &#x27;Judges&#x27; Rules&#x27; in 1912 by the judges of the King&#x27;s Bench Division in England. These rules, although not law, still have weight in the United Kingdom and Canada.

British military personnel were found to have misused a number of techniques during the detention of suspects in Northern Ireland in the early 1970s. Police deception in interrogation was banned in the UK in 1984 with the passage of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE).

===United States===
====Police interrogation====
In the United States, police interrogations are conducted under an adversarial system, in which the police seek to obtain material that will aid in convicting a suspect rather than discovering the facts of the case. To this end, a variety of tactics are employed.

The Reid technique is widely used by U. S. law enforcement officers for interrogation purposes. It involves steps to obtaining a confession and methods for detecting signs of deception in the suspect&#x27;s body language. The technique has been criticized for being difficult to apply across cultures and as eliciting false confessions from innocent people. An example is described in the analysis of the Denver police&#x27;s January 2000 interrogation of 14-year-old Lorenzo Montoya, which took place during its investigation of the murder of 29-year-old Emily Johnson.

====Constitutional protections====
The Fifth Amendment, which states that one cannot be made to be &quot;a witness against himself&quot;, prohibits law enforcement from forcing suspects to offer self-incriminating evidence.

As a result of the &quot;Miranda v. Arizona&quot; ruling, police are required to read aloud to suspects under interrogation their &quot;Miranda&quot; Rights afforded to them by the Fifth Amendment, such as the right to remain silent and the right to seek counsel. If the police fail to administer the &quot;Miranda&quot; rights, all statements under interrogation are prohibited from being used as evidence in court proceedings.

====Push for mandatory recording of interrogations in the U.S.====
By the 2000s, a growing movement calls for the mandatory electronic recording of all custodial interrogations in the United States. &quot;Electronic recording&quot; describes the process of recording interrogations from start to finish. This is in contrast to a &quot;taped&quot; or &quot;recorded confession,&quot; which typically only includes the final statement of the suspect. &quot;Taped interrogation&quot; is the traditional term for this process; however, as analog is becoming less and less common, statutes and scholars are referring to the process as &quot;electronically recording&quot; interviews or interrogations. Alaska, Illinois, Maine, Minnesota, and Wisconsin are the only states to require taped interrogation. New Jersey&#x27;s taping requirement started on January 1, 2006. Massachusetts allows jury instructions that state that the courts prefer taped interrogations. Neil Nelson of the St. Paul Police Department, an expert in taped interrogation, has described taped interrogation in Minnesota as the &quot;best tool ever forced down our throats&quot;.

== See also ==
* Covert interrogation
* Interrogation of Saddam Hussein
* Torture
* FM 34-52 Intelligence Interrogation
* Resistance to interrogation

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q327018" start="0" end="13" title="Interrogation" label="Interrogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q327018" start="27" end="38" title="Interrogation" label="questioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q178651" start="43" end="52" title="interview" label="interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503343" start="80" end="104" title="law enforcement officers" label="law enforcement officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47064" start="106" end="124" title="military personnel" label="military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="126" end="147" title="intelligence agencies" label="intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="149" end="174" title="organized crime syndicate" label="organized crime syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q312484" start="181" end="204" title="terrorist organizations" label="terrorist organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="426" end="433" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="467" end="476" title="Deception" label="Deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="539" end="552" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494119" start="835" end="850" title="Frazier v. Cupp" label="Frazier v. Cupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="869" end="877" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282290" start="2483" end="2499" title="Good cop/bad cop" label="Good cop/bad cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q202875" start="2534" end="2545" title="negotiation" label="negotiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2892" end="2923" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="3291" end="3310" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q180442" start="3465" end="3490" title="World Medical Association" label="World Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="3495" end="3523" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="3645" end="3652" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="4438" end="4449" title="inquisition" label="inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="4642" end="4653" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4951" end="4959" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="4974" end="5001" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552748" start="5152" end="5165" title="waterboarding" label="waterboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="5240" end="5247" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="5249" end="5252" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="5302" end="5312" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500368" start="5424" end="5444" title="psychological stress" label="psychological stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755657" start="5618" end="5633" title="Phoenix Program" label="Phoenix Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q156017" start="5671" end="5687" title="Operation Condor" label="Operation Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385398" start="6344" end="6360" title="Extraordinary rendition" label="torture-by-proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="6388" end="6408" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516835" start="6542" end="6575" title="enhanced interrogation techniques" label="enhanced interrogation techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q334740" start="6770" end="6780" title="Abu Ghraib prison" label="Abu Ghraib"/>
<link wikidata="Q814388" start="6782" end="6788" title="Bagram" label="Bagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q108131731" start="6807" end="6821" title="CIA black site" label="CIA black site"/>
<link wikidata="Q18612127" start="6875" end="6926" title="Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture" label="Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7064" end="7078" title="Enhanced interrogation techniques#Effectiveness and reliability" label="hotly disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="7085" end="7125" title="administration of President Barack Obama" label="administration of President Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022655" start="7421" end="7429" title="case law" label="case law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253065" start="7636" end="7654" title="Judges&amp;#x27; Rules" label="Judges&amp;#x27; Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="8208" end="8226" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310002" start="8410" end="8424" title="Reid technique" label="Reid technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642249" start="9228" end="9246" title="Miranda v. Arizona" label="Miranda v. Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q25051916" start="10797" end="10817" title="Covert interrogation" label="Covert interrogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056617" start="10820" end="10851" title="Interrogation of Saddam Hussein" label="Interrogation of Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="10854" end="10861" title="Torture" label="Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426696" start="10864" end="10899" title="FM 34-52 Intelligence Interrogation" label="FM 34-52 Intelligence Interrogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315627" start="10902" end="10929" title="Resistance to interrogation" label="Resistance to interrogation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220418" wikidata="Q57146" url="?curid=220418" title="Carol I of Romania">
<text>Carol I or Charles I of Romania (born Karl Eitel Friedrich Zephyrinus Ludwig von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen; 20 April 1839 – ), was the monarch of Romania from 1866 to his death in 1914, ruling as Prince (&quot;Domnitor&quot;) from 1866 to 1881, and as King from 1881 to 1914. He was elected Prince of the Romanian United Principalities on 20 April 1866 after the overthrow of Alexandru Ioan Cuza by a palace coup d&#x27;état. In May 1877, Romania was proclaimed an independent and sovereign nation. The defeat of the Ottoman Empire (1878) in the Russo-Turkish War secured Romanian independence, and he was proclaimed King on . He was the first ruler of the Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen dynasty, which ruled the country until the proclamation of a socialist republic in 1947.

During his reign, Carol I personally led Romanian troops during the Russo-Turkish War and assumed command of the Russo/Romanian army during the siege of Plevna. The country achieved internationally recognized independence via the Treaty of Berlin, 1878 and acquired Southern Dobruja from Bulgaria in 1913. In 1883 the king entered a top-secret military alliance with the Austro-Hungarian Empire, despite popular demands against Hungary. When World War I broke out he was unable to activate the alliance. Romania remained neutral and in 1916 joined the Allies.

Domestic political life was organized around the rival Liberal and Conservative parties. During Carol&#x27;s reign, Romania&#x27;s industry and infrastructure were much improved, however this process also resulted in major scandals, including the &quot;Strousberg Affair&quot; which personally implicated Carol. Overall, the country still had an agrarian-focused economy and the situation of the peasantry failed to improve, leading to a major revolt in 1907, bloodily suppressed by the authorities.

He married Princess Elisabeth of Wied on 15 November 1869. They only had one daughter, Maria, who died at the age of four. Carol never produced a male heir, leaving his elder brother Leopold next in line to the throne. In October 1880 Leopold renounced his right of succession in favour of his son William, who in turn surrendered his claim six years later in favour of his younger brother, the future King Ferdinand.

==Early life==
Prince Karl Eitel Friedrich Zephyrinus Ludwig of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen was born on 20 April 1839 in Sigmaringen, in the Catholic branch of the family. He was the second son of Prince Karl Anton of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen and his wife, Princess Josephine of Baden. After finishing his elementary studies, Karl entered the Cadet School in Münster. In 1857 he was attending the courses of the Artillery School in Berlin. Up to 1866, when he accepted the crown of Romania, he was a Prussian officer. He took part in the Second Schleswig War, including the assault of the Fredericia citadel and Dybbøl, an experience which would be very useful to him later in the Russo-Turkish war.

Although he was quite frail and not very tall, prince Karl was reported to be the perfect soldier, healthy and disciplined, and also a very good politician with liberal ideas. He was familiar with several European languages. His family was closely related to the Bonaparte family (one of his grandmothers was a Beauharnais, Joséphine&#x27;s niece-in-law, and the other a Murat, Joachim&#x27;s niece Marie Antoinette Murat), and they enjoyed very good relations with Napoleon III of France.

==&quot;En route&quot; to Romania==
The former Domnitor (ruling prince) of united Romania, Alexandru Ioan Cuza, had been expelled from the country by the leading noblemen, leaving Romania in political chaos. Cuza&#x27;s double election seven years earlier, both in Wallachia and in Moldavia, had been the basis on which the Romanian Principalities&#x27; unification was recognized by the European powers. With him gone, the country was in danger of disintegration, as the Ottoman Empire and other powers initially accepted the unification only on the condition that it would end with his reign.
As Romanian politicians searched for a successor, Karl was not their first choice. The authors of the anti-Cuza coup first approached Philip of Flanders, brother of king Leopold II of Belgium, hoping that he would bring the institutions of his country to the Lower Danube and turn the newly unified country into a &quot;Belgium of the East&quot;. Wary of France&#x27;s oppositions, Philip, who also turned down the throne of Greece a few years earlier, refused.

Soon after, Napoleon III suggested Karl, who was the brother in law of Philip. Napoleon&#x27;s recommendation weighed heavily with Romanian politicians of the time, since Romania was strongly influenced by French culture. Napoleon was a strong supporter of Romanian independence, hoping to consolidate French influence on the Black Sea. Another factor was Karl&#x27;s blood relation to the ruling Prussian family. Ion Brătianu was the Romanian politician sent to negotiate with Karl and his family the possibility of installing him on the Romanian throne.

Due to the political conflict between Prussia and the Austrian Empire, Karl travelled incognito by railroad from Düsseldorf to Baziaș, through Switzerland. He received there a Swiss passport from a Swiss public clerk, friend of his family, under the name of Karl Hettingen. From Baziaș he travelled by boat to Turnu Severin, since there was no railroad to Romania. As he crossed the border onto Romanian soil, he was met by Brătianu, who bowed before him and asked Karl to join him in his carriage. He was formally elected Domnitor on 20 April.

On 10 May 1866 (22 May 1866 N.S.), Karl entered the capital of Bucharest. The news of his arrival had been transmitted by telegraph and he was welcomed by a huge crowd eager to see the new ruler. In Băneasa he was given the keys to the capital city. It was a rainy day after a long period of drought, which was taken to be a good omen by locals. As he was crowned, Karl swore this oath: &quot;I swear to guard the laws of Romania, to maintain the rights of its People and the integrity of its territory.&quot; He took this oath in French, as he did not yet speak Romanian. In fact, it is said that, before his nomination as Domnitor, he had never heard of Romania. However, he endeared himself to his adopted country by adopting the Romanian spelling of his name, Carol. He learned to speak Romanian not long after that.

==Early reign==
=== The Constitution of 1866 ===
On 29 Junetwo months after Carol&#x27;s arrivalthe Romanian parliament adopted the 1866 Constitution of Romania, one of the most modern constitutions of its time. Carol signed it into law two days later. Modeled closely on the Constitution of Belgium, it guaranteed private propriety, freedom of speech, total freedom of the press, it abolished the death penalty during peace time, and established separation of powers. Despite the otherwise liberal nature of the act, the constitution barred non-Christians from becoming citizens, a measure which heavily affected the country&#x27;s Jewish population

This constitution allowed the development and modernization of the Romanian state. In a daring move, the Constitution chose to ignore the nominal suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire, which paved the way towards &quot;de jure&quot; independence.

Article 82 made the throne a hereditary office of Carol&#x27;s descendants &quot;on the male line through the right of first-born, perpetually excluding women and their descendants.&quot; It also required that Carol&#x27;s descendants be &quot;raised in the Eastern Orthodox Religion.&quot; Although Carol was vested with executive power, he was not politically responsible for exercising it. His acts were only valid if they were countersigned by a minister, who then became responsible for the act in question. Nevertheless, he commanded great moral authority as a symbol of the nation and its unity.

=== Franco-Prussian War and the Republic of Ploiești ===
While Romania did not take part in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871, the conflict nonetheless affected the early reign of Carol I. Since he was a German prince ruling a historically Francophile country, there was a strong feeling of distrust towards Carol during the time, who was not yet seen as Romanian. Several attempts to force the prince to abdicate took place around this time, usually led by the republicans and radical liberals led by Ion C. Brătianu and C. A. Rosetti. Carol&#x27;s alliance with the Conservatives which effectively blocked the Liberals out of government did little to quell Liberal animosity towards the prince.

The most well known such incident took place on 8 August 1870, when radical liberals in the city of Ploiești started a revolt and attempted coup by arresting the chief of police and the county Prefect, occupying several official buildings and proclaiming the so-called Republic of Ploiești. The revolt lasted less than 24 hours and lead to the arrest of many Liberal leaders.

Future republican projects were rare, especially since Brătianu became prime minister in 1876 and helped Liberals hold power until 1889, becoming loyal supporters of King Carol.
== War of independence (1877–1878) ==
=== Background ===
Between 1875 and 1877 anti-Ottoman revolts took place in several Balkan countries, most notably Bulgaria, where the April Uprisings of 1876 were brutally suppressed by irregular bashi-bazouks. The international outrage at the Bulgarian massacre – particularly on the part of Russia, who saw itself as a protector of Orthodox Christians in general and Bulgarians in particular – triggered several diplomatic efforts over the next year. After the failure of these diplomatic attempts, Russia declared war on the Ottoman Empire on 24 April 1877, launching the Russo-Turkish War, which is known in Romanian historiography as the War of Independence.

At the behest of then foreign minister Mihail Kogălniceanu and against the advice of his Crown Council, Carol decided to permit Russian troops to pass through its territory on the way to Bulgaria. This resulted in Turkish bombardments of Romanian towns on the Danube. At this point, Romania was de facto independent, being &quot;bound to the Ottoman Empire only by the payment of tribute (which had dropped to 1% of the country&#x27;s budget) and a number of largely formal prerogatives in matters of foreign policy.&quot;

=== Romanian participation ===
On May 10, 1877, Romania declared its independence, ending the legal fiction of Ottoman suzerainty that had existed since 1861. The declaration was put forward and voted on by the Parliament and promulgated by Prince Carol.

While Russia was happy to be given travelling rights inside Romanian territory, it vehemently opposed Romania actively entering the war, as this would have given them a place at the negotiation table after the war. However, after the Russian advance was halted outside the Bulgarian town of Pleven, they requested the Romanian army&#x27;s urgent intervention. Carol obtained the command of the combined Russian and Romanian forces that were surrounding Pleven and following heavy fighting and a prolonged siege, Osman Nuri Pasha surrendered the town on 28 November 1877. This victory sent ripples within Romanian society, elevating Carol&#x27;s name among the pantheon of national heroes.

The Romanian army, under Carol, continued to fight in the war, most notably the battles of Smârdan and Vidin. By early 1878, the Turks were losing the war and on the third of March they signed the Treaty of San Stefano, which recognized the independence of Romania, Serbia, Montenegro and the autonomy of Bulgaria.

=== Aftermath ===
After the war, the Treaty of Berlin recognized Romania as an independent country on 13 July 1878. In addition, Romania was granted the former Ottoman territory of Northern Dobruja, an immensely valuable territorial gain that gave Romania possession of the mouth of the Danube and access to the Black Sea. From 1878, Carol held the title of Royal Highness (&quot;Alteță Regală&quot;).

The war had also made possible the appearance of the Principality of Bulgaria. This young state began a search for a new prince, and Carol I was among the candidates, although he was not elected.

On 15 March 1881, the constitution was amended to proclaim Romania a kingdom. Carol became the first King of Romania, while the heir-apparent or heir-presumptive would be called Prince Royal. On 10 May, Carol was crowned king. The 1866 Constitution was retained, with the word &quot;prince&quot; replaced by the word &quot;king&quot;.

The Steel Crown that was used in the coronation of Carol was forged from steel of a melted Ottoman cannon that was captured by the Romanian Army at the Pleven. Since 2016 it is depicted on the Romanian coat of arms.

==King of Romania==

King Carol was a cold man who was always focused on the prestige of the dynasty he had founded. His wife, Elizabeth, claimed he &#x27;wore the crown in his sleep&#x27;. He was very meticulous and he tried to impose his style upon everyone that surrounded him. Though he was devoted to his job as Romania&#x27;s ruler, he never forgot his German roots. In 48 years of rule—the longest in Romanian history—he helped Romania gain its independence, raised its prestige, helped redress its economy and established a dynasty. In the Carpathian mountains, he built Peleș Castle in German style, which is considered one of Europe&#x27;s most beautiful castles and is still one of Romania&#x27;s most visited landmarks. After the Russo-Turkish War, Romania gained Northern Dobruja and Carol ordered Romanian engineer Anghel Saligny (a competitor and friend of Gustave Eiffel) to build the first contemporary permanent bridge over the Danube, between Fetești and Cernavodă, linking the newly acquired province to the rest of the country. The bridge was, at that time, the longest in Europe and, although no longer in use, it is still intact as of 2023.

The king&#x27;s personal authority in military and foreign policy issues was unquestioned. In 1883 he entered into a crucial alliance with the Central Powers, which he personally arranged without discussion in Parliament or with anyone outside a handful of insiders. Upon its renewal in 1892, he had to inform his prime minister and foreign minister, but Parliament and the public at large did not even know about its existence until the beginning of World War I.

On 22 June 1884, the Parliament voted in favour of granting Carol and his successors a large royal estate, making the king the biggest landowner in the country.

His reign established constitutional monarchy and saw the early days of democracy in Romania, despite the fact that elections of that era are largely seen as being controlled. Although the framers of the Constitution intended to vest most of the power in Parliament, the King exercised considerable influence on the electoral process. He would essentially alternate power between the two parties, installing the opposition whenever he felt the ruling party of the day had run its course. The new government would organize elections which they would invariably win. This resulted in a situation where Parliament reflected the will of the government, not vice versa as is the case in a true parliamentary democracy.

Between 1886 and 1887, there was a new proposal to make Carol I the ruler of Bulgaria. He was strongly supported by Stefan Stambolov, regent of the country after the abdication of the Bulgarian prince Alexander of Battenberg. Stambolov&#x27;s intention was to establish a personal union between Bulgaria and Romania. Carol I was interested in the offer, but had to reject it under Russian pressure.

==Last years and the looming World War I ==
In 1913 Romania intervened in the Second Balkan War and invaded Bulgaria. The approach of Romanian troops towards Sofia determined the Bulgarians to negotiate an armistice which resulted in the Treaty of Bucharest, which gained Romania the territory of Southern Dobruja, expanding the territory obtained by the country under King Carol and confirming Romania&#x27;s dominant role in the region.

The long rule of Carol helped the quick development of the Romanian state. Towards the end of his reign and the start of World War I, Carol wanted to enter the war on the side of the Central Powers; however, Romanian public opinion was overwhelmingly Francophile and sided with the Triple Entente. Carol had signed a secret treaty in 1883 which had linked Romania with the Triple Alliance. Although the treaty was to be activated only if Russia attacked one of the signatories, Carol was convinced that the honourable thing to do was to enter the war supporting the German Empire and his cousin, Kaiser Wilhelm II.

On , an emergency meeting was held with the Crown Council, where Carol told them about the secret treaty and shared his opinion with them. However, most of the Crown Council members strongly disagreed, opting for neutrality, with prime-minister Brătianu being a particularly strong voice for preserving the peace obtained by the Treaty of Bucharest.

King Carol died on . The new king, Ferdinand (under the influence of his wife, Marie of Edinburgh, a British princess), was more willing to listen to public opinion and brought Romania into the war on the side of the Allies in 1916.

==Life and family==

When he was elected prince of Romania, Carol was unmarried. In 1869, the prince started a trip around Europe and mainly Germany, to find a bride. During this trip he met and married Princess Elizabeth of Wied at Neuwied on 15 November 1869. Their marriage was strange, with Carol being a cold and calculating man while Elizabeth was a notorious dreamer who published literature under the name of Carmen Sylva. They had one child, Princess Maria, born in 1870, who died 9 April (N.S.) 1874. She had no prospect of inheriting her father&#x27;s throne; as mentioned above, the Constitution limited succession to the male line. This led to the further estrangement of the royal couple, Elizabeth never completely recovering from the trauma of losing her only child.

After the proclamation of the Kingdom (1881), the succession was a very important matter of state. Since Carol&#x27;s brother, Leopold (in 1880), and his oldest son, William (in 1886), declined their rights, the second son of Leopold, Ferdinand, was named prince of Romania and heir-presumptive to the throne, in 1886.

Towards the end of Carol&#x27;s life Carol and Elizabeth finally found a way to understand each other and were reported to have become good friends.

Carol died on , at the age of 75 years old.

== Legacy ==
Carol I is seen as a towering figure of national history in contemporary Romania. He is often depicted in history books as a historical leader on par with Decebalus, Stephen the Great, Michael the Brave or Alexandru Ioan Cuza. This view emerged during the second half of his reign, with the founding of the constitutional monarchy and the victory in the War of Independence making Carol a legendary personage in his own lifetime, according to historian Lucian Boia:His long reign (of forty-eight years, one more than Stephen the Great) allowed the myth to come to fruition even within his lifetime. The image of the sovereign, mediocre at first, took on a powerful brilliance in the last years of the century. An educational poster of around 1900 presents &quot;the four pillars of the Romanian people&quot;, along with other heroes of Wallachian history. The four are Trajan and Decebalus, Cuza and Carol I. Even Michael the Brave becomes a secondary figure by comparison. Carol appears organically rooted in Romanian history; he represents a new beginning, of course, but a beginning based on much older foundations.

During the Communist era, Carol became a target of scorn for Romanian historians, as were all other figures associated with the monarchy. He was often described as a money-hungry foreign prince who was placed on the throne by Western capitalists in order to tighten their control over the Romanian state, no more than a simple pawn of the Kaiser, who needed someone that blindly followed his orders to rule over the lower Danube. Additionally, he was depicted as an enemy of the peasantry, who tried to steal their lands and rape young peasant girls. He was usually indicated as the sole source of outrage during the 1907 Peasant Revolt. Starting with the second half of the 1970s, Carol&#x27;s image was rehabilitated to some extent by Romanian historians, who distanced themselves from the more propagandistic views of the last three decades. While more mainstream publications, such as school text books, continued the anti-monarchy line, some academics began describing his reign as a period of national progress and acknowledged his role in preserving the young Union.

Following the collapse of Communism in 1989, the monarchy was fully rehabilitated in the public eyes. Carol is now thought of as a figure of national unity who is seen as the founder of the modern Romanian state and one of the most revered individuals in the country&#x27;s history. During the 100 Greatest Romanians show broadcast by the national television in 2006, Carol I was voted the second greatest Romanian who has ever lived, after only Stephen the Great.

The Carol I National Defence University and Central University Library in Bucharest, and the Carol I National College in Craiova are named in his honour.

The Order of Carol I was established in 1906 and was until 1947 the highest honour bestowed by the Romanian Kingdom. In 2005 it was reintroduced by the Romanian royal family as a dynastic order.

==Arms and Honours==

;National orders and decorations
** Sovereign Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Star of Romania
** Founder of the Medal of Faithful Service, &quot;9 April 1878&quot;
** Founder of the Order of the Crown of Romania, &quot;14 March 1881&quot;
** Founder of the Order of Carol I, &quot;10 May 1906&quot;
* House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen: Cross of Honour of the Princely House Order of Hohenzollern, 1st Class with Swords

;Foreign orders and decorations
==Ancestry==

==See also==
* King Carol I equestrian statue in Bucharest
* Commissions of the Danube River

==Citations==
==Further reading==
* Keith Hitchins, &quot;Rumania 1866–1947&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1994).
* Boris Crăciun – &quot;Regii și Reginele României&quot;, Editura Porțile Orientului, Iași

==External links==

* Online edition of Carol&#x27;s 1899 book &quot;Reminiscences of the King of Roumania&quot;
* Daniel Cain: Carol I, King of Romania, in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="0" end="7" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="11" end="31" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Charles I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="38" end="105" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Karl Eitel Friedrich Zephyrinus Ludwig von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="195" end="201" title="Prince" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713794" start="209" end="217" title="Domnitor" label="Domnitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="251" end="255" title="King of Romania" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q958291" start="304" end="334" title="United Principalities" label="Romanian United Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q294832" start="375" end="394" title="Alexandru Ioan Cuza" label="Alexandru Ioan Cuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="407" end="423" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="516" end="530" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="545" end="562" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q157013" start="656" end="680" title="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="742" end="760" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="socialist republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q780367" start="915" end="930" title="siege of Plevna" label="siege of Plevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="1001" end="1023" title="Treaty of Berlin, 1878" label="Treaty of Berlin, 1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="1037" end="1053" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="1059" end="1067" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1142" end="1165" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1199" end="1206" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="1323" end="1329" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230371" start="1387" end="1394" title="National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307833" start="1399" end="1411" title="Conservative Party (Romania, 1880–1918)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1585" end="1602" title="Strousberg Affair" label="Strousberg Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q396108" start="1678" end="1702" title="Agrarian society" label="agrarian-focused economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q811241" start="1770" end="1782" title="1907 Romanian Peasants&amp;#x27; revolt" label="major revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57629" start="1853" end="1870" title="Elisabeth of Wied" label="Elisabeth of Wied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180697" start="1920" end="1925" title="Princess Maria of Romania (1870–1874)" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q553168" start="2016" end="2023" title="Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424" start="2131" end="2138" title="William, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="2235" end="2249" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="King Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="2370" end="2381" title="Sigmaringen" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58012" start="2446" end="2491" title="Karl Anton, Prince of Hohenzollern (died 1885)" label="Prince Karl Anton of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q257596" start="2506" end="2533" title="Princess Josephine of Baden" label="Princess Josephine of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="2608" end="2615" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2681" end="2687" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="2787" end="2807" title="Second Schleswig War" label="Second Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21181" start="2838" end="2848" title="Fredericia" label="Fredericia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567585" start="2861" end="2867" title="Dybbøl" label="Dybbøl"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="2930" end="2947" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish war"/>
<link wikidata="Q112581" start="3213" end="3229" title="House of Bonaparte" label="Bonaparte family"/>
<link wikidata="Q62024" start="3261" end="3272" title="Stéphanie de Beauharnais" label="Beauharnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="3328" end="3335" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q327869" start="3349" end="3371" title="Marie Antoinette Murat" label="Marie Antoinette Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="3416" end="3438" title="Napoleon III of France" label="Napoleon III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q294832" start="3532" end="3551" title="Alexandru Ioan Cuza" label="Alexandru Ioan Cuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="3706" end="3715" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="3723" end="3731" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q627527" start="3765" end="3788" title="Romanian principalities" label="Romanian Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q468968" start="4170" end="4188" title="Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders" label="Philip of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="4206" end="4227" title="Leopold II of Belgium" label="Leopold II of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="4295" end="4307" title="Lower Danube" label="Lower Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q153047" start="4913" end="4925" title="Ion Brătianu" label="Ion Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="5094" end="5101" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="5110" end="5125" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="5169" end="5179" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12756677" start="5183" end="5189" title="Baziaș" label="Baziaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q193890" start="5366" end="5379" title="Turnu Severin" label="Turnu Severin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5630" end="5634" title="Adoption of the Gregorian calendar#Adoption in Eastern Europe" label="N.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="5665" end="5674" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q167161" start="5801" end="5808" title="Băneasa" label="Băneasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="6133" end="6139" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q739225" start="6556" end="6584" title="1866 Constitution of Romania" label="1866 Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q633629" start="6700" end="6723" title="Constitution of Belgium" label="Constitution of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="6871" end="6891" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7240" end="7254" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="7450" end="7499" title="Salic law" label="perpetually excluding women and their descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909090" start="7865" end="7880" title="moral authority" label="moral authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="8019" end="8038" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445368" start="8166" end="8177" title="Francophile" label="Francophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q153047" start="8428" end="8443" title="Ion C. Brătianu" label="Ion C. Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092785" start="8448" end="8461" title="C. A. Rosetti" label="C. A. Rosetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="8724" end="8732" title="Ploiești" label="Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037501" start="8893" end="8913" title="Republic of Ploiești" label="Republic of Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="9332" end="9340" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q812768" start="9414" end="9426" title="bashi-bazouk" label="bashi-bazouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="9793" end="9810" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778687" start="9857" end="9880" title="Romanian War of Independence" label="the War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q319759" start="9922" end="9941" title="Mihail Kogălniceanu" label="Mihail Kogălniceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="10178" end="10186" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q931483" start="10501" end="10514" title="legal fiction" label="legal fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q446780" start="10633" end="10644" title="Promulgation" label="promulgated"/>
<link wikidata="Q780367" start="11104" end="11122" title="Siege of Plevna" label="surrounding Pleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q546595" start="11175" end="11191" title="Osman Nuri Pasha" label="Osman Nuri Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q194113" start="11550" end="11571" title="Treaty of San Stefano" label="Treaty of San Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="11706" end="11722" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673270" start="11850" end="11866" title="Northern Dobruja" label="Northern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q184429" start="11943" end="11962" title="mouth of the Danube" label="mouth of the Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q815731" start="12125" end="12149" title="Principality of Bulgaria" label="Principality of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="12319" end="12345" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="proclaim Romania a kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="12370" end="12385" title="King of Romania" label="King of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783760" start="12609" end="12620" title="Steel Crown of Romania" label="Steel Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q173213" start="12798" end="12819" title="Coat of arms of Romania" label="Romanian coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q917702" start="13401" end="13413" title="Peleș Castle" label="Peleș Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="13564" end="13581" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673270" start="13598" end="13614" title="Northern Dobruja" label="Northern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q285575" start="13651" end="13665" title="Anghel Saligny" label="Anghel Saligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882" start="13694" end="13708" title="Gustave Eiffel" label="Gustave Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657086" start="13752" end="13758" title="King Carol I Bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="13768" end="13774" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q598577" start="13784" end="13791" title="Fetești" label="Fetești"/>
<link wikidata="Q736276" start="13796" end="13805" title="Cernavodă" label="Cernavodă"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="14130" end="14144" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14438" end="14449" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q313833" start="15445" end="15461" title="Stefan Stambolov" label="Stefan Stambolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="15463" end="15469" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q159591" start="15530" end="15553" title="Alexander of Battenberg" label="Alexander of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12742840" start="15599" end="15644" title="Union of Bulgaria and Romania" label="a personal union between Bulgaria and Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="15807" end="15824" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q500067" start="15967" end="15986" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1913)" label="Treaty of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="16026" end="16042" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16290" end="16301" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="16352" end="16366" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="16451" end="16465" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q153867" start="16542" end="16557" title="Triple Alliance (1882)" label="Triple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="16735" end="16748" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="16772" end="16782" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725412" start="16829" end="16842" title="Crown Council of Romania" label="Crown Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q462175" start="17030" end="17038" title="Ion I. C. Brătianu" label="Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="17215" end="17233" title="Marie of Edinburgh" label="Marie of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q57629" start="17582" end="17599" title="Elizabeth of Wied" label="Elizabeth of Wied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967" start="17603" end="17610" title="Neuwied" label="Neuwied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180697" start="17821" end="17835" title="Princess Maria of Romania (1870–1874)" label="Princess Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q553168" start="18281" end="18288" title="Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424" start="18320" end="18327" title="William, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="18389" end="18398" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="18432" end="18448" title="heir-presumptive" label="heir-presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="18837" end="18846" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="18848" end="18865" title="Stephen the Great" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q118755" start="18867" end="18884" title="Michael the Brave" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q294832" start="18888" end="18907" title="Alexandru Ioan Cuza" label="Alexandru Ioan Cuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="18989" end="19012" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265175" start="19135" end="19146" title="Lucian Boia" label="Lucian Boia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="19551" end="19557" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q138340" start="20141" end="20147" title="Kaiser" label="Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="20218" end="20230" title="lower Danube" label="lower Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q811241" start="20419" end="20438" title="1907 Romanian Peasants&amp;#x27; revolt" label="1907 Peasant Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q852483" start="20869" end="20874" title="Unification of Moldova and Romania" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="20891" end="20920" title="Romanian Revolution" label="collapse of Communism in 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q251552" start="21171" end="21193" title="100 Greatest Romanians" label="100 Greatest Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q846168" start="21216" end="21235" title="Romanian Television" label="national television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044391" start="21347" end="21382" title="Carol I National Defence University" label="Carol I National Defence University"/>
<link wikidata="Q622015" start="21387" end="21413" title="Central University Library, Bucharest" label="Central University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044392" start="21436" end="21460" title="Carol I National College" label="Carol I National College"/>
<link wikidata="Q144853" start="21502" end="21518" title="Order of Carol I" label="Order of Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="21597" end="21613" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romanian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48889939" start="21650" end="21671" title="Romanian royal family" label="Romanian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q950604" start="21788" end="21816" title="Order of the Star of Romania" label="Order of the Star of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805044" start="21835" end="21860" title="Medal of Faithful Service" label="Medal of Faithful Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q278739" start="21905" end="21934" title="Order of the Crown (Romania)" label="Order of the Crown of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q144853" start="21980" end="21996" title="Order of Carol I" label="Order of Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q157013" start="22024" end="22057" title="House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22082" end="22118" title="House Order of Hohenzollern#Princely House Order" label="Princely House Order of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741329" start="22204" end="22234" title="King Carol I equestrian statue" label="King Carol I equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="22238" end="22247" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q126685528" start="22250" end="22281" title="Commissions of the Danube River" label="Commissions of the Danube River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392193" start="22319" end="22333" title="Keith Hitchins" label="Keith Hitchins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220419" wikidata="Q851857" url="?curid=220419" title="United Nations Convention Against Torture">
<text>The Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (commonly known as the United Nations Convention Against Torture (UNCAT)) is an international human rights treaty under the review of the United Nations that aims to prevent torture and other acts of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment around the world.

The Convention requires member states to take effective measures to prevent torture in any territory under their jurisdiction, and forbids member states to transport people to any country where there is reason to believe they will be tortured.

The text of the convention was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 10 December 1984 and, following ratification by the 20th state party, it came into force on 26 June 1987. 26 June is now recognized as the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, in honor of the convention. Since the convention&#x27;s entry was enforced, the absolute prohibition against torture and other acts of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment has become accepted as a principle of customary international law. As of April 2024, the convention has 174 state parties.

== Summary ==
The Convention follows the structure of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), with a preamble and 33 articles, divided into three parts:

Part I (Articles 1–16) contains a definition of torture (Article 1), and commits parties to taking effective measures to prevent any act of torture in any territory under their jurisdiction (Article 2). These include ensuring that torture is a criminal offense under a party&#x27;s municipal law (Article 4), establishing jurisdiction over acts of torture committed by or against a party&#x27;s nationals (Article 5), ensuring that torture is an extraditable offense (Article 8), and establishing universal jurisdiction to bring cases of torture to trial where an alleged torturer cannot be extradited (Article 5). Parties must promptly investigate any allegation of torture (Articles 12 and 13), and victims of torture, or their dependents in case victims died as a result of torture, must have an enforceable right to compensation (Article 14). Parties must also ban the use of evidence produced by torture in their courts (Article 15), and are barred from deporting, extraditing, or refouling people where there are substantial grounds for believing they will be tortured (Article 3). Parties are required to train and educate their public servants and private citizens involved in the custody, interrogation, or treatment of any individual subjected to any form of arrest, detention, or imprisonment, regarding the prohibition against torture (Article 10). Parties also must keep interrogation rules, instructions, methods, and practices under systematic review regarding individuals who are under custody or physical control in any territory under their jurisdiction, in order to prevent all acts of torture (Article 11). Parties are also obliged to prevent all acts of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment in any territory under their jurisdiction, and to investigate any allegation of such treatment. (Article 16).

Part II (Articles 17–24) governs reporting and monitoring of the convention and the steps taken by the parties to implement it. It establishes the Committee Against Torture (Article 17), and empowers it to investigate allegations of systematic torture (Article 20). It also establishes an optional dispute-resolution mechanism between parties (Article 21) and allows parties to recognize the competence of the committee to hear complaints from individuals about violations of the convention by a party (Article 22).

Part III (Articles 25–33) governs ratification, entry into force, and amendment of the convention. It also includes an optional arbitration mechanism for disputes between parties (Article 30).

== Main provisions ==

=== Definition of torture ===

Article 1.1 of the Convention defines torture as:

The words &quot;inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions&quot; remain vague and very broad. It is extremely difficult to determine what sanctions are &quot;inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions&quot; in a particular legal system and what are not. The drafters of the Convention neither provided any criteria for making such determination nor did it define the terms. The nature of the findings would so differ from one legal system to another that they would give rise to serious disputes among the parties to the convention. It was suggested that the reference to such rules would make the issue more complicated, for it would endow the rules with a semblance of legal binding force. This allows state parties to pass domestic laws that permit acts of torture that they believe are within the lawful sanctions clause. However, the most widely adopted interpretation of the lawful sanctions clause is that it refers to sanctions authorized by international law. Pursuant to this interpretation, only sanctions that are authorized by international law will fall within this exclusion. The interpretation of the lawful sanctions clause leaves no scope of application and is widely debated by authors, historians, and scholars alike.

=== Ban on torture ===
Article 2 prohibits torture, and requires parties to take effective measures to prevent it in any territory under their jurisdiction. This prohibition is absolute and non-derogable. &quot;No exceptional circumstances whatsoever&quot; may be invoked to justify torture, including war, threat of war, internal political instability, public emergency, terrorist acts, violent crime, or any form of armed conflict. In other words, torture cannot be justified as a means to protect public safety or prevent emergencies. Subordinates who commit acts of torture cannot abstain themselves from legal responsibility on the grounds that they were just following orders from their superiors.

The prohibition on torture applies to anywhere under a party&#x27;s effective jurisdiction inside or outside of its borders, whether on board its ships or aircraft or in its military occupations, military bases, peacekeeping operations, health care industries, schools, day care centers, detention centers, embassies, or any other of its areas, and protects all people under its effective control, regardless of nationality or how that control is exercised.

The other articles of part I lay out specific obligations intended to implement this absolute prohibition by preventing, investigating, and punishing acts of torture.

=== Ban on &quot;refoulement&quot; ===

Article 3 prohibits parties from returning, extraditing, or &quot;refouling&quot; any person to a state &quot;where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture.&quot; The Committee Against Torture has held that this danger must be assessed not just for the initial receiving state, but also to states to which the person may be subsequently expelled, returned or extradited.

=== Obligation to prosecute or extradite ===
Article 7 obligates the government of the state in which the alleged offense occurred to either prosecute the accused party, or extradite them to a state that will, under the principle of &quot;aut dedere aut judicare&quot;.

=== Ban on cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment ===

Article 16 requires parties to prevent &quot;other acts of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment which do not amount to torture as defined in article 1&quot; in any territory under their jurisdiction. Because it is often difficult to distinguish between cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment and torture, the Committee regards Article 16&#x27;s prohibition of such act as similarly absolute and non-derogable.

== Signatories and ratifications ==
As of 17 November 2021, there are 173 States parties. 22 UN Member States are not yet party to the convention.

== Optional Protocol ==
The Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OPCAT), adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2002 and in force since 22 June 2006, provides for the establishment of &quot;a system of regular visits undertaken by independent international and national bodies to places where people are deprived of their liberty, in order to prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,&quot; to be overseen by a Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

As of April 2022, the Protocol has 76 signatories and 91 parties.

== Committee Against Torture ==
The Committee Against Torture (CAT) is a body of human rights experts that monitors implementation of the convention by State parties. The committee is one of eight UN-linked human rights treaty bodies. All state parties are obliged under the convention to submit regular reports to the CAT on how rights are being implemented. Upon ratifying the convention, states must submit a report within one year, after which they are obliged to report every four years. The Committee examines each report and addresses its concerns and recommendations to the State party in the form of &quot;concluding observations&quot;. Under certain circumstances, the CAT may consider complaints or communications from individuals claiming that their rights under the Convention have been violated.

The CAT usually meets in April/May and November each year in Geneva. Members are elected to four-year terms by State parties and can be re-elected if nominated. The current membership of the CAT, :

== Effects ==
A 2021 study in the &quot;American Journal of Political Science&quot; found that countries that adopt national laws that prohibit torture (defining it in line with the standards codified in the UN Convention against Torture) subsequently experience reductions in police torture.

== See also ==

* Psychological torture
* European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
* International Day in Support of Victims of Torture
* International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims
* Use of torture since 1948
* World Organization Against Torture

== References ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==

* Official text of the Convention
* List of parties
* Optional Protocol
* U.N. Committee against Torture
* Convention Against Torture Initiative
* Human Rights Watch summary of the Convention
* List of links to other related documents
* Human Rights First; Tortured Justice: Using Coerced Evidence to Prosecute Terrorist Suspects (2008)
* Human Rights First; Leave No Marks: Enhanced Interrogation Techniques and the Risk of Criminality
* International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims (IRCT); What is torture? Defining torture
* Introductory note by Hans Danelius, procedural history note and audiovisual material on the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law
* UN Convention Against Torture (1984–2014) – Research Guide, UNOG Library
* UN Convention Against Torture (1984–2014) – Bibliography (Books/Articles), UNOG Library

=== Decisions of the Committee Against Torture ===
* Committee against Torture – Jurisprudence
* CAT decisions on OHCHR
* Decisions of the Committee Against Torture</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q851857" start="4" end="92" title="United Nations Convention Against Torture" label="Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q851857" start="116" end="157" title="United Nations Convention Against Torture" label="United Nations Convention Against Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q851857" start="159" end="164" title="United Nations Convention Against Torture" label="UNCAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414472" start="173" end="206" title="International human rights instruments" label="international human rights treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="231" end="245" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="267" end="274" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374304" start="293" end="345" title="cruel and unusual punishment" label="cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="456" end="465" title="Territory (geographic region)" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="478" end="490" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="656" end="687" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028114" start="830" end="880" title="International Day in Support of Victims of Torture" label="International Day in Support of Victims of Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194894" start="1108" end="1135" title="customary international law" label="customary international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="1252" end="1289" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="1298" end="1350" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q457862" start="1367" end="1429" title="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights" label="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009938" start="1782" end="1795" title="municipal law" label="municipal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="1946" end="1958" title="extradition" label="extraditable"/>
<link wikidata="Q928801" start="1997" end="2019" title="universal jurisdiction" label="universal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="2380" end="2388" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="2459" end="2468" title="Deportation" label="deporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268413" start="2486" end="2495" title="Non-refoulement" label="refouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="2636" end="2651" title="Public service" label="public servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q86009752" start="2656" end="2671" title="private citizen" label="private citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071447" start="2689" end="2696" title="Detention (imprisonment)" label="custody"/>
<link wikidata="Q327018" start="2698" end="2711" title="interrogation" label="interrogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403016" start="2769" end="2775" title="arrest" label="arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="2791" end="2803" title="imprisonment" label="imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709362" start="3486" end="3511" title="Committee Against Torture" label="Committee Against Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="5111" end="5128" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="5702" end="5705" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q392160" start="5731" end="5752" title="failed state" label="political instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="5754" end="5770" title="State of emergency" label="public emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="5772" end="5786" title="Terrorism" label="terrorist acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520311" start="5788" end="5801" title="violent crime" label="violent crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q153817" start="6060" end="6081" title="Superior Orders" label="just following orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907518" start="6093" end="6101" title="Superior (hierarchy)" label="superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="6251" end="6255" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="6260" end="6268" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="6279" end="6298" title="military occupation" label="military occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="6301" end="6314" title="military base" label="military base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="6317" end="6340" title="Peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15067276" start="6342" end="6364" title="Health care industry" label="health care industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914" start="6366" end="6372" title="school" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="6375" end="6391" title="Day care" label="day care centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="6393" end="6410" title="Prison" label="detention centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="6412" end="6421" title="Embassy" label="embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268413" start="6782" end="6853" title="non-refoulement" label="prohibits parties from returning, extraditing, or &amp;quot;refouling&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630412" start="7444" end="7467" title="aut dedere aut judicare" label="aut dedere aut judicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="9708" end="9714" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117084" start="10158" end="10179" title="Psychological torture" label="Psychological torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377205" start="10182" end="10280" title="European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment" label="European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028114" start="10283" end="10333" title="International Day in Support of Victims of Torture" label="International Day in Support of Victims of Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338973" start="10336" end="10392" title="International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims" label="International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901867" start="10395" end="10420" title="Use of torture since 1948" label="Use of torture since 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q689232" start="10423" end="10457" title="World Organization Against Torture" label="World Organization Against Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="11608" end="11613" title="OHCHR" label="OHCHR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220425" wikidata="Q313906" url="?curid=220425" title="James Gregory (mathematician)">
<text>James Gregory (November 1638 – October 1675) was a Scottish mathematician and astronomer. His surname is sometimes spelt as Gregorie, the original Scottish spelling. He described an early practical design for the reflecting telescope – the Gregorian telescope – and made advances in trigonometry, discovering infinite series representations for several trigonometric functions.

In his book &quot;Geometriae Pars Universalis&quot; (1668) Gregory gave both the first published statement and proof of the fundamental theorem of the calculus (stated from a geometric point of view, and only for a special class of the curves considered by later versions of the theorem), for which he was acknowledged by Isaac Barrow.

==Biography==
Gregory was born in 1638. His mother Janet was the daughter of Jean and David Anderson and his father was John Gregory, an Episcopalian Church of Scotland minister, James was youngest of their three children and he was born in the manse at Drumoak, Aberdeenshire, and was initially educated at home by his mother, Janet Anderson (~1600–1668). It was his mother who endowed Gregory with his appetite for geometry, her uncle – Alexander Anderson (1582–1619) – having been a pupil and editor of French mathematician Viète. After his father&#x27;s death in 1651 his elder brother David took over responsibility for his education. He attended Aberdeen Grammar School, and then Marischal College from 1653–1657, graduating AM in 1657.

In 1663 he went to London, meeting John Collins and fellow Scot Robert Moray, one of the founders of the Royal Society. In 1664 he departed for the University of Padua, in the Venetian Republic, passing through Flanders, Paris and Rome on his way. At Padua he lived in the house of his countryman James Caddenhead, the professor of philosophy, and he was taught by Stefano Angeli.

Upon his return to London in 1668 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, before travelling to St Andrews in late 1668 to take up his post as the first Regius Professor of Mathematics at the University of St Andrews, a position created for him by Charles II, probably upon the request of Robert Moray. There at the University of St Andrews, he laid the first meridian line across the floor of his lab in 1673, which was 200 years prior to the Greenwich Meridian being established, and thus &quot;arguably making St Andrews the place where time began&quot;.

He was successively professor at the University of St Andrews and the University of Edinburgh.

He had married Mary, daughter of George Jameson, painter, and widow of John Burnet of Elrick, Aberdeen; their son James was Professor of Physics at King&#x27;s College, Aberdeen. He was the grandfather of John Gregory (FRS 1756); uncle of David Gregorie (FRS 1692) and brother of David Gregory (1627–1720), a physician and inventor.

About a year after assuming the Chair of Mathematics at Edinburgh, James Gregory suffered a stroke while viewing the moons of Jupiter with his students. He died a few days later at the age of 36.

==Published works==
===&quot;Optica Promota&quot;===
In the &quot;Optica Promota&quot;, published in 1663, Gregory described his design for a reflecting telescope, the &quot;Gregorian telescope&quot;. He also described the method for using the transit of Venus to measure the distance of the Earth from the Sun, which was later advocated by Edmund Halley and adopted as the basis of the first effective measurement of the Astronomical Unit.

===&quot;Vera Circuli et Hyperbolae Quadratura&quot;===
Before he left Padua, Gregory published &quot;Vera Circuli et Hyperbolae Quadratura&quot; (1667) in which he approximated the areas of the circle and hyperbola with convergent series:
:[James Gregory] cannot be denied the authorship of many curious theorems on the relation of the circle to inscribed and circumscribed polygons, and their relation to each other. By means of these theorems he gives with infinitely less trouble than by the usual calculations, … the measure of the circle and hyperbola (and consequently the construction of logarithms) to more than twenty decimal places. Following the example of Huygens, he also gave constructions of straight lines equal to the arcs of the circle, and whose error is still less.

&quot;The first proof of the fundamental theorem of calculus and the discovery of the Taylor series can both be attributed to him.&quot;

The book was reprinted in 1668 with an appendix, &quot;Geometriae Pars&quot;, in which Gregory explained how the volumes of solids of revolution could be determined.

==Gregorian telescope==

In his 1663 &quot;Optica Promota&quot;, James Gregory described his reflecting telescope which has come to be known by his name, the Gregorian telescope. Gregory pointed out that a reflecting telescope with a parabolic mirror would correct spherical aberration as well as the chromatic aberration seen in refracting telescopes. In his design he also placed a concave secondary mirror with an elliptical surface past the focal point of the parabolic primary mirror, reflecting the image back through a hole in the primary mirror where it could be conveniently viewed. According to his own confession, Gregory had no practical skill and he could find no optician capable of actually constructing one.

The telescope design attracted the attention of several people in the scientific establishment such as Robert Hooke, the Oxford physicist who eventually built the telescope 10 years later, and Sir Robert Moray, polymath and founding member of the Royal Society.

The Gregorian telescope design is rarely used today, as other types of reflecting telescopes are known to be more efficient for standard applications. Gregorian optics are also used in radio telescopes such as Arecibo, which features a &quot;Gregorian dome&quot;.

==Mathematics==
The following excerpt is from the &quot;Pantologia. A new (cabinet) cyclopædia&quot; (1813)

Mr. James Gregory was a man of a very acute and penetrating genius. ...The most brilliant part of his character was that of his mathematical genius as an inventor, which was of the first order; as will appear by... his inventions and discoveries [which include] quadrature of the circle and hyperbola, by an infinite converging series; his method for the transformation of curves; a geometrical demonstration of Lord Brouncker&#x27;s series for squaring the hyperbola—his demonstration that the meridian line is analogous to a scale of logarithmic tangents of the half complements of the latitude; he also invented and demonstrated geometrically, by help of the hyperbola, a very simple converging series for making the logarithms; he sent to the solution of the famous Keplerian problem by an infinite series; he discovered a method of drawing Tangents to curves geometrically, without any previous calculations; a rule for the direct and inverse method of tangents, which stands upon the same principle (of exhaustions) with that of fluxions, and differs not much from it in the manner of application; a series for the length of the arc of a circle from the tangent, and vice versa; as also for the secant and logarithmic tangent and secant, and vice versa. These, with others, for measuring the length of the elliptic and hyperbolic curves, were sent to Mr. Collins, in return for some received from him of Newton&#x27;s, in which he followed the elegant example of this author, in delivering his series in simple terms, independent of each other.
==Other work==
In a letter of 1671 to John Collins, Gregory gives the power series expansion of the seven functions (using modern notation) formula_1 (often called Gregory&#x27;s series), formula_2 formula_3 formula_4 the inverse Gudermannian function formula_5, formula_6 and the Gudermannian function formula_7

There is evidence that he discovered the method of taking higher derivatives in order to compute a power series, which was not discovered by Taylor until 1715, but did not publish his results, thinking he had only rediscovered &quot;Mr. Newton&#x27;s universal method,&quot; which was based on a different technique. 
James Gregory discovered the diffraction grating by passing sunlight through a bird feather and observing the diffraction pattern produced. In particular he observed the splitting of sunlight into its component colours – this occurred a year after Newton had done the same with a prism and the phenomenon was still highly controversial.

A round wheel is unsuitable for irregular surfaces, and Gregory devised an appropriate &quot;adaptable wheel&quot; using a &quot;Gregory transformation&quot;.

Gregory, an enthusiastic supporter of Newton, later had much friendly correspondence with him and incorporated his ideas into his own teaching, ideas which at that time were controversial and considered quite revolutionary.

The crater Gregory on the Moon is named after him. He was the uncle of mathematician David Gregory.

==Works==
* 1663 – &quot;Optica promota&quot; (The advance of optics), link from Google Books.
* 1667 – Vera circuli et hyperbolae quadratura (&quot;The true squaring of the circle and hyperbola&quot;) via Internet Archive
* 1668 – &quot;Exercitationes geometricae&quot; (Geometrical exercises), link from Google Books.
* 1668 – &quot;Geometriae pars universalis&quot; (The universal part of geometry)

==See also==
*James Gregory Telescope, St Andrews
*Gregor telescope at the Teide Observatory
*Thomas Reid
*Deans Court

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* 
* James Gregory&#x27;s Euclidean Proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus at Convergence
* James Gregory Public Lectures on Religion and Science, University of St Andrews
* James Gregory&#x27;s &quot;&quot;Optica Promota&quot; (English translation)
* James Gregory&#x27;s &quot;The Universal Part of Geometry&quot; (Andrew Leahy&#x27;s English translation of Gregory&#x27;s &quot;Geometriae Pars Universalis&quot;&quot;). 
* James Gregory (1663) &quot;Optica promota&quot; – digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313906" start="0" end="13" title="James Gregory (mathematician)" label="James Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="78" end="88" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313906" start="124" end="132" title="James Gregory (mathematician)" label="Gregorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="213" end="233" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q742318" start="240" end="259" title="Gregorian telescope" label="Gregorian telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="283" end="295" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="309" end="324" title="infinite series" label="infinite series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217677" start="503" end="538" title="fundamental theorem of the calculus" label="fundamental theorem of the calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207718" start="701" end="713" title="Isaac Barrow" label="Isaac Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576423" start="793" end="816" title="Jean Guild" label="Jean and David Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918074" start="853" end="865" title="Episcopalianism in the Church of Scotland" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820541" start="866" end="893" title="Church of Scotland minister" label="Church of Scotland minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051104" start="961" end="966" title="manse" label="manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q635398" start="970" end="977" title="Drumoak" label="Drumoak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290674" start="979" end="992" title="Aberdeenshire (historic)" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="1133" end="1141" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530587" start="1155" end="1185" title="Alexander Anderson (mathematician)" label="Alexander Anderson (1582–1619)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188623" start="1243" end="1248" title="Viète" label="Viète"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666924" start="1368" end="1391" title="Aberdeen Grammar School" label="Aberdeen Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838975" start="1402" end="1419" title="Marischal College" label="Marischal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279339" start="1495" end="1507" title="John Collins (mathematician)" label="John Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q719623" start="1524" end="1536" title="Robert Moray" label="Robert Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1565" end="1578" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="1608" end="1627" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1636" end="1653" title="Venetian Republic" label="Venetian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1671" end="1679" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1757" end="1773" title="James Caddenhead" label="James Caddenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498009" start="1825" end="1839" title="Stefano Angeli" label="Stefano Angeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="1893" end="1920" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="1943" end="1953" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309482" start="2000" end="2031" title="Regius Professor of Mathematics" label="Regius Professor of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="2039" end="2063" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="2095" end="2105" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="2163" end="2187" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="2443" end="2467" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="2476" end="2499" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q725308" start="2535" end="2549" title="George Jamesone" label="George Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410877" start="2650" end="2679" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Aberdeen" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q551202" start="2707" end="2719" title="John Gregory (moralist)" label="John Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174600" start="2741" end="2755" title="David Gregory (mathematician)" label="David Gregorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840213" start="2782" end="2795" title="David Gregory (physician)" label="David Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="2892" end="2901" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="3175" end="3195" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q742318" start="3207" end="3226" title="Gregorian telescope" label="Gregorian telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q185203" start="3277" end="3293" title="transit of Venus" label="transit of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="3374" end="3387" title="Edmund Halley" label="Edmund Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="3455" end="3472" title="Astronomical Unit" label="Astronomical Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="3670" end="3676" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="3681" end="3690" title="hyperbola" label="hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066790" start="3822" end="3831" title="inscribed figure" label="inscribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682882" start="3836" end="3858" title="tangential polygon" label="circumscribed polygons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="4071" end="4080" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="4144" end="4151" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="4211" end="4215" title="arc (geometry)" label="arcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217677" start="4292" end="4323" title="fundamental theorem of calculus" label="fundamental theorem of calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="4349" end="4362" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q725939" start="4525" end="4545" title="solids of revolution" label="solids of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="4661" end="4681" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="4802" end="4818" title="parabolic reflector" label="parabolic mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913798" start="4833" end="4853" title="spherical aberration" label="spherical aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087688" start="4869" end="4889" title="chromatic aberration" label="chromatic aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q216778" start="4898" end="4918" title="refracting telescope" label="refracting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395645" start="4960" end="4976" title="secondary mirror" label="secondary mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q613628" start="5042" end="5056" title="primary mirror" label="primary mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="5396" end="5408" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q719623" start="5490" end="5502" title="Robert Moray" label="Robert Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="5504" end="5512" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="5540" end="5553" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="5741" end="5757" title="radio telescopes" label="radio telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q102327045" start="5766" end="5773" title="Arecibo Observatory" label="Arecibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131881" start="5877" end="5887" title="Pantologia" label="Pantologia"/>
<link wikidata="Q451693" start="6342" end="6363" title="William Brouncker, 2nd Viscount Brouncker" label="Lord Brouncker&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564682" start="6700" end="6717" title="Kepler problem" label="Keplerian problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="6775" end="6782" title="Tangent" label="Tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q865019" start="6939" end="6950" title="Method of exhaustion" label="exhaustions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074567" start="6965" end="6973" title="Method of Fluxions" label="fluxions"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="7340" end="7353" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279339" start="7519" end="7531" title="John Collins (mathematician)" label="John Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="7551" end="7563" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606780" start="7645" end="7666" title="Gregory&amp;#x27;s series" label="Gregory&amp;#x27;s series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328149" start="7711" end="7732" title="Gudermannian function" label="Gudermannian function"/>
<link wikidata="Q653294" start="8142" end="8161" title="diffraction grating" label="diffraction grating"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="8173" end="8181" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="8197" end="8204" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q165896" start="8393" end="8398" title="prism (optics)" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776557" start="8847" end="8854" title="Gregory (lunar crater)" label="Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174600" start="8921" end="8934" title="David Gregory (mathematician)" label="David Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="9018" end="9030" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="9143" end="9159" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q949790" start="9354" end="9389" title="James Gregory Telescope" label="James Gregory Telescope, St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9391" end="9407" title="Leibniz Institute for Astrophysics Potsdam#GREGOR" label="Gregor telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013047" start="9415" end="9432" title="Teide Observatory" label="Teide Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q316347" start="9434" end="9445" title="Thomas Reid" label="Thomas Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246784" start="9447" end="9458" title="Deans Court" label="Deans Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551622" start="10027" end="10045" title="Linda Hall Library" label="Linda Hall Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220426" wikidata="Q3449014" url="?curid=220426" title="Domestic partnership">
<text>A domestic partnership is an intimate relationship between people, usually couples, who live together and share a common domestic life but who are not married (to each other or to anyone else). People in domestic partnerships receive legal benefits that guarantee right of survivorship, hospital visitation, and other rights.

The term is not used consistently, which results in some inter-jurisdictional confusion. Some jurisdictions, such as Australia, New Zealand, and the U.S. states of California, Maine, Nevada, Oregon and Washington use the term &quot;domestic partnership&quot; to mean what other jurisdictions call civil union, civil partnership, or registered partnership. Other jurisdictions use the term as it was originally coined, to mean an interpersonal status created by local municipal and county governments, which provides an extremely limited range of rights and responsibilities.

Some legislatures have voluntarily established domestic partnership relations by statute instead of being ordered to do so by a court. Although some jurisdictions have instituted domestic partnerships as a way to recognize same-sex marriage, statutes do exist which provide for recognition of opposite-sex domestic partnerships in many jurisdictions.

In some legal jurisdictions, domestic partners who live together for an extended period of time but are not legally entitled to common-law marriage may be entitled to legal protection in the form of a domestic partnership. Some domestic partners may enter into nonmarital relationship contracts in order to agree, either verbally or in writing, to issues involving property ownership, support obligations, and similar issues common to marriage. (See effects of marriage and palimony.) Beyond agreements, registration of relationships in domestic partnership registries allow for the jurisdiction to formally acknowledge domestic partnerships as valid relationships with limited rights.

==Overview==
Although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably, a Domestic Partnership, Same Sex Marriage or Civil Union are each separate and distinct legal concepts. The domestic partnership is a legal relationship between two people of the same or opposite sex who live together and share a domestic life, but are not married or joined by a civil union nor are blood relatives. It may be established by contract between the parties, but more often by registration according to procedures established by a state or municipal government. Benefits granted under a domestic partnership vary among different jurisdictions. Some accord full health benefits, others only a right of visitation. In still other jurisdictions, registered domestic partners are accorded a legal status similar to that of a married person with respect to matters of probate, guardianships, conservatorships, inheritance, protection from abuse, and related matters.

Since the 2015 US Supreme Court&#x27;s decision legalizing same-sex marriage, there have been fewer US domestic partnerships registered, but in many jurisdictions they are still allowed for couples of the same gender or different genders who do not want to marry but still would like to be eligible for certain benefits. Many couples opt for a domestic partnership after comparing the potential tax consequences of being married.

==In the United States==


===Origin of term in Californian municipalities===
In August 1979, gay rights activist Tom Brougham proposed a new category of relationship called &quot;domestic partnership&quot;. Initially, the requirements were that only two people who resided together and were qualified to marry except that they were the same gender. Additional requirements were later added for the partners to maintain mutual financial responsibility and for both to be at least eighteen years old and able to enter into a legal contract.

====San Francisco====
In 1982, Brougham&#x27;s definition was modified by Supervisor Harry Britt, a gay man appointed to replace Harvey Milk. Britt&#x27;s version was adopted and passed by the San Francisco Board of Supervisors, but Dianne Feinstein, mayor of San Francisco at the time, came under intense pressure from the Catholic Church and vetoed the bill. In 1989, a domestic partnership law was adopted in San Francisco. However, voters repealed the domestic partnership law by initiative; a modified version was reinstated by another voter initiative, 1990&#x27;s Proposition K, also written by Britt.
Currently, the city still offers a domestic partnership status separate and differing in benefits from that offered by the state; city residents can apply for both.

According to the San Francisco Human Rights Commission, &quot;In 1982, the term &#x27;domestic partner&#x27; was first used in a lawsuit filed by San Francisco Human Rights Commission employee Larry Brinkin. Mr. Brinkin, then an employee of Southern Pacific Railway, had recently suffered the loss of his partner of eleven years. When he was denied the three days of paid bereavement leave given to married employees, he filed suit with the assistance of the ACLU. Mr. Brinkin lost his case. Despite a great deal of evidence to the contrary, the judge agreed with his employer&#x27;s claim that there was no way to know if his relationship was legitimate.&quot;

====Berkeley====

In 1983, the City Council of Berkeley, California, under the leadership of Mayor Gus Newport, ordered their Human Relations and Welfare Commission to develop a domestic partnership proposal. The Commission appointed its vice-chair, Leland Traiman, a gay activist, to head the Domestic Partner Task Force and draft a policy. Working with Tom Brougham, members of the East Bay Lesbian/Gay Democratic Club, and attorney Matt Coles, the Domestic Partner Task Force drafted what has become the template for domestic partner/civil union policies around the world. The City of Berkeley&#x27;s Human Relations and Welfare Commission held a public hearing early in 1984 on &quot;Examining the Use of Marriage to Determine Benefits and Liabilities in Berkeley and the Alternatives&quot;. A policy was adopted by the commission and presented to the City Council. A copy was sent to the Berkeley School Board. In July 1984 the City Council voted down the proposal citing financial concerns. On August 1, 1984, the Berkeley School Board enacted the policy by a 4 to 1 vote. The school board motion was made by board member and community activist Ethel Manheimer.

In November 1984, all the city council members up for election who had voted against the policy lost reelection. Progressives from the Berkeley Citizens&#x27; Action (BCA) slate who replaced them had voiced strong support for a domestic partner policy. The East Bay Lesbian/Gay Democratic Club had worked hard to elect the BCA Slate. This was the first time domestic partners was a campaign issue. At the first meeting of the new City Council in December 1984, the Berkeley City Council enacted a policy extending employee benefits to unmarried couples of any gender. The first couple to file for benefits under Berkeley&#x27;s sex-neutral policy were Brougham and his partner Barry Warren.

However, the City Council did not create a registry for domestic partners until 1991. On October 11 of that year, 28 lesbian and gay male couples and one heterosexual couple registered their partnerships. The registry and benefits were also extended to non-resident couples that same year.

====West Hollywood====
In 1985, West Hollywood city council member John Heilman successfully introduced domestic partner legislation for city residents and employees that was passed by the city council and created the first &quot;domestic partnership registry&quot;.

===Statewide===
====California====
California created the first state-level domestic partnership in the United States in 1999. Effective from January 1, 2020, domestic partnerships will be legally available to all couples consisting of any two people, regardless of gender over 18 years old. The California Governor signed the bill SB-30 into law on July 30, 2019.

On September 4, 2003, the California legislature passed an expanded domestic partnership bill, extending all of the state legal rights and responsibilities of marriage to people in state domestic partnerships. California&#x27;s comprehensive domestic partner legislation was the first same-sex couples policy in the United States created by a legislature without a court order. The legislation became effective January 1, 2005.

Pre-existing municipal and county domestic partnership ordinances remain in force unless repealed by their local governments. Thus, residents of San Francisco, West Hollywood, and a few other locations may choose between a local domestic partnership, a California domestic partnership, or marriage. Nothing in either the 1999 or 2003 domestic partnership legislation applies to any of the municipal or county domestic partnership ordinances, whose scopes are extremely limited and are not portable outside of the jurisdiction that issued them.

The State of California has developed an Online Self-Help Center that provides resources and information to assist domestic partners in many areas, including filing domestic partnerships, dissolving domestic partnerships, parenting issues, tax issues, and more.

====Colorado====

Since July 1, 2009 unmarried couples have been legally able to enter a designated beneficiary agreement which will grant them limited rights. A law on civil unions went into effect on May 1, 2013.

====District of Columbia====

Washington, D.C., has recognized domestic partnerships since 1992. However, Congress prohibited the District from spending any local funds to implement the law. The prohibition was lifted in the federal appropriations act for the District for the 2002 fiscal year. Domestic partnership in the District is open to both same-sex and opposite-sex couples. All couples registered as domestic partners are entitled to the same rights as family members to visit their domestic partners in the hospital and to make decisions concerning the treatment of a domestic partner&#x27;s remains after the partner&#x27;s death. The measure also grants District of Columbia government employees rights to a number of benefits. Domestic partners are eligible for health care insurance coverage, can use annual leave or unpaid leave for the birth or adoption of a dependent child or to care for a domestic partner or a partner&#x27;s dependents, and can make funeral arrangements for a deceased partner. The Domestic Partnership Equality Amendment Act of 2006, D.C. Law 16-79, came into effect on April 4, 2006. This act provides that in almost all cases a domestic partner will have the same rights as a spouse regarding inheritance, probate, guardianship, and other rights traditionally accorded to spouses. D.C. Council on May 6, 2008, approved the addition of 39 new provisions to the city&#x27;s domestic partners law, bringing the law to a point where same-sex couples who register as domestic partners will receive most, but not quite all, of the rights and benefits of marriage under District law.

====Hawaii====

Reciprocal beneficiary registration was enacted in 1997. The law took effect on June 1, 1997.

====Illinois====
The Village of Oak Park, Illinois in October 1997 began offering a domestic partnership registry for same-sex couples, according to a Chicago Tribune article by Joanne von Alroth. Largely symbolic, the registry was the first of its kind in the state, and it required couples to swear that they were in committed relationships of at least six months. Oak Park&#x27;s Village Board had approved the registry at a meeting in September 1997.

==== Maine ====

In April 2004 the legislature passed a domestic partnership bill. The law, which provides same-sex individuals with inheritance rights over their partners&#x27; property and guardianship over their deceased partner, went into effect on July 30, 2004. On May 6, 2009, Maine&#x27;s legislature and governor enacted a law to legalize same-sex marriage, but on November 3, 2009, that law was repealed by voters. Maine legalized same-sex marriage in December 2012.

==== Maryland ====

Since July 1, 2008, unmarried couples have been able to enter a designated unregistered beneficiary agreement which will grant them limited rights such as the right to visit one another in the hospital, the right to share a room in a nursing home, and the right to make funeral decisions. A law on same-sex marriage went into effect on January 1, 2013.

==== Nevada ====

In Nevada domestic partnerships are granted all the benefits, rights, obligations and/or responsibilities of marriage (for any two adults over 18, regardless of gender) and these have become legally available since October 1, 2009. The act specifically excludes requiring any entity to provide health benefits to domestic partners. In addition, due to vagueness in the verbiage of the act, most companies and entities within Nevada refuse to acknowledge or afford any major benefits or rights to registered domestic partners, leaving legal action as the only avenue to garner individual rights.

====New Jersey====

Domestic partnerships in New Jersey have been available since July 30, 2004 for same-sex couples, and for opposite-sex couples in which both people are above the age of 62. However, on October 25, 2006, the Supreme Court of New Jersey ruled that under the New Jersey state constitution, the state could not deny the benefits of marriage to same-sex couples, although the court left it up to the legislature whether to call such relationships marriage or to use a different term. Complying with the court&#x27;s ruling, on December 14, 2006, the New Jersey Legislature passed a bill establishing civil unions for same-sex couples, which was signed into law by the governor on December 21 and came into effect on February 19, 2007.

==== Oregon ====
The governor of Oregon, Ted Kulongoski, signed a domestic partnership bill into law on May 9, 2007. Called the Oregon Family Fairness Act, the law would provide several major rights to same-sex couples that were previously only given to married couples, including the ability to file jointly on insurance forms, hospital visitation rights, and rights relating to the deceased partner. The law&#x27;s initial implementation was delayed by a federal Court, but the injunction was lifted on February 1, 2008, and the law went into effect on February 4.

==== Washington ====

In the state of Washington, Governor Christine Gregoire signed into law legislation allowing limited domestic partnership on April 21, 2007. The law, which took effect July 22, 2007 and expanded to all areas except for marriage in 2008 and 2009, permits same-sex couples (as well as heterosexual couples when one individual is at least age 62) to register in a domestic partnership registry that allows couples hospital visitation rights, the ability to authorize autopsies and organ donations, and inheritance rights when there is no will. This follows the 1998 passage of a bill by the Washington State legislature that defined marriage as being between a man and a woman; this legislation was upheld by the Washington State Supreme Court in 2006.

Same-sex marriage was legalized in Washington with effect from December 6, 2012. As a result, the domestic partnership law was amended so that from June 30, 2014, domestic partnerships will be available only when at least one of the partners is sixty-two years of age or older.

==== Wisconsin ====
Wisconsin was the first state in the Midwest to legislatively enact same-sex unions. Out of about thirty states that have bans on same-sex marriage and civil unions, Wisconsin was the first (and only) to enact domestic partnerships.

On March 5, 2009, Wisconsin Governor Jim Doyle proposed legislation for same-sex partnerships in Wisconsin.

In June 2009, the Wisconsin State Assembly and Senate both passed the biennial state budget which includes domestic partnership protections for the state&#x27;s same-sex couples.

On June 29, 2009, Governor Jim Doyle signed the budget, giving final approval to limited domestic partnership benefits for same-sex couples living in Wisconsin.

On July 23, 2009, three members of Wisconsin Family Action filed a petition for an original action in the Wisconsin Supreme Court, seeking a declaration that the domestic partner registry is unconstitutional under the state&#x27;s Marriage Protection Amendment.

The law went into effect on August 3, 2009.

November 4, 2009: The Wisconsin Supreme Court rejected &quot;Appling v. Doyle&quot;, Wisconsin Family Action&#x27;s legal challenge to domestic partnerships.

May 13, 2011: Governor Scott Walker asked to withdraw the state&#x27;s defense of the domestic partnership registry.

June 20, 2011: Dane County Judge Dan Moeser ruled that the domestic partnership registry does not violate the state constitution, finding that the state &quot;does not recognize domestic partnership in a way that even remotely resembles how the state recognizes marriage&quot;.

Wisconsin ended its domestic partnership registry on April 1, 2018.

====Other states====
Many states recognize through their judicial systems cohabitation agreements and common law partner agreements concluded between two partners in a relationship. These are de facto domestic partnerships that protect both parties and allow for shared property and court recognition of their relationships.

Sometimes adult adoption by gay couples creates a de jure domestic partnership in all 50 states.

===Local level===
===United States Military===
On February 11, 2013, Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta submitted a memorandum (subject: Extending Benefits to Same-Sex Domestic Partners of Military Members) that outlined benefits that would be made available to service members in domestic partnerships. The newly listed benefits available to gay and lesbian service members was to include:
* Dependant ID Cards
* Commissary privileges
* Exchange privileges
* Morale, Welfare, and Recreation (MWR) privileges
* Surveys of Military Families
* Quadrennial Quality of Life Review
* Emergency Leave
* Emergency Leave of Absence
* Youth Sponsorship Program
* Youth Programs
* Family Center Programs
* Sexual Assault Counselling Program
* Joint Duty Assignments
* Exemption from Hostile-Fire Areas
* Transportation to and from certain places of employment and on military installations, as well as primary and secondary school for dependants
* Authority of Service Secretary to Transport Remains of a Dependant
* Disability and Death Compensation: Dependants of Members Held as Captives
* Payments to Missing Persons
* Space-Available Travel on DoD Aircraft
* Child Care
* Legal Assistance

Implementation of the plan was cancelled once the Supreme Court handed down its opinion in &quot;United States v. Windsor&quot;.

== In Europe ==
In France since 1968, article 515-81 of Code civil defines domestic partnership (in French: &quot;concubinage &quot; or &quot;concubinage notoire&quot;) as a &quot;de facto&quot; union between two persons, of different sex or of same sex, characterised by a stable and continuous cohabitation and partnership. The French fiscal administration takes it into account in the calculation of the solidarity tax on wealth but not for other purposes. All children enjoy equal right whether within or outside wedlock. Since 1999 French law also provides for a civil solidarity pact (in French: &quot;pacte civil de solidarité&quot;, or &quot;PACS&quot;), a contractual form of civil union between two adults bringing additional rights and responsibilities, but less so than marriage.

Hungary has registered partnerships for same-sex partners, which afford rights similar to marriage. Croatia also had unregistered partnerships until June 2014 when the Croatian parliament passed a law allowing life partnerships for same-sex couples giving them the same rights married couples do have.

In Hungary, since 1995 domestic partnership in the form of unregistered cohabitation offers a limited set of rights compared to marriage in a Civil Code (more in the field of health and pension; but no inheritance), although a growing number of Hungarian couples, both opposite-sex couples and same-sex couples choose this kind of partnership instead of marriage. In April 2009, the Hungarian Parliament passed a &quot;Registration Partnership Act 2009&quot; with a vote of 199–159, which provides a registered partnership for same-sex couples with all the benefits and entitlements of marriage (except for marriage itself, adoption, IVF access, taking a partner&#x27;s surname, parentage and surrogacy). The law was passed in December 2007 by a vote of 110–78, but the Constitutional Court of Hungary was &quot;deeply concerned&quot; that the law was a duplication of opposite-sex marriage benefits and entitlements, so same-sex couples only registration was chosen. Some politicians of the Alliance of Free Democrats and Hungarian Socialist Party parties have argued for the introduction of marriage for same-sex couples. The &quot;Registration Partnership Act 2009&quot; came into effect from July 1, 2009.

==In Oceania==
===Australia===

Since January 9, 2018 same-sex marriage became legal throughout Australia. Since July 1, 2009, Australia also recognises de facto relationships for all couples of any sex.
* Australian Capital Territory (domestic relationship status provided from 1994 and Civil partnership provided since 2008).
* Commonwealth (federal Government of Australia provides both a de facto and registered relationship since 2009).
* New South Wales (de facto status provided since 1999, expanded further in 2002, 2005 and 2008).
* Norfolk Island (de facto status provided from 2006).
* Northern Territory (de facto status provided since 2003).
* Queensland (de facto status provided since 1999, expanded further in 2002).
* South Australia (domestic relationship status provided since 2007).
* Tasmania (de facto status provided from 2003, &quot;Registry system/Significant Relationships&quot; provided since 2004) Recognition of same-sex unions in Tasmania
* Victoria (domestic relationship status provided since 2001 and a &quot;registry system&quot; has been provided since 2008).
* Western Australia (de facto status provided since 2002).

===New Zealand===
In 2001, the Property (Relationships) Act 1976 was extended to offer partners in unregistered &quot;de facto&quot; relationships similar rights to those of married couples. A de facto relationship is defined as a relationship between two persons living as a couple, who are not married or in a civil union. This applies to both heterosexual and same sex couples. Since 2013, same-sex marriage is legally recognised and performed within New Zealand.

==See also==

* Cohabitation
* Civil marriage
* Civil union
* Concubinage
* Free union
* Common-law marriage
* Same-sex marriage
** Same-sex marriage in California

==References==
==External links==

* Same-Sex Marriage, Civil Unions, and Domestic Partnerships topic page from The New York Times
* Domestic Partnership, &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="2" end="22" title="Domestic partnership" label="domestic partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q736922" start="29" end="50" title="intimate relationship" label="intimate relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49800" start="88" end="101" title="cohabitation" label="live together"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="151" end="158" title="marriage" label="married"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939539" start="264" end="285" title="right of survivorship" label="right of survivorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="444" end="453" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="455" end="466" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="476" end="480" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="491" end="501" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="503" end="508" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="510" end="516" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="518" end="524" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="529" end="539" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="624" end="635" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113097" start="637" end="654" title="civil partnership in the United Kingdom" label="civil partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="659" end="681" title="registered partnership" label="registered partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="1126" end="1143" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="1284" end="1301" title="Domestic partnership" label="domestic partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="1383" end="1402" title="common-law marriage" label="common-law marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="1516" end="1549" title="Domestic partnership" label="nonmarital relationship contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347375" start="1705" end="1724" title="effects of marriage" label="effects of marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324110" start="1729" end="1737" title="palimony" label="palimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="1792" end="1823" title="Domestic partnership" label="domestic partnership registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="3411" end="3421" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815083" start="3431" end="3443" title="Tom Brougham" label="Tom Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667511" start="3943" end="3954" title="Harry Britt" label="Harry Britt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141" start="3987" end="3998" title="Harvey Milk" label="Harvey Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="4051" end="4064" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q230733" start="4091" end="4107" title="Dianne Feinstein" label="Dianne Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4182" end="4197" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="4342" end="4352" title="Popular initiative" label="initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414052" start="4650" end="4687" title="San Francisco Human Rights Commission" label="San Francisco Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414052" start="4779" end="4816" title="San Francisco Human Rights Commission" label="San Francisco Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="5343" end="5363" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="7025" end="7031" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="7480" end="7494" title="West Hollywood" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238541" start="7515" end="7527" title="John Heilman" label="John Heilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="8108" end="8118" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302627" start="11169" end="11204" title="Domestic partnerships in Hawaii" label="Reciprocal beneficiary registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q331397" start="11296" end="11314" title="Oak Park, Illinois" label="Oak Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001120" start="13413" end="13440" title="Supreme Court of New Jersey" label="Supreme Court of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="13462" end="13472" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="13751" end="13773" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="13801" end="13812" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q880976" start="13978" end="13992" title="Ted Kulongoski" label="Ted Kulongoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q22072891" start="14065" end="14091" title="Oregon Family Fairness Act" label="Oregon Family Fairness Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="14543" end="14553" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q239366" start="14564" end="14582" title="Christine Gregoire" label="Christine Gregoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486" start="15278" end="15295" title="Same-sex marriage in Washington State" label="Same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q705961" start="15848" end="15857" title="Jim Doyle" label="Jim Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236853" start="15938" end="15962" title="Wisconsin State Assembly" label="Wisconsin State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412814" start="15967" end="15973" title="Wisconsin State Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q705961" start="16127" end="16136" title="Jim Doyle" label="Jim Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027332" start="16368" end="16391" title="Wisconsin Supreme Court" label="Wisconsin Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027261" start="16493" end="16522" title="Wisconsin Referendum 1 (2006)" label="Marriage Protection Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141294" start="17269" end="17291" title="cohabitation agreement" label="cohabitation agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685912" start="17531" end="17545" title="adult adoption" label="adult adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="17688" end="17708" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q244631" start="17709" end="17721" title="Leon Panetta" label="Leon Panetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893525" start="18900" end="18924" title="United States v. Windsor" label="United States v. Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="18952" end="18958" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="18989" end="18999" title="Code civil" label="Code civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="19033" end="19039" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149543" start="19340" end="19364" title="solidarity tax on wealth" label="solidarity tax on wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27249" start="19501" end="19522" title="civil solidarity pact" label="civil solidarity pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="19527" end="19533" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="19726" end="19733" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="19826" end="19833" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200599" start="21021" end="21047" title="Alliance of Free Democrats" label="Alliance of Free Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q753223" start="21052" end="21077" title="Hungarian Socialist Party" label="Hungarian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="21294" end="21311" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="21336" end="21345" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="21367" end="21376" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="21446" end="21474" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="21570" end="21582" title="Commonwealth of Australia" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="21684" end="21699" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="21782" end="21796" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="21837" end="21855" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="21897" end="21907" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="21975" end="21990" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="22045" end="22053" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010166" start="22166" end="22208" title="Recognition of same-sex unions in Tasmania" label="Recognition of same-sex unions in Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="22211" end="22219" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="22337" end="22354" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009858" start="22426" end="22459" title="Property (Relationships) Act 1976" label="Property (Relationships) Act 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147546" start="22707" end="22718" title="Civil union in New Zealand" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="22788" end="22805" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q49800" start="22879" end="22891" title="Cohabitation" label="Cohabitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="22894" end="22908" title="Civil marriage" label="Civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="22911" end="22922" title="Civil union" label="Civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="22925" end="22936" title="Concubinage" label="Concubinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550316" start="22939" end="22949" title="Free union" label="Free union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="22952" end="22971" title="Common-law marriage" label="Common-law marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="22974" end="22991" title="Same-sex marriage" label="Same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17505" start="22995" end="23026" title="Same-sex marriage in California" label="Same-sex marriage in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="23140" end="23158" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220432" wikidata="Q212093" url="?curid=220432" title="Xylitol">
<text>Xylitol is a chemical compound with the formula , or HO(CH2)(CHOH)3(CH2)OH; specifically, one particular stereoisomer with that structural formula. It is a colorless or white crystalline solid. It is classified as a polyalcohol and a sugar alcohol, specifically an alditol. Of the common sugar alcohols, only sorbitol is more soluble in water.

The name derives from , &quot;xyl[on]&quot; &#x27;wood&#x27;, with the suffix &quot;-itol&quot; used to denote it being a sugar alcohol.

Xylitol is used as a food additive and sugar substitute. Its European Union code number is E967. Replacing sugar with xylitol in food products may promote better dental health, but evidence is lacking on whether xylitol itself prevents dental cavities. In the United States, xylitol is used as a common sugar substitute, and is considered to be safe for humans.

Xylitol can be toxic to dogs.

==History==
Emil Fischer, a German chemist, and his assistant Rudolf Stahel isolated a new compound from beech wood chips in September 1890 and named it , after the Greek word for wood. The following year, the French chemist M. G. Bertrand isolated xylitol syrup by processing wheat and oat straw. Sugar rationing during World War II led to an interest in sugar substitutes. Interest in xylitol and other polyols became intense, leading to their characterization and manufacturing methods.

==Structure, production, commerce==
Xylitol is one of three 5-carbon sugar alcohols. The others are arabitol and ribitol. These three compounds differ in the stereochemistry of the three secondary alcohol groups.
Xylitol occurs naturally in small amounts in plums, strawberries, cauliflower, and pumpkin; humans and many other animals make trace amounts during metabolism of carbohydrates. Unlike most sugar alcohols, xylitol is achiral. Most other isomers of pentane-1,2,3,4,5-pentol are chiral, but xylitol has a plane of symmetry.

Industrial production starts with lignocellulosic biomass from which xylan is extracted; raw biomass materials include hardwoods, softwoods, and agricultural waste from processing maize, wheat, or rice. The mixture is hydrolyzed with acid to give xylose. The xylose is purified by chromatography. Purified xylose is catalytically hydrogenated into xylitol using a Raney nickel catalyst. The conversion changes the sugar (xylose, an aldehyde) into the primary alcohol, xylitol.

Xylitol can also be obtained by industrial fermentation, but this methodology are not as economical as the acid hydrolysis/chromatography route described above. Fermentation is effected by bacteria, fungi, or yeast, especially &quot;Candida tropicalis&quot;. According to the US Department of Energy, xylitol production by fermentation from discarded biomass is one of the most valuable renewable chemicals for commerce, forecast to be a US $1.41 billion industry by 2025.

==Uses==
Xylitol is used as a sugar substitute in such manufactured products as drugs, dietary supplements, confections, toothpaste, and chewing gum, but is not a common household sweetener. Xylitol has negligible effects on blood sugar because its assimilation and metabolism are independent of insulin. It is approved as a food additive and sugar substitute in the United States. 

Xylitol is also found as an additive to saline solution for nasal irrigation and has been reported to be effective in improving symptoms of chronic sinusitis.

Xylitol can also be incorporated into fabrics to produce a cooling fabric. When moisture, such as sweat, comes into contact with the xylitol embedded in the fabric, it produces a cooling sensation.

==Food properties==

===Nutrition, taste, and cooking===
Humans absorb xylitol more slowly than sucrose, and xylitol supplies 40% fewer calories than an equal mass of sucrose.

Xylitol has about the same sweetness as sucrose, but is sweeter than similar compounds like sorbitol and mannitol.

Xylitol is stable enough to be used in baking, but because xylitol and other polyols are more heat-stable, they do not caramelise as sugars do. When used in foods, they lower the freezing point of the mixture.

===Food risks===
No serious health risk exists in most humans for normal levels of consumption. The European Food Safety Authority has not set a limit on daily intake of xylitol. Due to the adverse laxative effect that all polyols have on the digestive system in high doses, xylitol is banned from soft drinks in the European Union. Similarly, due to a 1985 report by the E.U. Scientific Committee on Food which states that &quot;ingesting 50 g a day of xylitol can cause diarrhea&quot;, tabletop sweeteners (as well as other products containing xylitol) are required to display the warning &quot;Excessive consumption may induce laxative effects&quot;.

===Metabolism===
Xylitol has 2.4 kilocalories of food energy per gram of xylitol (10 kilojoules per gram) according to U.S. and E.U. food-labeling regulations. The real value can vary, depending on metabolic factors.

Primarily, the liver metabolizes absorbed xylitol. The main metabolic route in humans occurs in cytoplasm, via nonspecific NAD-dependent dehydrogenase (polyol dehydrogenase), which transforms xylitol to -xylulose. Specific xylulokinase phosphorylates it to -xylulose-5-phosphate. This then goes to pentose phosphate pathway for further processing.

About 50% of eaten xylitol is absorbed via the intestines. Of the remaining 50% that is not absorbed by the intestines, in humans, 50–75% of the xylitol remaining in the gut is fermented by gut bacteria into short-chain organic acids and gases, which may produce flatulence. The remnant unabsorbed xylitol that escapes fermentation is excreted unchanged, mostly in feces; less than 2 g of xylitol out of every 100 g ingested is excreted via urine.

Xylitol ingestion also increases motilin secretion, which may be related to xylitol&#x27;s ability to cause diarrhea. The less-digestible but fermentable nature of xylitol also contributes to constipation relieving effects.

==Health effects==

===Dental care===
A 2015 Cochrane review of ten studies between 1991 and 2014 suggested a positive effect in reducing tooth decay of xylitol-containing fluoride toothpastes when compared to fluoride-only toothpaste, but there was insufficient evidence to determine whether other xylitol-containing products can prevent tooth decay in infants, children or adults. Subsequent reviews support the belief that xylitol can suppress the growth of pathogenic Streptococcus in the mouth, thereby reducing dental caries and gingivitis, although there is concern that swallowed xylitol may cause intestinal dysbiosis. A 2022 review suggested that xylitol-containing chewing gum decreases plaque, but not xylitol-containing candy.

===Earache===
In 2011 EFSA &quot;concluded that there was not enough evidence to support&quot; the claim that xylitol-sweetened gum could prevent middle-ear infections, also known as acute otitis media (AOM). A 2016 review indicated that xylitol in chewing gum or a syrup may have a moderate effect in preventing AOM in healthy children. It may be an alternative to conventional therapies (such as antibiotics) to lower risk of earache in healthy children – reducing risk of occurrence by 25% – although there is no definitive proof that it could be used as a therapy for earache.

===Diabetes===
In 2011, EFSA approved a marketing claim that foods or beverages containing xylitol or similar sugar replacers cause lower blood glucose and lower insulin responses compared to sugar-containing foods or drinks. Xylitol products are used as sucrose substitutes for weight control, as xylitol has 40% fewer calories than sucrose (2.4 kcal/g compared to 4.0 kcal/g for sucrose). The glycemic index (GI) of xylitol is only 7% of the GI for glucose.

==Adverse effects==

===Humans===
When ingested at high doses, xylitol and other polyols may cause gastrointestinal discomfort, including flatulence, diarrhea, and irritable bowel syndrome (see Metabolism above); some people experience the adverse effects at lower doses. Xylitol has a lower laxation threshold than some sugar alcohols but is more easily tolerated than mannitol and sorbitol.

Increased xylitol consumption can increase oxalate, calcium, and phosphate excretion to urine (termed &quot;oxaluria&quot;, &quot;calciuria&quot;, and &quot;phosphaturia&quot;, respectively). These are known risk factors for kidney stone disease, but despite that, xylitol has not been linked to kidney disease in humans. 
A 2024 study suggests that xylitol is prothrombotic (increases clotting) and is associated with cardiovascular risk when consumed at &quot;typical dietary amounts&quot;.

===Dogs and other animals===
Xylitol is poisonous to dogs. Ingesting 100 milligrams of xylitol per kilogram of body weight (mg/kg bw) causes dogs to experience a dose-dependent insulin release; depending on the dose it can result in life-threatening hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemic symptoms of xylitol toxicity may arise as quickly as 30 to 60 minutes after ingestion. Vomiting is a common first symptom, which can be followed by tiredness and ataxia. At doses above 500 mg/kg bw, liver failure is likely and may result in coagulopathies like disseminated intravascular coagulation. 

Xylitol is safe for rhesus macaques, horses, and rats. 

A 2018 study suggests that xylitol is safe for cats in doses of up to 1000 mg/kg; however, this study was performed on only 6 cats and should not be considered definitive.

==See also==

* Aspartame
* Birch sap
* -Xylulose reductase
* Xylonic acid

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212093" start="0" end="7" title="Xylitol" label="Xylitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="13" end="30" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q47455153" start="105" end="117" title="Stereoisomerism" label="stereoisomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="175" end="182" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625944" start="216" end="227" title="polyalcohol" label="polyalcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625944" start="234" end="247" title="sugar alcohol" label="sugar alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415812" start="265" end="272" title="alditol" label="alditol"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="309" end="317" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="504" end="517" title="food additive" label="food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q626292" start="522" end="538" title="sugar substitute" label="sugar substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="544" end="570" title="E number" label="European Union code number"/>
<link wikidata="Q212093" start="574" end="578" title="Xylitol" label="E967"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="590" end="595" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="719" end="734" title="dental cavities" label="dental cavities"/>
<link wikidata="Q626292" start="786" end="802" title="sugar substitute" label="sugar substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="870" end="873" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q70554" start="889" end="901" title="Emil Fischer" label="Emil Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="982" end="987" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1198" end="1210" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q626292" start="1233" end="1250" title="sugar substitutes" label="sugar substitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165586" start="1323" end="1339" title="Characterization (materials science)" label="characterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880471" start="1468" end="1476" title="arabitol" label="arabitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q416534" start="1481" end="1488" title="ribitol" label="ribitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="1729" end="1739" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="1743" end="1755" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214514" start="1797" end="1804" title="Chirality (chemistry)" label="achiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="1817" end="1823" title="isomer" label="isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q508355" start="1937" end="1960" title="lignocellulosic biomass" label="lignocellulosic biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q419547" start="1972" end="1977" title="xylan" label="xylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="2022" end="2030" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="2033" end="2042" title="softwoods" label="softwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q66589603" start="2150" end="2156" title="xylose" label="xylose"/>
<link wikidata="Q170050" start="2184" end="2198" title="chromatography" label="chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q66589603" start="2209" end="2215" title="xylose" label="xylose"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="2233" end="2245" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenated"/>
<link wikidata="Q898293" start="2267" end="2279" title="Raney nickel" label="Raney nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="2335" end="2343" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832210" start="2354" end="2369" title="primary alcohol" label="primary alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q845523" start="2413" end="2436" title="industrial fermentation" label="industrial fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q143138" start="2614" end="2632" title="Candida tropicalis" label="Candida tropicalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="2660" end="2680" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="2704" end="2716" title="fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="2732" end="2739" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138571" start="2768" end="2787" title="Renewable resource" label="renewable chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8386" start="2935" end="2939" title="drug" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="2942" end="2960" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="2963" end="2974" title="Confectionery" label="confections"/>
<link wikidata="Q35855" start="2976" end="2986" title="toothpaste" label="toothpaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q130878" start="2992" end="3003" title="chewing gum" label="chewing gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="3080" end="3091" title="blood sugar" label="blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="3151" end="3158" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275792" start="3279" end="3285" title="Saline (medicine)" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425813" start="3299" end="3315" title="nasal irrigation" label="nasal irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183344" start="3387" end="3396" title="sinusitis" label="sinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="3815" end="3822" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="3867" end="3875" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q407646" start="3880" end="3888" title="mannitol" label="mannitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q73185" start="4010" end="4020" title="Caramelization" label="caramelise"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="4202" end="4232" title="European Food Safety Authority" label="European Food Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="4300" end="4308" title="laxative" label="laxative"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4419" end="4433" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q909206" start="4479" end="4507" title="Scientific Committee on Food" label="Scientific Committee on Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="4574" end="4582" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q186205" start="4806" end="4817" title="food energy" label="food energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4876" end="4880" title="United States of America" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4885" end="4889" title="European Union" label="E.U."/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="5071" end="5080" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="5098" end="5101" title="NAD+" label="NAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q423204" start="5178" end="5187" title="D-xylulose" label="-xylulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045554" start="5198" end="5210" title="xylulokinase" label="xylulokinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q37864045" start="5232" end="5253" title="D-xylulose-5-phosphate" label="-xylulose-5-phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q827489" start="5273" end="5298" title="pentose phosphate pathway" label="pentose phosphate pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="5514" end="5526" title="gut bacteria" label="gut bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="5587" end="5597" title="flatulence" label="flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q126440" start="5806" end="5813" title="motilin" label="motilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105187" start="6043" end="6058" title="Cochrane review" label="Cochrane review"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="6136" end="6147" title="tooth decay" label="tooth decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="6170" end="6178" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q190161" start="6470" end="6483" title="Streptococcus" label="Streptococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q673083" start="6533" end="6543" title="gingivitis" label="gingivitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6604" end="6624" title="Dysbiosis#Gut/intestinal dysbiosis" label="intestinal dysbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130878" start="6674" end="6685" title="chewing gum" label="chewing gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="6761" end="6765" title="EFSA" label="EFSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q223254" start="6922" end="6940" title="acute otitis media" label="acute otitis media"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="7137" end="7147" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="7483" end="7490" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="7576" end="7583" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q273924" start="7716" end="7730" title="glycemic index" label="glycemic index"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="7772" end="7779" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="7881" end="7897" title="gastrointestinal" label="gastrointestinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="7920" end="7930" title="flatulence" label="flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="7932" end="7940" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="7946" end="7970" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7976" end="7986" title="#Metabolism" label="Metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="8074" end="8082" title="laxation" label="laxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625944" start="8103" end="8117" title="sugar alcohols" label="sugar alcohols"/>
<link wikidata="Q407646" start="8152" end="8160" title="mannitol" label="mannitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="8165" end="8173" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641060" start="8284" end="8292" title="oxaluria" label="oxaluria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210589" start="8306" end="8315" title="calciuria" label="calciuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q113070778" start="8333" end="8345" title="phosphaturia" label="phosphaturia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="8401" end="8421" title="kidney stone disease" label="kidney stone disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="8723" end="8726" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="8847" end="8854" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="8920" end="8932" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="9109" end="9115" title="ataxia" label="ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q970208" start="9146" end="9159" title="liver failure" label="liver failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q890200" start="9188" end="9202" title="Coagulopathy" label="coagulopathies"/>
<link wikidata="Q823027" start="9208" end="9246" title="disseminated intravascular coagulation" label="disseminated intravascular coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156606" start="9270" end="9284" title="rhesus macaque" label="rhesus macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="9287" end="9292" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="9299" end="9302" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="9354" end="9357" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q182040" start="9496" end="9505" title="Aspartame" label="Aspartame"/>
<link wikidata="Q865598" start="9508" end="9517" title="Birch sap" label="Birch sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141536" start="9520" end="9539" title="L-xylulose reductase" label="-Xylulose reductase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325795" start="9542" end="9554" title="Xylonic acid" label="Xylonic acid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220434" wikidata="Q5347375" url="?curid=220434" title="Effects of marriage">
<text>In family law, effects of marriage is a legal term of art used to describe all of the rights and obligations that individuals may be subject and entitled to if they are in a common-law marriage, an annulled marriage, domestic partnership or a civil union.

Thus, even if the underlying marriage is held to be void there may still be rights and obligations that continue and are recognized by court order. An example may be an annulled marriage where the court awards alimony to the weaker, poorer or less well educated spouse to allow them a period of time to go back to school or re-enter the work force.

There are a few positive and negative influences of marriage on an individual. Life after marriage depends on individual and partner. First of all, an individual becomes excited that they will begin to share their life with someone who cares for them, and whom they feel comforted by. They will feel excited to know that soon they will be starting a family of their own, and that they will become parents of their own children. Research has shown that those individuals who live a stable marital relationship tend to live longer, have a better physical health, better functional health at old age and better emotional health than those in troubled marriages or who are divorced.

On the other hand, there a few negative influences of marriage on an adult. An adult can become stressed out on the fact that they will need to make compromises and sacrifices, in order to form a good marital relationship. This can lead to a loss of hobbies, because there are restrictions about what the individuals can do; and these restrictions are for both the men and women in the relationship. The adult may develop a sense of stress because they have a lot of responsibility ahead of them. In addition, the individuals in the relationship can become upset by the fact that they have to make sure that their relationship has no betrayals, and it is kept loyal, throughout the couple&#x27;s lives.

== Traditional marriage ==
Traditional marriage defined as being between a man and a woman as defined by the American psychological association by defining it as &quot;a marriage of husband and wife, wherein the former is the primary or sole breadwinner and the latter holds primary or sole responsibility for maintaining the home and managing child care.&quot; This union, when intentionally invested in, can have health benefits for the individuals involved. Furthermore, the American Sociological Association noted on their findings that is it not necessarily being in a marriage that brings the benefits, rather it is being in a &quot;good marriage&quot; quality that brings benefits of better health and well-being. Individuals can be in marriage and have their health plummet because the relationship is abusive. Thus, it is evident that the quality of the marriage is a determining factor if people receive health benefits.

Studies have shown that single individuals are at a disadvantage relative to married individuals in terms of recovering from or adapting to illness with even less difference in health behavior, morbidity, and self-reported health. Married individuals are typically healthier than unmarried individuals. Furthermore in regards to mental health, Gove et al., found in their studies that marital status appears to be approximately as powerful a factor of determining mental health as education, income and even more so in regard to age, race or childhood background. Ironically, as more research are conducted, it is gradually shown that the belief that trying to have more free time and less busy work does not make people happy. Often times, people believe that in order to be happy, they need to have less social constraints and obligations. However, research has shown that the very social constraints and obligations that many believe steal our happiness from us are the very things that are necessary by-products of living with others that have a strong effect on our mental well-being that tends to override the positive effect of companionship and social support among those who never married, are divorced or are separated or widowed.

It is also worth mentioning that data shows that cohabitation may appear to have much of the same advantages to health that marriage does; which may lead individuals to assume that cohabitation is a good alternative to marriage. However, as a caution it is good to remember that cohabitation also is a less stable family structure both for couples with or without children. Furthermore, it has been found that those in cohabitating relationships are more likely to end their unions, have lower life satisfaction, have low relationship quality and more likely to be depressed. Thus, we see that more benefits lie in traditional marriage than cohabitation.

The benefits of marriage go beyond health and living with a partner, because marriage is a public vow and a legal contract, it signifies a stronger and more sacred commitment between the partner to the public and more importantly, to each other. Individuals who share a union in marriage may have better long-term perspectives that the single or cohabitating counterparts because marriage is intended to last through life. Marriage also makes couples stronger because due to the fact that when the going gets tough, couples are motivated to work harder on their relationship, which forges a stronger and more powerful bond in the marriage. The union of marriage between husband and wife brings a sense of security and wellbeing in emotional reassurance, financial stability, security for their children and the comfort of not being alone in old age say focus group respondents throughout Europe and Australia. Lastly, this security is only strengthened by the protection marriage provides in certain countries within the legal system; thus we see that marriage reduces insecurities in life and increase general well-being which overall greatly affects health.

Healthier people in marriages may have a better chance of having a successful marriage. A healthier person may be more appealing to their partner. For example, having a higher income could improve the health care individuals receive or lowers stress. In certain marriages, a spouse may help in monitoring and encouraging healthy behaviors; as well as discouraging unhealthy habits. Marriage may provide an emotional fulfilling relationship. Which would satisfy the need for a social connection. Marriage is able to reduce depressive symptoms for both men and women. As marriage is able to reduce them, divorce is able to increase them. Marriage can also be associated with less healthier behaviors. For example, alcohol consumption, drug use, cigarette smoking, diet, and exercise.

== Same-sex marriage ==
In same-sex marriages, marriage has a more positive effect than negative. Single persons in the same-sex world happen to be more distressed. In contrast to same-sex marriage, heterosexuals have the lowest psychological distress. Lesbians, gays, and bisexuals who are not in a legalized marriages have the highest psychological distress. Marriage diminishes mental health issues between people in the same-sex community. Children who are raised in such marriages grow with the same beneficial experiences when compared to children raised in heterosexual marriages. Science shows that there is no reason to deny such people marriage, however there is scientific research show there are adverse effects when denying heterosexual couples to marry.

== Polygamy ==
Polygamous marriages can have negative effects on women and are illegal in many countries. Many women experience feelings of neglect and jealousy. Men, often, are not fair when it comes to equally splitting their time in these marriages, though they may desire to be. It is possible that women rarely see their husbands or have their needs met. This not only applies to women, but also their children. The severity of the negative effects depend on the tolerance and patience of the wife. In more serious cases, it can range from depression, tantrums, or illness. All of the previously mentioned feelings and conditions can certainly affect men too. There are also pros for either sex when they are in a polygamas marriage. For men, their sexual needs are met more fully, and society views the man as more successful. For women, it is a decrease in individual household chores and less pressure to provide many healthy and fit children. As a household, they have shown to have better choice and availability of food as well as they often times have healthier children.

== Differences between sex, race, and education ==
In opposition to men, women are more likely to get married and remarried. Women are also more likely to get married younger. Caucasians marry at a higher rate, then Asian, Hispanic, American Indian and lastly African Americans; listed in decreasing order. For each race, marriage numbers jump immensely from ages 23–25. In comparison to Hispanics and Whites, Blacks were less likely to get married and more likely to get divorced. 70% of non-Hispanic Caucasian children and 59% of Hispanics reported to live with both parents. However, for African Americans only 1/3rd reported such findings. People who did not complete high school were less likely to get married over people who did complete high school. For those who achieved a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher, 69% did not divorce and of those with such degrees 29.7% got divorces. About 48% of those who graduated high school and/or got an Associate&#x27;s degree, got divorced. The more education one has, the later in life they are to get married.

== Divorce ==
As time goes on, many changes have affected divorce and marriage rates. 2000 divorce was 4.0 per 1,000 people, 2015 down to 3.1 per 1,000, in 2018 it went down again to 2.9 per 1,000, and in 2020 it is 3.0 per 1,000. Divorce rates decline as educational attainment increases. It is also said that people who marry later in life are less inclined to get divorced. The Coronavirus disease has caused the divorce rates to jump an additional 34% compared to previous years in the United States.

==See also==
*Civil union
*Cohabitation
*Domestic partnership
*Common-law marriage

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q384014" start="3" end="13" title="family law" label="family law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347375" start="15" end="34" title="Effects of marriage" label="effects of marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="40" end="57" title="legal term of art" label="legal term of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="174" end="193" title="common-law marriage" label="common-law marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="198" end="206" title="annulment" label="annulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="217" end="237" title="domestic partnership" label="domestic partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="243" end="254" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q696617" start="392" end="403" title="court order" label="court order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772887" start="659" end="667" title="Marriage in the United States" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="6792" end="6809" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="7549" end="7569" title="Polygamy" label="Polygamous marriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517602" start="7613" end="7638" title="Legality of polygamy" label="illegal in many countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="9735" end="9742" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="10197" end="10208" title="Civil union" label="Civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49800" start="10210" end="10222" title="Cohabitation" label="Cohabitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="10224" end="10244" title="Domestic partnership" label="Domestic partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="10246" end="10265" title="Common-law marriage" label="Common-law marriage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220437" wikidata="Q1791952" url="?curid=220437" title="Visitation">
<text>Visitation may refer to:

==Law==
* Visitation (law) or contact, the right of a non-custodial parent to visit with their children
* Prison visitation rights, the rules and conditions under which prisoners may have visitors

==Music==
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Division Day album), 2009
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Sam Jones album), 1978
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Joe McPhee album), 1985
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Jonah Sharp and Bill Laswell album), 1994
* &quot;Visitation&quot;, an instrumental by Paul Chambers from &quot;Chambers&#x27; Music&quot;, 1956

==Religion==
* Visitation (Christianity), a liturgical feast day commemorating the visit of the Virgin Mary to St. Elizabeth
*Visitation Order of enclosed nuns
** Visitation Convent
** Visitation Monastery
* Visitation Church, Montreal
* Canonical visitation, an inspection made by a clergyman authorised under Catholic canon law
* Visitation, a funeral custom where a mourner visits the deceased&#x27;s family and views the body

==Visual arts==
Images of the Visitation (Christianity), the visit of the Virgin Mary to St. Elizabeth
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Albertinelli), 1503
* Visitation (Cariani), c.1524-1528
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Dürer), a 1503 engraving by Albrecht Dürer
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Ghirlandaio), a 1491 painting by Domenico Ghirlandaio displayed in the Louvre
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (El Greco), a 1608–1613 painting by El Greco
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Perugino), c.1472
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Raphael), a c. 1517 painting by Raphael
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (Rubens), 1610s
* Visitation (Tintoretto, Bologna), c.1550
* Visitation (Tintoretto, Venice), c.1588
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (van der Weyden), c.1445

==Other uses==
* &quot;Visitation&quot; (&quot;Stargate Universe&quot;), an episode of &quot;Stargate Universe&quot;
* Heraldic visitation, a tour of inspection by a herald (or other officer-of-arms) to regulate and register coats of arms, and to record pedigrees; also, the written record of such a tour

== See also ==
* The Visitation (disambiguation)
* Alien visitation (disambiguation)
* Visit (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1791952" start="0" end="10" title="Visitation" label="Visitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123171259" start="36" end="52" title="Visitation (law)" label="Visitation (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126009069" start="132" end="149" title="Prison visitation" label="Prison visitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960521" start="236" end="279" title="Visitation (Division Day album)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Division Day album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603436" start="288" end="328" title="Visitation (Sam Jones album)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Sam Jones album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898164" start="337" end="378" title="Visitation (Joe McPhee album)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Joe McPhee album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395556" start="387" end="446" title="Visitation (Jonah Sharp and Bill Laswell album)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Jonah Sharp and Bill Laswell album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069621" start="523" end="543" title="Chambers&amp;#x27; Music" label="Chambers&amp;#x27; Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q691810" start="572" end="597" title="Visitation (Christianity)" label="Visitation (Christianity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q864271" start="683" end="699" title="Order of the Visitation of Holy Mary" label="Visitation Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936308" start="720" end="738" title="Visitation Convent" label="Visitation Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166165" start="742" end="762" title="Visitation Monastery" label="Visitation Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585888" start="765" end="782" title="Visitation Church" label="Visitation Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q202030" start="795" end="815" title="Canonical visitation" label="Canonical visitation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="903" end="910" title="funeral#visitation" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q691810" start="1018" end="1043" title="Visitation (Christianity)" label="Visitation (Christianity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014806" start="1093" end="1130" title="Visitation (Albertinelli)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Albertinelli)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27979421" start="1139" end="1159" title="Visitation (Cariani)" label="Visitation (Cariani)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936304" start="1175" end="1205" title="Visitation (Dürer)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Dürer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23946" start="1244" end="1280" title="Visitation (Ghirlandaio)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Ghirlandaio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688008" start="1348" end="1381" title="Visitation (El Greco)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (El Greco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213855" start="1418" end="1451" title="Visitation (Perugino)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Perugino)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467082" start="1462" end="1494" title="Visitation (Raphael)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Raphael)"/>
<link wikidata="Q38403891" start="1528" end="1559" title="Visitation (Rubens)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (Rubens)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25444052" start="1569" end="1601" title="Visitation (Tintoretto, Bologna)" label="Visitation (Tintoretto, Bologna)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60841086" start="1612" end="1643" title="Visitation (Tintoretto, Venice)" label="Visitation (Tintoretto, Venice)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25444058" start="1654" end="1693" title="Visitation (van der Weyden)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (van der Weyden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044161" start="1720" end="1774" title="Visitation (Stargate Universe)" label="&amp;quot;Visitation&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Stargate Universe&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732698" start="1822" end="1841" title="Heraldic visitation" label="Heraldic visitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16884601" start="2026" end="2057" title="The Visitation (disambiguation)" label="The Visitation (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64854302" start="2060" end="2093" title="Alien visitation (disambiguation)" label="Alien visitation (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130325" start="2096" end="2118" title="Visit (disambiguation)" label="Visit (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220438" wikidata="Q5490397" url="?curid=220438" title="Frank Willis">
<text>Frank Willis may refer to:
*Frank B. Willis (1871–1928), American politician
*Frank Willis (canoeist) (1915–1991), Canadian canoeist

==See also==
*Francis Willis (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5490397" start="0" end="12" title="Frank Willis" label="Frank Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q881420" start="28" end="43" title="Frank B. Willis" label="Frank B. Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490398" start="78" end="101" title="Frank Willis (canoeist)" label="Frank Willis (canoeist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482799" start="148" end="179" title="Francis Willis (disambiguation)" label="Francis Willis (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220441" wikidata="Q318165" url="?curid=220441" title="Luke Perry">
<text>Coy Luther &quot;Luke&quot; Perry III (October 11, 1966 – March 4, 2019) was an American actor. He became a teen idol for playing Dylan McKay on the Fox television series &quot;Beverly Hills, 90210&quot; from 1990 to 1995, and again from 1998 to 2000. Perry also starred as Fred Andrews on the CW series &quot;Riverdale.&quot; He had guest roles on shows such as &quot;Criminal Minds&quot;, &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;, &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, and &quot;Will &amp; Grace&quot;, as well as a recurring role voicing Rick Jones in &quot;The Incredible Hulk&quot; (1996–1997) from Marvel Comics, and also appeared in various films, including &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; (1992), &quot;8 Seconds&quot; (1994), &quot;The Fifth Element&quot; (1997), &quot;The Final Storm&quot;, &quot;The Beat Beneath My Feet&quot; (2016), and &quot;Once Upon a Time in Hollywood&quot; (2019), which was his final feature performance and earned him a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination.

==Early life==
Luke Perry was born on October 11, 1966, in Mansfield, Ohio, the second of three children to Ann Perry, a homemaker, and Coy Luther Perry Jr., a steelworker. He had an older brother, Thomas Perry, and a younger sister, Amy Coder (née Perry). His parents divorced in 1972. His father died of a heart attack in 1980. Perry was raised in Fredericktown, Ohio, and played Freddie Bird, the school mascot for Fredericktown High School.

==Career==
===Beginnings===
In 1984, Perry moved to Los Angeles shortly after high school to pursue acting. He worked odd jobs, including for an asphalt paving company and in a doorknob factory. He appeared in the 1985 music video of &quot;Be Chrool to Your Scuel&quot; for the band Twisted Sister. Perry had auditioned for 256 acting jobs before receiving his first acceptance in 1988. After moving to New York, Perry&#x27;s earliest roles were on daytime soap operas: one episode of &quot;Loving&quot; (1987–1988) and ten episodes of &quot;Another World&quot; (1988–1989).

===Rise to fame: &quot;Beverly Hills, 90210&quot; era===

In 1990, Perry got the role of the brooding millionaire&#x27;s son Dylan McKay on Fox&#x27;s teen drama &quot;Beverly Hills, 90210&quot;. He originally auditioned for the role of Steve Sanders but lost to Ian Ziering. With this role, Perry became a popular teen idol; a riot broke out when 10,000 teen girls attended an August 1991 autograph session at The Fashion Mall at Plantation, causing him to leave after 90 seconds. While starring in &quot;90210&quot;, Perry had a supporting role in the original film version of Joss Whedon&#x27;s &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; (1992). He also starred in &quot;Terminal Bliss&quot; in 1992, and as Lane Frost in &quot;8 Seconds&quot; in 1994. At 1992 MTV Video Music Awards&#x27; Perry presented the award for best Metal Music Video along with Howard Stern dressed as Fartman, generating much press. 

In an attempt to find more mature roles, he decided to leave &quot;Beverly Hills, 90210&quot; in 1995. That year, he took a part in the Italian film &quot;Vacanze di Natale &#x27;95&quot;, playing himself. Although he announced that &quot;90210&quot; was behind him, his absence lasted for only three years, and he returned to the show in 1998. During this time, Perry starred in the independent film &quot;Normal Life&quot; opposite Ashley Judd and starred in the science fiction television film &quot;Invasion&quot; (1997) and &quot;Riot&quot; (1997), a drama about the 1992 Los Angeles riots. He had a small role in Luc Besson&#x27;s science fiction adventure film &quot;The Fifth Element&quot; (1997). In 1998, he returned to &quot;90210&quot;, where he remained as a permanent special guest star through the show&#x27;s final season in 2000. In 1999, he starred in the film &quot;Storm.&quot;

He said of his role on &quot;Beverly Hills, 90210&quot; as Dylan McKay, &quot;I&#x27;m going to be linked with him until I die, but that&#x27;s actually just fine. I created Dylan McKay. He&#x27;s mine,&quot; but did not reprise his role in the spin-off. He stated: &quot;When you&#x27;re in the professional acting business, you have to look into all these offers, and I don&#x27;t mean anything bad about it but creatively it&#x27;s something I have done before and I don&#x27;t know how it will benefit me if I do it again.&quot; Perry said that the fact that the show&#x27;s longtime producer Aaron Spelling was not involved in the revival was critical: &quot;The difference between CW bringing something back and Aaron Spelling doing something is significant. And I cannot do it without Aaron.&quot; However, Shannen Doherty, Jennie Garth, and Tori Spelling reprised their roles in the 2008 revival of the series.

===Later work===
From 2001 to 2002, Perry starred in the HBO prison drama &quot;Oz&quot;, as Reverend Jeremiah Cloutier. From 2002 to 2004, he starred in the post-apocalyptic television series &quot;Jeremiah&quot;. Perry went on to star in a 2002 television film called &quot;The Triangle&quot;. In 2006, Perry co-starred in the ensemble drama series &quot;Windfall&quot;, about a group of friends who win the lottery. The series ran for 13 episodes during the summer of 2006 on NBC. In 2007, he landed the role of Tommy &quot;Santa&quot; Santorelli on the film &quot;The Sandlot: Heading Home&quot;, and he appeared in the 2008 western &quot;A Gunfighter&#x27;s Pledge&quot;. Perry also appeared in the 2007 HBO series &quot;John from Cincinnati&quot;. He also starred in the Swedish film &quot;Äntligen Midsommar&quot; (&quot;Finally Midsummer&quot;), which was released in the summer of 2009.

Perry did considerable voice-over work for various animated series, usually playing himself. He played himself (as Krusty the Clown&#x27;s half brother) in &quot;Krusty Gets Kancelled&quot;, an episode of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; (1993).&lt;ref name=&quot;A Star is Burns / 4 Jan 2010 2:43 PM PST Top 25 Simpsons Guest Appearances&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; He voiced himself in an episode of &quot;Johnny Bravo&quot;, giving Johnny dating advice after Johnny saved him from a stampede of fan girls. Perry parodied himself in &quot;The Story on Page One&quot;, an episode of &quot;Family Guy&quot;, in which he sues Peter Griffin for calling him gay in a newspaper article. His other voice work includes &quot;The Incredible Hulk&quot; as Rick Jones, &quot;Biker Mice from Mars&quot; (which also starred fellow &quot;90210&quot; co-star Ian Ziering), &quot;Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm&quot;, and &quot;The Night of the Headless Horseman&quot;.

Perry guest-starred as gay characters in the sitcoms &quot;Spin City&quot; (1997) and &quot;Will &amp; Grace&quot; (2005); in the former, he appeared as Carter Heywood&#x27;s ex-boyfriend who subsequently fell in love with a woman, and in the latter he played a birdwatcher who catches the eye of Jack McFarland. In 2005, Perry was reunited with former &quot;90210&quot; co-star Jennie Garth when he guest-starred on &quot;What I Like About You&quot; in a loose parody of their &quot;90210&quot; characters&#x27; relationship. In 2008, Perry guest-starred as rapist Noah Sibert in the season premiere of the television series &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;. He also guest-starred as cult leader Benjamin Cyrus in an episode of &quot;Criminal Minds&quot;. In late 2009, Perry starred in The Killers&#x27; music video for their fourth annual Christmas single, &quot;¡Happy Birthday Guadalupe!&quot;.

The same year, Perry participated in Thomas Nelson&#x27;s audio Bible production known as &quot;The Word of Promise&quot;. In this dramatized audio, Perry played both Saint Stephen and Judas Iscariot. The project also featured a large ensemble of other well-known Hollywood actors, including Jim Caviezel, Louis Gossett Jr., John Rhys-Davies, Jon Voight, Gary Sinise, Jason Alexander, Christopher McDonald, Marisa Tomei, Stacy Keach, and John Schneider.

Perry appeared on Broadway in 2001 in a revival of &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;, playing Brad Majors. In 2004, he appeared in the London production of &quot;When Harry Met Sally ...&quot; as Harry, alongside Alyson Hannigan as Sally. He played a con man/psychic in a second-season episode of &quot;Leverage&quot; in 2010, and then appeared as the American version of Inspector Spacetime in an episode of &quot;Community&quot; in 2013, titled &quot;Conventions of Space and Time&quot;.

From 2017 until his death in 2019, Perry starred as Frederick &quot;Fred&quot; Andrews, Archie&#x27;s father and owner of Andrews Construction, on The CW series &quot;Riverdale&quot;. All episodes aired after his death were dedicated to him. His final film role was as actor Wayne Maunder in the 2019 Quentin Tarantino film &quot;Once Upon a Time in Hollywood&quot;, about 1960s Hollywood around the time of the Tate–LaBianca murders.

==Personal life==
Perry married Rachel Minnie Sharp on November 20, 1993, in Beverly Hills. They had two children, son Jack Perry (born June 16, 1997) and daughter Sophie Perry (born June 7, 2000), before separating in 2003. Jack is a professional wrestler in All Elite Wrestling (AEW) who was formerly known as Jungle Boy.

Perry became an advocate for colorectal cancer testing after undergoing a colonoscopy in 2015 that revealed pre-cancerous growths. As a result of the scare, he created a will naming his children as the sole beneficiaries. At the time of his death, Perry was engaged to Wendy Madison Bauer.

==Illness and death==
On February 27, 2019, Perry suffered a massive ischemic stroke at his home in Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles, and was taken to Providence Saint Joseph Medical Center in Burbank. After a second stroke, his family decided to remove him from life support, and he died on March 4 at age 52. He is buried at the Perry Family Farm in VanLeer, Tennessee, where he had owned a home since 1995. Perry is buried in an eco-friendly mushroom burial suit which the manufacturer states can remove polluting toxins from the body while naturally breaking it down.

In the aftermath of his death, the Reelz channel announced a documentary titled &quot;Luke Perry: In His Own Words.&quot; As a result of his death, his &quot;Riverdale&quot; character Fred Andrews also died, and the fourth season premiere was a tribute episode dedicated to him and his character, featuring his &quot;Beverly Hills, 90210&quot; co-star Shannen Doherty.

==Filmography==

===Television===
===Film===
===Music videos===
=== Awards and nominations ===
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q318165" start="0" end="10" title="Luke Perry" label="Coy Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q318165" start="17" end="21" title="Luke Perry" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q318165" start="28" end="37" title="Luke Perry" label="Perry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553798" start="130" end="141" title="Dylan McKay" label="Dylan McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="149" end="152" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q117590" start="177" end="197" title="Beverly Hills, 90210" label="Beverly Hills, 90210"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="274" end="286" title="Families of Archie&amp;#x27;s Gang#Fred Andrews" label="Fred Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="294" end="296" title="The CW" label="CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001951" start="310" end="319" title="Riverdale (American TV series)" label="Riverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q202141" start="369" end="383" title="Criminal Minds" label="Criminal Minds"/>
<link wikidata="" start="397" end="434" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="448" end="460" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q212135" start="478" end="494" title="Will &amp;amp; Grace" label="Will &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535955" start="538" end="548" title="Rick Jones (character)" label="Rick Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282514" start="558" end="577" title="The Incredible Hulk (1996 TV series)" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="601" end="614" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39970" start="668" end="692" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer (film)" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q580917" start="713" end="722" title="8 Seconds" label="8 Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q106506" start="743" end="760" title="The Fifth Element" label="The Fifth Element"/>
<link wikidata="Q823020" start="781" end="796" title="The Final Storm (film)" label="The Final Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="859" end="888" title="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood" label="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q268200" start="960" end="985" title="Screen Actors Guild Awards" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q983698" start="1058" end="1073" title="Mansfield, Ohio" label="Mansfield, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666999" start="1349" end="1368" title="Fredericktown, Ohio" label="Fredericktown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499226" start="1417" end="1442" title="Fredericktown High School" label="Fredericktown High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1497" end="1508" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="1590" end="1597" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23009" start="1622" end="1630" title="doorknob" label="doorknob"/>
<link wikidata="Q162758" start="1685" end="1708" title="Be Chrool to Your Scuel" label="Be Chrool to Your Scuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q272239" start="1728" end="1742" title="Twisted Sister" label="Twisted Sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q607295" start="1936" end="1942" title="Loving (TV series)" label="Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030713" start="1987" end="2000" title="Another World (TV series)" label="Another World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553798" start="2146" end="2157" title="Dylan McKay" label="Dylan McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="2172" end="2182" title="teen drama" label="teen drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q117590" start="2189" end="2209" title="Beverly Hills, 90210" label="Beverly Hills, 90210"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2258" end="2271" title="List of Beverly Hills, 90210 characters#Steve Sanders" label="Steve Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q352233" start="2284" end="2295" title="Ian Ziering" label="Ian Ziering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034298" start="2336" end="2345" title="teen idol" label="teen idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436740" start="2432" end="2462" title="Plantation Walk" label="The Fashion Mall at Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q298025" start="2600" end="2611" title="Joss Whedon" label="Joss Whedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39970" start="2625" end="2649" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer (film)" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702640" start="2689" end="2703" title="Terminal Bliss" label="Terminal Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485399" start="2726" end="2736" title="Lane Frost" label="Lane Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q580917" start="2746" end="2755" title="8 Seconds" label="8 Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="2779" end="2801" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q348603" start="2872" end="2884" title="Howard Stern" label="Howard Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q820623" start="3337" end="3348" title="Normal Life" label="Normal Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q228645" start="3364" end="3375" title="Ashley Judd" label="Ashley Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821068" start="3433" end="3441" title="Invasion (miniseries)" label="Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335426" start="3465" end="3469" title="Riot (1997 film)" label="Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q696187" start="3502" end="3524" title="1992 Los Angeles riots" label="1992 Los Angeles riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q484779" start="3549" end="3559" title="Luc Besson" label="Luc Besson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106506" start="3604" end="3621" title="The Fifth Element" label="The Fifth Element"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620091" start="3815" end="3820" title="Storm (1999 film)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q295080" start="4426" end="4440" title="Aaron Spelling" label="Aaron Spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q207598" start="4643" end="4658" title="Shannen Doherty" label="Shannen Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q230015" start="4660" end="4672" title="Jennie Garth" label="Jennie Garth"/>
<link wikidata="Q229050" start="4678" end="4691" title="Tori Spelling" label="Tori Spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q276071" start="4720" end="4746" title="90210 (TV series)" label="2008 revival of the series"/>
<link wikidata="Q739780" start="4829" end="4831" title="Oz (TV series)" label="Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="4907" end="4923" title="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="post-apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751059" start="4948" end="4956" title="Jeremiah (TV series)" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431506" start="5025" end="5037" title="The Triangle (film)" label="The Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189754" start="5106" end="5114" title="Windfall (TV series)" label="Windfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="5228" end="5231" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5317" end="5342" title="The Sandlot: Heading Home" label="The Sandlot: Heading Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="5378" end="5385" title="Western (genre)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657219" start="5392" end="5418" title="A Gunfighter&amp;#x27;s Pledge" label="A Gunfighter&amp;#x27;s Pledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="5458" end="5461" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702252" start="5475" end="5495" title="John from Cincinnati" label="John from Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q727156" start="5761" end="5777" title="Krusty the Clown" label="Krusty the Clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498192" start="5808" end="5829" title="Krusty Gets Kancelled" label="Krusty Gets Kancelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q216991" start="6040" end="6052" title="Johnny Bravo" label="Johnny Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271282" start="6173" end="6194" title="The Story on Page One" label="The Story on Page One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="6222" end="6232" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28465" start="6257" end="6270" title="Peter Griffin" label="Peter Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282514" start="6351" end="6370" title="The Incredible Hulk (1996 TV series)" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535955" start="6380" end="6390" title="Rick Jones (character)" label="Rick Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068331" start="6398" end="6418" title="Biker Mice from Mars" label="Biker Mice from Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q352233" start="6478" end="6489" title="Ian Ziering" label="Ian Ziering"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6498" end="6535" title="Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm" label="Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="6619" end="6622" title="Gay men" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q256527" start="6655" end="6664" title="Spin City" label="Spin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q212135" start="6688" end="6704" title="Will &amp;amp; Grace" label="Will &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q685629" start="6858" end="6869" title="Birdwatching" label="birdwatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564351" start="6893" end="6907" title="Jack McFarland" label="Jack McFarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q230015" start="6975" end="6987" title="Jennie Garth" label="Jennie Garth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160221" start="7019" end="7040" title="What I Like About You (TV series)" label="What I Like About You"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7228" end="7265" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q220730" start="7401" end="7412" title="The Killers" label="The Killers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750277" start="7479" end="7505" title="¡Happy Birthday Guadalupe!" label="¡Happy Birthday Guadalupe!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648991" start="7551" end="7564" title="Thomas Nelson (publisher)" label="Thomas Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="7681" end="7694" title="Saint Stephen" label="Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="7699" end="7713" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q200841" start="7806" end="7818" title="Jim Caviezel" label="Jim Caviezel"/>
<link wikidata="Q329719" start="7820" end="7837" title="Louis Gossett Jr." label="Louis Gossett Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q16455" start="7839" end="7855" title="John Rhys-Davies" label="John Rhys-Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q167520" start="7857" end="7867" title="Jon Voight" label="Jon Voight"/>
<link wikidata="Q180272" start="7869" end="7880" title="Gary Sinise" label="Gary Sinise"/>
<link wikidata="Q311754" start="7882" end="7897" title="Jason Alexander" label="Jason Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q349857" start="7899" end="7919" title="Christopher McDonald" label="Christopher McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q191828" start="7921" end="7933" title="Marisa Tomei" label="Marisa Tomei"/>
<link wikidata="Q315090" start="7935" end="7946" title="Stacy Keach" label="Stacy Keach"/>
<link wikidata="Q286642" start="7952" end="7966" title="John Schneider (screen actor)" label="John Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="7987" end="7995" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="8026" end="8047" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="8104" end="8110" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8131" end="8155" title="When Harry Met Sally...#Legacy" label="When Harry Met Sally ..."/>
<link wikidata="Q199927" start="8182" end="8197" title="Alyson Hannigan" label="Alyson Hannigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q868835" start="8272" end="8280" title="Leverage (American TV series)" label="Leverage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8341" end="8360" title="List of Doctor Who parodies#Community (2011)" label="Inspector Spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q728553" start="8384" end="8393" title="Community (TV series)" label="Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q19306177" start="8422" end="8451" title="Conventions of Space and Time" label="Conventions of Space and Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8512" end="8546" title="Families of Archie&amp;#x27;s Gang#Fred Andrews" label="Frederick &amp;quot;Fred&amp;quot; Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860154" start="8548" end="8554" title="Archie Andrews" label="Archie"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="8607" end="8613" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001951" start="8627" end="8636" title="Riverdale (2017 TV series)" label="Riverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566844" start="8735" end="8748" title="Wayne Maunder" label="Wayne Maunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="8761" end="8778" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="8790" end="8819" title="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood" label="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q377616" start="8833" end="8848" title="New Hollywood" label="1960s Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q24930704" start="8872" end="8893" title="Tate–LaBianca murders" label="Tate–LaBianca murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q87394627" start="9015" end="9025" title="Jack Perry" label="Jack Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="9156" end="9175" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="9250" end="9267" title="colorectal cancer" label="colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q840387" start="9295" end="9306" title="colonoscopy" label="colonoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="9581" end="9596" title="ischemic stroke" label="ischemic stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015874" start="9612" end="9637" title="Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles" label="Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252477" start="9656" end="9694" title="Providence Saint Joseph Medical Center" label="Providence Saint Joseph Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="9698" end="9705" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624498" start="9768" end="9780" title="life support" label="life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292516" start="9857" end="9875" title="VanLeer, Tennessee" label="VanLeer, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423025" start="10113" end="10118" title="Reelz" label="Reelz"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001951" start="10236" end="10245" title="Riverdale (2017 TV series)" label="Riverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q117590" start="10395" end="10415" title="Beverly Hills, 90210" label="Beverly Hills, 90210"/>
<link wikidata="Q207598" start="10430" end="10445" title="Shannen Doherty" label="Shannen Doherty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220443" wikidata="Q129012" url="?curid=220443" title="Choanoflagellate">
<text>Choanoflagellates are a group of free-living unicellular and colonial flagellate eukaryotes considered to be the closest living relatives of animals. The name refers to the characteristic funnel-shaped &quot;collar&quot; of interconnected microvilli and the presence of a flagellum. Choanoflagellates are found globally in aquatic environments, and they are of particular interest to evolutionary biologists studying the origins of multicellularity in animals.

The flagellum of choanoflagellates is surrounded by microvilli at its base. Movement of the flagellum creates water currents that can propel free-swimming choanoflagellates through the water column and trap bacteria and detritus against the microvilli, where these foodstuffs are engulfed. This feeding plays an ecological role in the carbon cycle by linking different trophic levels.

Choanoflagellates bear morphological similarities to the choanocyte, a type of cell in sponges. As the proposed sister group to Animalia, choanoflagellates serve as a useful model for reconstructions of the last unicellular ancestor of animals. According to a 2021 study, crown group craspedids (and perhaps crown group choanoflagellates if Acanthoecida arose within Craspedida) appeared 422.78 million years ago, although a previous study from 2017 recovered the divergence of the crown group choanoflagellates (craspedids) at 786.62 million years.

==Etymology==
&quot;Choanoflagellate&quot; is a hybrid word from Greek &quot;&quot; meaning &quot;funnel&quot; (due to the shape of the collar) and the Latin word (whence English &quot;flagellum&quot;).

==Appearance==
Each choanoflagellate has a single flagellum, surrounded by a ring of actin-filled protrusions called microvilli, forming a cylindrical or conical &quot;collar&quot; (&quot;&quot; in Greek). Movement of the flagellum draws water through the collar, and bacteria and detritus are captured by the microvilli and ingested. Water currents generated by the flagellum also push free-swimming cells along, as in animal sperm. In contrast, most other flagellates are &quot;pulled&quot; by their flagella.

In addition to the single apical flagellum surrounded by actin-filled microvilli that characterizes choanoflagellates, the internal organization of organelles in the cytoplasm is constant. A flagellar basal body sits at the base of the flagellum, and a second, non-flagellar basal body rests at a right angle to the flagellar base. The nucleus occupies an apical-to-central position in the cell, and food vacuoles are positioned in the basal region of the cytoplasm. Additionally, the cell body of many choanoflagellates is surrounded by a distinguishing extracellular matrix or periplast. These cell coverings vary greatly in structure and composition and are used by taxonomists for classification purposes. Many choanoflagellates build complex basket-shaped &quot;houses&quot;, called lorica, from several silica strips cemented together. The functional significance of the periplast is unknown, but in sessile organisms, it is thought to aid attachment to the substrate. In planktonic organisms, there is speculation that the periplast increases drag, thereby counteracting the force generated by the flagellum and increasing feeding efficiency.

Choanoflagellates are either free-swimming in the water column or sessile, adhering to the substrate directly or through either the periplast or a thin pedicel. Although choanoflagellates are thought to be strictly free-living and heterotrophic, a number of choanoflagellate relatives, such as members of Ichthyosporea or Mesomycetozoa, follow a parasitic or pathogenic lifestyle. The life histories of choanoflagellates are poorly understood. Many species are thought to be solitary; however, coloniality seems to have arisen independently several times within the group, and colonial species still retain a solitary stage.

==Ecology==
Over 125 extant species of choanoflagellates are known, distributed globally in marine, brackish and freshwater environments from the Arctic to the tropics, occupying both pelagic and benthic zones. Although most sampling of choanoflagellates has occurred between , they have been recovered from as deep as in open water and under Antarctic ice sheets. Many species are hypothesized to be cosmopolitan on a global scale [e.g., &quot;Diaphanoeca grandis&quot; has been reported from North America, Europe and Australia (OBIS)], while other species are reported to have restricted regional distributions. Co-distributed choanoflagellate species can occupy quite different microenvironments, but in general, the factors that influence the distribution and dispersion of choanoflagellates remain to be elucidated.

A number of species, such as those in the genus &quot;Proterospongia&quot;, form simple colonies, planktonic clumps that resemble a miniature cluster of grapes in which each cell in the colony is flagellated or clusters of cells on a single stalk. A colonial species from Mono Lake, &quot;Barroeca monosierra&quot;, forms spheres filled with a branched network of an extracellular matrix where a microbiome of different species of symbiotic bacteria live. In October 2019, scientists found a new band behaviour of choanoflagellates: they apparently can coordinate to respond to light.

The choanoflagellates feed on bacteria and link otherwise inaccessible forms of carbon to organisms higher in the trophic chain. Even today, they are important in the carbon cycle and microbial food web. There is some evidence that choanoflagellates feast on viruses as well.

==Life cycle==
Choanoflagellates grow vegetatively, with multiple species undergoing longitudinal fission; however, the reproductive life cycle of choanoflagellates remains to be elucidated. A paper released in August 2017 showed that environmental changes, including the presence of certain bacteria, trigger the swarming and subsequent sexual reproduction of choanoflagellates. The ploidy level is unknown; however, the discovery of both retrotransposons and key genes involved in meiosis previously suggested that they used sexual reproduction as part of their life cycle. Some choanoflagellates can undergo encystment, which involves the retraction of the flagellum and collar and encasement in an electron dense fibrillar wall. On transfer to fresh media, excystment occurs; though it remains to be directly observed.

Evidence for sexual reproduction has been reported in the choanoflagellate species &quot;Salpingoeca rosetta&quot;. Evidence has also been reported for the presence of conserved meiotic genes in the choanoflagellates &quot;Monosiga brevicollis&quot; and &quot;Monosiga ovata&quot;.

==Silicon biomineralization==
The Acanthoecid choanoflagellates produce an extracellular basket structure known as a lorica. The lorica is composed of individual costal strips, made of a silica-protein biocomposite. Each costal strip is formed within the choanoflagellate cell and is then secreted to the cell surface. In nudiform choanoflagellates, lorica assembly takes place using a number of tentacles once sufficient costal strips have been produced to comprise a full lorica. In tectiform choanoflagellates, costal strips are accumulated in a set arrangement below the collar. During cell division, the new cell takes these costal strips as part of cytokinesis and assembles its own lorica using only these previously produced strips.

Choanoflagellate biosilicification requires the concentration of silicic acid within the cell. This is carried out by silicon transporter (SiT) proteins. Analysis of choanoflagellate SiTs shows that they are similar to the SiT-type silicon transporters of diatoms and other silica-forming stramenopiles. The SiT gene family shows little or no homology to any other genes, even to genes in non-siliceous choanoflagellates or stramenopiles. This suggests that the SiT gene family evolved via a lateral gene transfer event between Acanthoecids and Stramenopiles. This is a remarkable case of horizontal gene transfer between two distantly related eukaryotic groups, and has provided clues to the biochemistry and silicon-protein interactions of the unique SiT gene family.

==Classification==
===Relationship to metazoans===
Félix Dujardin, a French biologist interested in protozoan evolution, recorded the morphological similarities of choanoflagellates and sponge choanocytes and proposed the possibility of a close relationship as early as 1841. Over the past decade, this hypothesized relationship between choanoflagellates and animals has been upheld by independent analyses of multiple unlinked genetic sequences: 18S rDNA, nuclear protein-coding genes, and mitochondrial genomes (Steenkamp, et al., 2006; Burger, et al., 2003; Wainright, et al., 1993). Importantly, comparisons of mitochondrial genome sequences from a choanoflagellate and three sponges confirm the placement of choanoflagellates as an outgroup to Metazoa (animals, also known as Animalia) and negate the possibility that choanoflagellates evolved from metazoans (Lavrov, et al., 2005). Finally, a 2001 study of genes expressed in choanoflagellates has revealed that choanoflagellates synthesize homologues of metazoan cell signaling and adhesion genes. Genome sequencing shows that, among living organisms, the choanoflagellates are most closely related to animals.

Because choanoflagellates and metazoans are closely related, comparisons between the two groups promise to provide insights into the biology of their last common ancestor and the earliest events in metazoan evolution. The choanocytes (also known as &quot;collared cells&quot;) of sponges (considered among the most basal metazoa) have the same basic structure as choanoflagellates. Collared cells are found in other animal groups, such as ribbon worms, suggesting this was the morphology of their last common ancestor. The last common ancestor of animals and choanoflagellates was unicellular, perhaps forming simple colonies; in contrast, the last common ancestor of all eumetazoan animals was a multicellular organism, with differentiated tissues, a definite &quot;body plan&quot;, and embryonic development (including gastrulation). The timing of the splitting of these lineages is difficult to constrain, but was probably in the late Precambrian, &gt;.

External relationships of Choanoflagellatea.
===Phylogenetic relationships===
The choanoflagellates were included in Chrysophyceae until Hibberd, 1975. Recent molecular phylogenetic reconstruction of the internal relationships of choanoflagellates allows the polarization of character evolution within the clade. Large fragments of the nuclear SSU and LSU ribosomal RNA, alpha tubulin, and heat-shock protein 90 coding genes were used to resolve the internal relationships and character polarity within choanoflagellates. Each of the four genes showed similar results independently and analysis of the combined data set (concatenated) along with sequences from other closely related species (animals and fungi) demonstrate that choanoflagellates are strongly supported as monophyletic and confirm their position as the closest known unicellular living relative of animals.

Previously, Choanoflagellida was divided into these three families based on the composition and structure of their periplast: Codonosigidae, Salpingoecidae and Acanthoecidae. Members of the family Codonosigidae appear to lack a periplast when examined by light microscopy, but may have a fine outer coat visible only by electron microscopy. The family Salpingoecidae consists of species whose cells are encased in a firm theca that is visible by both light and electron microscopy. The theca is a secreted covering predominately composed of cellulose or other polysaccharides. These divisions are now known to be paraphyletic, with convergent evolution of these forms widespread. The third family of choanoflagellates, the Acanthoecidae, has been supported as a monophyletic group. This clade possess a synapomorphy of the cells being found within a basket-like lorica, providing the alternative name of &quot;Loricate Choanoflagellates&quot;. The Acanthoecid lorica is composed of a series of siliceous costal strips arranged into a species-specific lorica pattern.&quot;

The choanoflagellate tree based on molecular phylogenetics divides into three well supported clades. Clade 1 and Clade 2 each consist of a combination of species traditionally attributed to the Codonosigidae and Salpingoecidae, while Clade 3 comprises species from the group taxonomically classified as Acanthoecidae. The mapping of character traits on to this phylogeny indicates that the last common ancestor of choanoflagellates was a marine organism with a differentiated life cycle with sedentary and motile stages.
===Taxonomy===
Choanoflagellates;
* Order Craspedida 
** Family Salpingoecidae 
*** ?&quot;Dicraspedella&quot; 
*** ?&quot;Diploeca&quot; 
*** ?&quot;Diplosigopsis&quot; 
*** ?&quot;Pachysoeca&quot; 
*** ?&quot;Piropsis&quot; 
*** ?&quot;Salpingorhiza&quot; 
*** ?&quot;Sphaerodendron&quot; 
*** ?&quot;Stelexomonas&quot; 
*** &quot;Astrosiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Aulomonas&quot; 
*** &quot;Choanoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Cladospongia&quot; 
*** &quot;Codonosigopsis&quot; 
*** &quot;Diplosiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Hartaetosiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Mylnosiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Lagenoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Microstomoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Paramonosiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Salpingoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Stagondoeca&quot; 
** Family Codonosigaceae 
*** &quot;Codosiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Desmarella&quot; 
*** &quot;Kentrosiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Monosiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Proterospongia&quot; 
*** &quot;Sphaeroeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Stylochromonas&quot; 
* Order Acanthoecida (Loricate choanoflagellates)
** &quot;Conioeca&quot; 
** Family Acanthoecidae (Nudiform choanoflagellates)
*** &quot;Acanthoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Enibas&quot; 
*** &quot;Helgoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Polyoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Savillea&quot; 
** Family Stephanoecidae (Tectiform choanoflagellates) 
*** ?&quot;Conion&quot; 
*** ?&quot;Spiraloecion&quot; 
*** &quot;Acanthocorbis&quot; 
*** &quot;Amoenoscopa&quot; 
*** &quot;Apheloecion&quot; 
*** &quot;Bicosta&quot; 
*** &quot;Calliacantha&quot; 
*** &quot;Calotheca&quot; 
*** &quot;Cosmoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Crinolina&quot; 
*** &quot;Crucispina&quot; 
*** &quot;Diaphanoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Didymoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Kakoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Monocosta&quot; 
*** &quot;Nannoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Parvicorbicula&quot; 
*** &quot;Pleurasiga&quot; 
*** &quot;Polyfibula&quot; 
*** &quot;Saepicula&quot; 
*** &quot;Saroeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Spinoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Stephanacantha&quot; 
*** &quot;Stephanoeca&quot; 
*** &quot;Syndetophyllum&quot; 
*** &quot;Thomsenella&quot; 

==Genomes and transcriptomes==

===&quot;Monosiga brevicollis&quot; genome===
The genome of &quot;Monosiga brevicollis&quot;, with 41.6 million base pairs, is similar in size to filamentous fungi and other free-living unicellular eukaryotes, but far smaller than that of typical animals. In 2010, a phylogenomic study revealed that several algal genes are present in the genome of &quot;Monosiga brevicollis&quot;. This could be due to the fact that, in early evolutionary history, choanoflagellates consumed algae as food through phagocytosis. Carr et al. (2010) screened the &quot;M. brevicollis&quot; genome for known eukaryotic meiosis genes. Of 19 known eukaryotic meiotic genes tested (including 8 that function in no other process than meiosis), 18 were identified in &quot;M. brevicollis&quot;. The presence of meiotic genes, including meiosis specific genes, indicates that meiosis, and by implication, sex is present within the choanoflagellates.

===&quot;Salpingoeca rosetta&quot; genome===
The genome of &quot;Salpingoeca rosetta&quot; is 55 megabases in size. Homologs of cell adhesion, neuropeptide and glycosphingolipid metabolism genes are present in the genome.
&quot;S. rosetta&quot; has a sexual life cycle and transitions between haploid and diploid stages. In response to nutrient limitation, haploid cultures of &quot;S. rosetta&quot; become diploid. This ploidy shift coincides with mating during which small, flagellated cells fuse with larger flagellated cells. There is also evidence of historical mating and recombination in &quot;S. rosetta&quot;.

&quot;S. rosetta&quot; is induced to undergo sexual reproduction by the marine bacterium &quot;Vibrio fischeri&quot;. A single &quot;V. fischeri&quot; protein, EroS fully recapitulates the aphrodisiac-like activity of live &quot;V. fisheri&quot;.

=== Other genomes ===
The single-cell amplified genomes of four uncultured marine choanoflagellates, tentatively called UC1–UC4, were sequenced in 2019. The genomes of UC1 and UC4 are relatively complete.

===Transcriptomes===

An EST dataset from &quot;Monosiga ovata&quot; was published in 2006. The major finding of this transcriptome was the choanoflagellate Hoglet domain and shed light on the role of domain shuffling in the evolution of the Hedgehog signaling pathway. &quot;M. ovata&quot; has at least four eukaryotic meiotic genes.
The transcriptome of &quot;Stephanoeca diplocostata&quot; was published in 2013. This first transcriptome of a loricate choanoflagellate led to the discovery of choanoflagellate silicon transporters. Subsequently, similar genes were identified in a second loricate species, &quot;Diaphanoeca grandis&quot;. Analysis of these genes found that the choanoflagellate silicon transporters show homology to the SIT-type silicon transporters of diatoms and have evolved through horizontal gene transfer.

An additional 19 transcriptomes were published in 2018. A large number of gene families previously thought to be animal-only were found.

==References==
==External links==
* ChoanoWiki a collaborative resource maintained by the Choanoflagellate research community
* Tree of Life Webpage for Choanoflagellates
* &quot;Monosiga brevicollis&quot; genome browser
* Your brain chemistry existed before animals did
* Choanobase, the Choanoflagellate genetic library, developed and maintained by the Nicole King laboratory at the University of California, Berkeley</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q129012" start="0" end="17" title="Choanoflagellate" label="Choanoflagellates"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="70" end="80" title="flagellate" label="flagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="81" end="91" title="eukaryotes" label="eukaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="141" end="147" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q939486" start="239" end="249" title="microvilli" label="microvilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="272" end="281" title="flagellum" label="flagellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="432" end="448" title="multicellularity" label="multicellularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="603" end="616" title="free-swimming" label="free-swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="669" end="677" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q736879" start="682" end="690" title="detritus" label="detritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167751" start="797" end="809" title="carbon cycle" label="carbon cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053008" start="831" end="844" title="trophic level" label="trophic level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075549" start="905" end="915" title="choanocyte" label="choanocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="935" end="941" title="sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="960" end="972" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377255" start="1447" end="1458" title="hybrid word" label="hybrid word"/>
<link wikidata="Q29957" start="1497" end="1503" title="funnel" label="funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="1584" end="1593" title="flagellum" label="flagellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="1653" end="1662" title="flagellum" label="flagellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185269" start="1688" end="1693" title="actin" label="actin"/>
<link wikidata="Q939486" start="1720" end="1730" title="Microvillus" label="microvilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="2023" end="2029" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="2030" end="2035" title="spermatozoon" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q45948" start="2264" end="2274" title="organelles" label="organelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="2282" end="2291" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q809753" start="2317" end="2327" title="basal body" label="basal body"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="2452" end="2459" title="Cell nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465536" start="2516" end="2528" title="food vacuole" label="food vacuole"/>
<link wikidata="Q193825" start="2671" end="2691" title="extracellular matrix" label="extracellular matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071108" start="2695" end="2704" title="periplast" label="periplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095935" start="2904" end="2910" title="Lorica (biology)" label="lorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="3296" end="3309" title="Motility" label="free-swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759860" start="3333" end="3340" title="Sessility (zoology)" label="sessile"/>
<link wikidata="Q159344" start="3498" end="3511" title="heterotrophic" label="heterotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29405749" start="3572" end="3602" title="Mesomycetozoea" label="Ichthyosporea or Mesomycetozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="3613" end="3622" title="parasitic" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="3626" end="3636" title="pathogenic" label="pathogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="3985" end="3991" title="marine (ocean)" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="3993" end="4001" title="brackish" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="4006" end="4016" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="4077" end="4084" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="4089" end="4096" title="benthic" label="benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="4294" end="4306" title="cosmopolitan (biology)" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q87704216" start="4338" end="4357" title="Diaphanoeca grandis" label="Diaphanoeca grandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="4387" end="4400" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4402" end="4408" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4413" end="4422" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="4728" end="4735" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4758" end="4763" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251577" start="4770" end="4784" title="Proterospongia" label="Proterospongia"/>
<link wikidata="Q354341" start="4804" end="4812" title="Colony (biology)" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="4814" end="4824" title="planktonic" label="planktonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516284" start="4858" end="4875" title="cluster of grapes" label="cluster of grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q335585" start="4988" end="4997" title="Mono Lake" label="Mono Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330402" start="5112" end="5122" title="microbiome" label="microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="5332" end="5340" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="5382" end="5388" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q167751" start="5469" end="5481" title="carbon cycle" label="carbon cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="5486" end="5495" title="microbial" label="microbial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775153" start="5496" end="5504" title="food web" label="food web"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="5963" end="5969" title="ploidy" label="ploidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="6106" end="6125" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42266354" start="6492" end="6511" title="Salpingoeca rosetta" label="Salpingoeca rosetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="6581" end="6594" title="meiosis" label="meiotic genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447198" start="7341" end="7352" title="cytokinesis" label="cytokinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457481" start="7493" end="7505" title="silicic acid" label="silicic acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7546" end="7565" title="silicon transporter" label="silicon transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="7684" end="7691" title="diatoms" label="diatoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q461622" start="7717" end="7730" title="stramenopiles" label="stramenopiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="8017" end="8041" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355541" start="8250" end="8264" title="Félix Dujardin" label="Félix Dujardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075549" start="8392" end="8402" title="choanocyte" label="choanocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="8948" end="8955" title="Metazoa" label="Metazoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="8980" end="8986" title="Animal" label="Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="9566" end="9574" title="metazoan" label="metazoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="9648" end="9655" title="sea sponge" label="sponges"/>
<link wikidata="Q185631" start="9807" end="9819" title="Nemertea" label="ribbon worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="9845" end="9855" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174" start="10040" end="10058" title="eumetazoan" label="eumetazoan animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763065" start="10443" end="10456" title="Chrysophyceae" label="Chrysophyceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="10495" end="10507" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10018973" start="10670" end="10673" title="18S ribosomal RNA" label="SSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632704" start="10678" end="10681" title="28S ribosomal RNA" label="LSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="10682" end="10695" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q422492" start="10697" end="10710" title="tubulin" label="alpha tubulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418939" start="10716" end="10734" title="heat-shock protein" label="heat-shock protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="10947" end="10959" title="concatenated" label="concatenated"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="11018" end="11024" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="11030" end="11035" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="11098" end="11110" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="11520" end="11539" title="electron microscopy" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367166" start="11686" end="11691" title="theca" label="theca"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="11741" end="11750" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="11760" end="11775" title="polysaccharides" label="polysaccharides"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="11813" end="11825" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="12003" end="12015" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="12194" end="12203" title="siliceous" label="siliceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="12367" end="12373" title="clades" label="clades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052390" start="12664" end="12684" title="last common ancestor" label="last common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="12750" end="12760" title="Biological life cycle" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759860" start="12766" end="12775" title="sessility (zoology)" label="sedentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="12780" end="12786" title="Motility" label="motile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23753092" start="12837" end="12847" title="Craspedida" label="Craspedida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215232" start="12859" end="12873" title="Salpingoecidae" label="Salpingoecidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12886" end="12899" title="Dicraspedella" label="Dicraspedella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12918" end="12926" title="Diploeca" label="Diploeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12945" end="12958" title="Diplosigopsis" label="Diplosigopsis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12977" end="12987" title="Pachysoeca" label="Pachysoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13006" end="13014" title="Piropsis" label="Piropsis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13033" end="13046" title="Salpingorhiza" label="Salpingorhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q142359" start="13065" end="13079" title="Sphaerodendron" label="Sphaerodendron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13098" end="13110" title="Stelexomonas" label="Stelexomonas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13128" end="13137" title="Astrosiga" label="Astrosiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13155" end="13164" title="Aulomonas" label="Aulomonas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13182" end="13191" title="Choanoeca" label="Choanoeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q28432523" start="13209" end="13221" title="Cladospongia (Chaonozoa)" label="Cladospongia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13239" end="13253" title="Codonosigopsis" label="Codonosigopsis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13271" end="13280" title="Diplosiga" label="Diplosiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13298" end="13310" title="Hartaetosiga" label="Hartaetosiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13328" end="13337" title="Mylnosiga" label="Mylnosiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13355" end="13364" title="Lagenoeca" label="Lagenoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13382" end="13395" title="Microstomoeca" label="Microstomoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13413" end="13425" title="Paramonosiga" label="Paramonosiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q23069970" start="13443" end="13454" title="Salpingoeca" label="Salpingoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13472" end="13483" title="Stagondoeca" label="Stagondoeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q24953592" start="13501" end="13515" title="Codonosigaceae" label="Codonosigaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981702" start="13527" end="13535" title="Codosiga" label="Codosiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q109124559" start="13553" end="13563" title="Desmarella" label="Desmarella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13581" end="13591" title="Kentrosiga" label="Kentrosiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q129012" start="13609" end="13617" title="Monosiga" label="Monosiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251577" start="13635" end="13649" title="Proterospongia" label="Proterospongia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13667" end="13677" title="Sphaeroeca" label="Sphaeroeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13695" end="13709" title="Stylochromonas" label="Stylochromonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655961" start="13725" end="13737" title="Acanthoecida" label="Acanthoecida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13776" end="13784" title="Conioeca" label="Conioeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q337756" start="13802" end="13815" title="Acanthoecidae" label="Acanthoecidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13855" end="13865" title="Acanthoeca" label="Acanthoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13883" end="13889" title="Enibas" label="Enibas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13907" end="13915" title="Helgoeca" label="Helgoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13933" end="13941" title="Polyoeca" label="Polyoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13959" end="13967" title="Savillea" label="Savillea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13985" end="13999" title="Stephanoecidae" label="Stephanoecidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14042" end="14048" title="Conion" label="Conion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14067" end="14079" title="Spiraloecion" label="Spiraloecion"/>
<link wikidata="Q113629887" start="14097" end="14110" title="Acanthocorbis" label="Acanthocorbis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14128" end="14139" title="Amoenoscopa" label="Amoenoscopa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14157" end="14168" title="Apheloecion" label="Apheloecion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14186" end="14193" title="Bicosta" label="Bicosta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14211" end="14223" title="Calliacantha" label="Calliacantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968395" start="14241" end="14250" title="Calotheca" label="Calotheca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14268" end="14276" title="Cosmoeca" label="Cosmoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14294" end="14303" title="Crinolina" label="Crinolina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14321" end="14331" title="Crucispina" label="Crucispina"/>
<link wikidata="Q87704268" start="14349" end="14360" title="Diaphanoeca" label="Diaphanoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14378" end="14387" title="Didymoeca" label="Didymoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14405" end="14412" title="Kakoeca" label="Kakoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14430" end="14439" title="Monocosta" label="Monocosta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14457" end="14465" title="Nannoeca" label="Nannoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14483" end="14497" title="Parvicorbicula" label="Parvicorbicula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14515" end="14525" title="Pleurasiga" label="Pleurasiga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14543" end="14553" title="Polyfibula" label="Polyfibula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14571" end="14580" title="Saepicula" label="Saepicula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14598" end="14605" title="Saroeca" label="Saroeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14623" end="14631" title="Spinoeca" label="Spinoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14649" end="14663" title="Stephanacantha" label="Stephanacantha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14681" end="14692" title="Stephanoeca" label="Stephanoeca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14710" end="14724" title="Syndetophyllum" label="Syndetophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14742" end="14753" title="Thomsenella" label="Thomsenella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14860" end="14880" title="Monosiga brevicollis" label="Monosiga brevicollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184726" start="15293" end="15305" title="phagocytosis" label="phagocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="15383" end="15393" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="15674" end="15677" title="sexual reproduction" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q42266354" start="15785" end="15804" title="Salpingoeca rosetta" label="Salpingoeca rosetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="16013" end="16039" title="ploidy" label="haploid and diploid stages"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="16298" end="16311" title="genetic recombination" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q148731" start="16435" end="16450" title="Aliivibrio fischeri" label="Vibrio fischeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859918" start="17036" end="17062" title="Hedgehog signaling pathway" label="Hedgehog signaling pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="17567" end="17574" title="diatoms" label="diatoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="17600" end="17624" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278983" start="17701" end="17714" title="gene families" label="gene families"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795064" start="18120" end="18131" title="Nicole King" label="Nicole King"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="18150" end="18184" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220444" wikidata="Q371101" url="?curid=220444" title="Morchella">
<text>Morchella, the true morels, is a genus of edible sac fungi closely related to anatomically simpler cup fungi in the order Pezizales (division Ascomycota). These distinctive fungi have a honeycomb appearance due to the network of ridges with pits composing their caps. Morels are prized by gourmet cooks, particularly in Catalan and French cuisine, but can be toxic if consumed raw or undercooked. Due to difficulties in cultivation, commercial harvesting of wild morels has become a multimillion-dollar industry in the temperate Northern Hemisphere, in particular North America, Turkey, China, the Himalayas, India, and Pakistan where these highly prized fungi are found in abundance.

Typified by &quot;Morchella esculenta&quot; in 1794, the genus has been the source of considerable taxonomical controversy throughout the years, mostly with regard to the number of species involved, with some mycologists recognising as few as three species and others over thirty. Current molecular phylogenetics suggest there might be over seventy species of &quot;Morchella&quot; worldwide, most of them exhibiting high continental endemism and provincialism.

The genus is currently the focus of extensive phylogenetic, biogeographical, taxonomical and nomenclatural studies, and several new species have been described from Australia, Canada, Cyprus, Israel, Spain, and Turkey.

== Description ==

Morels resemble a honeycomb due to the network of ridges with pits composing their caps. Morels have a convoluted head/cap, and are varied in shape and habitat. 

=== Similar species ===
When gathering morels for the table, care must be taken to distinguish them from the poisonous &quot;false morels&quot;, a term loosely applied to describe &quot;Gyromitra esculenta&quot;, &quot;Verpa bohemica&quot;, and other morel lookalikes. Although false morels are sometimes eaten without ill effect, they can cause severe gastrointestinal upset, loss of muscular coordination (including cardiac muscle), or even death. Incidents of poisoning usually occur when they are eaten in large quantities, inadequately cooked, or over several days in a row. False morels contain gyromitrin, an organic carcinogenic poison, hydrolyzed in the body into monomethylhydrazine (MMH). &quot;Gyromitra esculenta&quot; in particular, has been reported to be responsible for up to 23% of mushroom fatalities each year in Poland.

The key morphological features distinguishing false morels from true morels are as follows:

* &quot;Gyromitra&quot; species often have a &quot;wrinkled&quot; or &quot;cerebral&quot; (brain-like) appearance to the cap due to multiple wrinkles and folds, rather than the honeycomb appearance of true morels due to ridges and pits.
* &quot;Gyromitra esculenta&quot; has a cap that is usually reddish-brown in colour, but sometimes also chestnut, purplish-brown, or dark brown.
* &quot;Gyromitra&quot; species are typically chambered in longitudinal section, while &quot;Verpa&quot; species contain a cottony substance inside their stem, in contrast to true morels which are always hollow.
* The caps of &quot;Verpa&quot; species (&quot;V. bohemica&quot;, &quot;V. conica&quot; and others) are attached to the stem only at the apex (top of the cap), unlike true morels which have caps that are attached to the stem at, or near the base of the cap. The easiest way to distinguish &quot;Verpa&quot; species from &quot;Morchella&quot; species is to slice them longitudinally.

== Taxonomy ==
The fruit bodies of &quot;Morchella&quot; species are highly polymorphic, varying in shape, color, and size. While in many cases they do not exhibit clear-cut distinguishing features microscopically, this has historically contributed to uncertainties in taxonomy. Discriminating between the various taxa described is further hindered by uncertainty over which of these are truly biologically distinct. Remarkably, some authors in the past had suggested that the genus contains as few as 3 to 6 species, while others recognised as many as 34. Efforts to clarify the situation and re-evaluate old classical names (such as &quot;Morchella elata&quot; and others) in accordance to current phylogenetic data have been challenging, due to vague or ambiguous original descriptions and loss of holotype material. In 2012, the simultaneous description of several new taxa from Europe by Clowez and North America by Kuo and colleagues resulted in several synonymities further complicating matters, until a transatlantic study by Richard and colleagues resolved many of these issues in 2014. The genus is currently undergoing extensive re-evaluation with regard to the taxonomic status of several species.

=== Early taxonomic history ===
&quot;Morchella&quot; Dill. ex Pers. : Fr. was typified by Christiaan Hendrik Persoon in 1794, with &quot;Morchella esculenta&quot; designated as the type species for the genus. Among early pioneers who took an interest in the genus, were mycologists Julius Vincenz von Krombholz and Émile Boudier, who, in 1834 and 1897 respectively, published several species and varieties, accompanied by meticulously illustrated iconographic plates. The seminal taxon &quot;Morchella elata&quot;, whose true identity still remains unresolved, was described by Elias Fries in 1822, from a fir forest in Sweden. Other classical, early-proposed names include &quot;Morchella deliciosa&quot;, also described by Fries in 1822, &quot;Morchella semilibera&quot;, the half-free morel, originally described by de Candolle and sanctioned by Fries in 1822, &quot;Morchella vulgaris&quot;, which was recombined by Samuel Gray as a distinct species in 1821 following a &quot;forma&quot; of &quot;M. esculenta&quot; previously proposed by Persoon, and &quot;Morchella angusticeps&quot;, a large-spored species described by American mycologist Charles Peck in 1887. &quot;Morchella purpurascens&quot;, the purple morel, was first described by Boudier as a variety of &quot;M. elata&quot; in 1897 based on an 1834 plate by Krombholz, and was recombined as a distinct species in 1985 by Emile Jacquetant. &quot;Morchella eximia&quot;, a globally-occurring fire-associated species was also described by Boudier in 1910. The old, widely applied name &quot;Morchella conica&quot;, featuring in many field guides and literature across several countries, has been shown by Richard and colleagues to be illegitimate.

=== Classification ===
About 80 species of &quot;Morchella&quot; were described until the turn of the 21st century (per the &quot;Index Fungorum&quot;), a number of which were later shown to be illegitimate or synonyms. As molecular tools became widely available in the new millennium, a revived interest in the genus commenced and several new species were proposed. In 2008 Kuo described &quot;Morchella tomentosa&quot; from burned coniferous forests in western North America. In 2010 Işiloğlu and colleagues described &quot;Morchella anatolica&quot;, a basal species from Turkey later shown to be sister to &quot;Morchella rufobrunnea&quot;. A study by Clowez described over 20 new species in 2012, while later in the same year, another study by Kuo and colleagues described 19 species from North America. However, several of these newly proposed names later turned out to be synonyms. An extensive taxonomical and nomenclatural revision of the genus provided by Richard and colleagues in 2014, applied names to 30 of the genealogical lineages recognized so far and clarified several synonymities. Also in 2014, Elliott and colleagues described &quot;Morchella australiana&quot; from sclerophyll forests in Australia, while Clowez and colleagues described &quot;Morchella fluvialis&quot; from riparian forests in Spain.

In 2015, Loizides and colleagues clarified the taxonomy of &quot;Morchella tridentina&quot;, a cosmopolitan species described under many names, and recombined &quot;Morchella kakiicolor&quot; as a distinct species. Later in the same year, Clowez and colleagues described &quot;Morchella palazonii&quot; from Spain, while Voitk and colleagues described &quot;Morchella laurentiana&quot; from Canada and &quot;Morchella eohespera&quot;, a cosmopolitan species present in several continents. In an extensive phylogenetic and morphological study from Cyprus in 2016, Loizides and colleagues added two more Mediterranean species, &quot;Morchella arbutiphila&quot; and &quot;Morchella disparilis&quot;, and resurrected &quot;Morchella dunensis&quot; as an autonomous species. In the same year, Taşkın and colleagues described four of the previously unnamed phylospecies from Turkey: &quot;Morchella conifericola&quot;, &quot;Morchella feekensis&quot;, &quot;Morchella magnispora&quot; and &quot;Morchella mediteterraneensis&quot;.

==== Section &quot;Rufobrunnea&quot; ====
*&quot;Morchella anatolica&quot;
**synonym: &quot;Morchella lanceolata&quot;
*&quot;Morchella rufobrunnea&quot;

====Section &quot;Morchella&quot;====
*&quot;Morchella americana&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella californica&quot;, &quot;Morchella claviformis&quot;, &quot;Morchella esculentoides&quot;, &quot;Morchella populina&quot;
*&quot;Morchella castaneae&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella brunneorosea&quot;, &quot;Morchella brunneorosea var. sordida&quot;
*&quot;Morchella diminutiva&quot;
*&quot;Morchella dunensis&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella esculenta f. dunensis&quot;, &quot;Morchella andalusiae&quot;
*&quot;Morchella esculenta&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella pseudoumbrina&quot;, &quot;Morchella pseudoviridis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella fluvialis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella galilaea&quot;
*&quot;Morchella palazonii&quot;
*&quot;Morchella prava&quot;
*&quot;Morchella sceptriformis&quot;
**synonym: &quot;Morchella virginiana&quot;
*&quot;Morchella steppicola&quot;
*&quot;Morchella ulmaria&quot;
**synonym: &quot;Morchella cryptica&quot;
*&quot;Morchella vulgaris&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella acerina&quot;, &quot;Morchella anthracina&quot;, &quot;Morchella lepida&quot;, &quot;Morchella robiniae&quot;, &quot;Morchella spongiola&quot;

==== Section &quot;Distantes&quot; ====
*&quot;Morchella angusticeps&quot;
*&quot;Morchella arbutiphila&quot;
*&quot;Morchella australiana&quot;
*&quot;Morchella brunnea&quot;
*&quot;Morchella conifericola&quot;
*&quot;Morchella deliciosa&quot;
**synonym: &quot;Morchella conica&quot;
*&quot;Morchella disparilis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella dunalii&quot;
**synonym: &quot;Morchella fallax&quot;
*&quot;Morchella elata&quot;
*&quot;Morchella eohespera&quot;
*&quot;Morchella eximia&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella anthracophila&quot;, &quot;Morchella carbonaria&quot;, &quot;Morchella septimelata&quot;
*&quot;Morchella eximioides&quot;
*&quot;Morchella exuberans&quot;
**synonym: &quot;Morchella capitata&quot;
*&quot;Morchella feekensis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella iberica&quot;
*&quot;Morchella importuna&quot;
*&quot;Morchella kakiicolor&quot;
**synonym: &quot;Morchella quercus-ilicis f. kakiicolor&quot;
*&quot;Morchella laurentiana&quot;
*&quot;Morchella magnispora&quot;
*&quot;Morchella mediterraneensis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella populiphila&quot;
*&quot;Morchella pulchella&quot;
*&quot;Morchella punctipes&quot;
*&quot;Morchella purpurascens&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella elata var. purpurascens&quot;, &quot;Morchella conica&quot;, &quot;Morchella conica var. purpurascens&quot;, &quot;Morchella conica var. crassa&quot;
*&quot;Morchella semilibera&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella gigas&quot;, &quot;Morchella gigas var. tintinnabulum&quot;, &quot;Morchella hybrida&quot;, &quot;Morchella undosa&quot;, &quot;Morchella varisiensis&quot;, &quot;Morchella esculenta var. crassipes&quot;, &quot;Phallus gigas&quot;, &quot;Eromitra gigas&quot;, &quot;Phallus undosus&quot;, &quot;Phallus crassipes&quot;, &quot;Mitrophora hybrida&quot;, &quot;Mitrophora hybrida var. crassipes&quot;, &quot;Ptychoverpa gigas&quot;, &quot;Helvella hybrida&quot;
*&quot;Morchella septentrionalis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella sextelata&quot;
*&quot;Morchella snyderi&quot;
*&quot;Morchella tomentosa&quot;
*&quot;Morchella tridentina&quot;
**synonyms: &quot;Morchella quercus-ilicis&quot;, &quot;Morchella frustrata&quot;, &quot;Morchella elatoides&quot;, &quot;Morchella elatoides var. elagans&quot;, &quot;Morchella conica var. pseudoeximia&quot;

==== Unresolved classification ====
*&quot;Morchella anteridiformis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella apicata&quot;
*&quot;Morchella bicostata&quot;
*&quot;Morchella conicopapyracea&quot;
*&quot;Morchella crassipes&quot;
*&quot;Morchella deqinensis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella distans&quot;
*&quot;Morchella guatemalensis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella herediana&quot;
*&quot;Morchella hetieri&quot;
*&quot;Morchella hortensis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella hotsonii&quot;
*&quot;Morchella hungarica&quot;
*&quot;Morchella inamoena&quot;
*&quot;Morchella intermedia&quot;
*&quot;Morchella meiliensis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella miyabeana&quot;
*&quot;Morchella neuwirthii&quot;
*&quot;Morchella norvegiensis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella patagonica&quot;
*&quot;Morchella patula&quot;
*&quot;Morchella pragensis&quot;
*&quot;Morchella procera&quot;
*&quot;Morchella pseudovulgaris&quot;
*&quot;Morchella rielana&quot;
*&quot;Morchella rigida&quot;
*&quot;Morchella rigidoides&quot;
*&quot;Morchella smithiana&quot;
*&quot;Morchella sulcata&quot;
*&quot;Morchella tasmanica&quot;
*&quot;Morchella tatari&quot;
*&quot;Morchella tibetica&quot;
*&quot;Morchella umbrina&quot;
*&quot;Morchella umbrinovelutipes&quot;
*&quot;Morchella vaporaria&quot;
=== Phylogeny ===
Early phylogenetic analyses supported the hypothesis that the genus comprises only a few species with considerable phenotypic variation. Subsequent multigenic DNA studies, however, have revealed more than a dozen genealogically distinct species in North America and at least as many in Europe. DNA studies revealed three discrete clades, or genetic groups, consisting of the &quot;white morels&quot; (&quot;Morchella rufobrunnea&quot; and &quot;M. anatolica&quot;), the &quot;yellow morels&quot; (&quot;M. esculenta&quot; and others), and the &quot;black morels&quot; (&quot;M. elata&quot; and others). The fire-associated species &quot;Morchella tomentosa&quot;, commonly known as the &quot;gray morel&quot;, is distinct for its fine hairs on the cap ridges and sclerotia-like underground structures, and may also deserve its own clade based on DNA evidence. Within the yellow and black clades, there are dozens of distinct species, many endemic to individual continents or regions. This species-rich view is supported by studies in Western Europe, Turkey, Cyprus, Israel, China, Patagonia, and the Himalayas.

Early ancestral reconstruction tests by O&#x27;Donnell and collaborators postulated a western North American origin of morels and the genus was estimated to have diverged from its closest genealogical relatives &quot;Verpa&quot; and &quot;Disciotis&quot; in the early Cretaceous, approximately 129 million years ago (Mya). This date was later revised by Du and collaborators, placing the divergence of the genus in the late Jurassic, approximately 154 Mya. However, neither of these reconstructions had included &quot;Morchella anatolica&quot; in the analyses, whose phylogenetic placement remained at the time unresolved. Following genetic testing of isotype collection of &quot;M. anatolica&quot; by Taşkın and colleagues, this species was shown to nest in the ancestral /Rufobrunnea clade, together with the transcontinental &quot;M. rufobrunnea&quot;. This cast doubts over the accuracy of the original reconstructions, since both species of the ancestral /Rufobrunnea clade are present in the Mediterranean, while &quot;M. anatolica&quot; is altogether absent from North America. Updated ancestral area reconstructions by Loizides and colleagues using an expanded 79-species data set, have in 2021 refuted the previous hypothesis and designated the Mediterranean basin as the most probable place of origin of morels.

== Distribution and habitat ==
Morels can be found in the temperate Northern Hemisphere, in particular North America, Turkey, China, the Himalayas, India, and Pakistan.

Yellow morels (&quot;Morchella esculenta&quot; and related species) are more commonly found under deciduous trees rather than conifers, while black morels (&quot;M. elata&quot; and related species) are mostly found in coniferous forests, disturbed ground and recently burned areas. &quot;Morchella galilaea&quot;, and occasionally &quot;M. rufobrunnea&quot;, appear to fruit in the autumn or winter months rather than spring, which is the typical fruiting season for morels. In the American Pacific Northwest, they can be found from April to August.

Efforts to cultivate morels at a large scale have rarely been successful and the commercial morel industry relies on the harvest of wild mushrooms.

=== Transcontinental species ===
Although many species within &quot;Morchella&quot; exhibit continental endemism and provincialism, several species have been phylogenetically shown to be present in more than one continent. So far, the list of transcontinental species includes &quot;M. americana&quot;, &quot;M. eohespera&quot;, &quot;M. eximia&quot;, &quot;M. exuberans&quot;, &quot;M. galilaea&quot;, &quot;M. importuna&quot;, &quot;M. populiphila&quot;, &quot;M. pulchella&quot;, &quot;M. rufobrunnea&quot;, &quot;M. semilibera&quot;, &quot;M. sextelata&quot;, &quot;M. steppicola&quot;, and &quot;M. tridentina&quot;. The reasons behind the widespread, cosmopolitan distribution of these species, are still puzzling. Some authors have hypothesized that such transcontinental occurrences are the result of accidental anthropogenic introductions, but this view has been disputed by others, who suggested an old and natural distribution, at least for some of these species which appear to be linked to indigenous flora. Long-distance spore dispersal has also been suggested as a possible dispersal mechanism for some species, especially those belonging to fire-adapted lineages. It has been suggested that the widespread but disjunct distribution of some morel species, especially early diverging lineages like &quot;M. rufobrunnea&quot; and &quot;M. tridentina&quot;, may be the result of climatic refugia from the Quaternary glaciation.

==Ecology==

The ecology of &quot;Morchella&quot; species is not well understood. Many species appear to form symbiotic or endophytic relationships with trees, while others appear to act as saprotrophs.

Tree species associated with &quot;Morchella&quot; vary greatly depending on the individual species, continent, or region. Trees commonly associated with morels in Europe and across the Mediterranean include &quot;Abies&quot; (fir), &quot;Pinus&quot; (pine), &quot;Populus&quot; (poplar), &quot;Ulmus&quot; (elm), &quot;Quercus&quot; (oak), &quot;Arbutus&quot; (strawberry trees), &quot;Castanea&quot; (chestnut), &quot;Alnus&quot; (alder), &quot;Olea&quot; (olive trees), &quot;Malus&quot; (apple trees), and &quot;Fraxinus&quot; (ash). In western North America morels are often found in coniferous forests, including species of &quot;Pinus&quot; (pine), &quot;Abies&quot; (fir), &quot;Larix&quot; (larch), and &quot;Pseudotsuga&quot; (Douglas-fir), as well as in &quot;Populus&quot; (cottonwood) riparian forests. Deciduous trees commonly associated with morels in the northern hemisphere include &quot;Fraxinus&quot; (ash), &quot;Platanus&quot; (sycamore), &quot;Liriodendron&quot; (tulip tree), dead and dying elms, cottonwoods, and old apple trees (remnants of orchards). Due to their springtime phenology (March–May), morels are hardly ever found in the vicinity of common poisonous mushrooms such as the death cap (&quot;Amanita phalloides&quot;), the sulphur tuft (&quot;Hypholoma fasciculare&quot;), or the fly agaric (&quot;Amanita muscaria&quot;). They can, however, occur alongside false morels (&quot;Gyromitra&quot; and &quot;Verpa&quot; species) and elfin saddles (&quot;Helvella&quot; species), which also appear in spring.

=== Association with wildfire ===
Certain &quot;Morchella&quot; species (&quot;M. eximia&quot;, &quot;M. importuna&quot;, &quot;M. tomentosa&quot; and others) exhibit a pyrophilic behaviour and may grow abundantly in forests which have been recently burned by a fire. Moderate-intensity fires are reported to produce higher abundances of morels than low- or high-intensity fires. This is caused by the soil becoming more alkaline as the result of wood ash combining with water and being absorbed into the soil which triggers the morels to fruit. Alkaline soil conditions which trigger fruiting have been observed and exploited with small-scale commercial cultivation of morels. Where fire suppression is practiced, morels often grow in small numbers in the same spot, year after year. If these areas are overrun by wildfire they often produce a bumper crop of black morels the following spring. Commercial pickers and buyers in North America target recently burned areas for this reason. These spots may be closely guarded by mushroom pickers, as morels are widely regarded as a delicacy and often a cash crop.

== Cultivation ==
Due to the mushroom&#x27;s prized fruit bodies, several attempts have been made to grow the fungus in culture. In 1901, Repin reported successfully obtaining fruit bodies in a cave in which cultures had been established in flower pots nine years previously in 1892.

More recently, small-scale commercial growers have had success growing morels by using partially shaded rows of mulched wood. The rows of mulch piles are inoculated with morel mushroom spores in a solution of water and molasses which are poured over the piles of mulch and then they are allowed to grow undisturbed for several weeks. A solution of wood ashes mixed in water and diluted is subsequently poured over the rows of wood mulch which triggers fruiting of the morels. Morels are known to appear after fires and the alkalinity produced by wood ash mixed with water initiate fruit body formation for most species of morels.

In 2021 it was announced that indoor cultivation of black morels had been successfully achieved after decades of research and experimentation with methods by The Danish Morel Project. The project has been able to cultivate 20 lbs of morels per square yard or around 10 kg per square metre with cost estimates expected to be similar to producing white button mushrooms (&quot;Agaricus bisporus&quot;). Previous attempts at cultivation had managed to produce sclerotia but encountered issues in getting them to reliably fruit. One of the breakthroughs with this project was growing them in a climate controlled environment in conjunction with grass which is involved in stimulating fruiting in the morel mycelium. Cultivation in this manner has been noted to produce superior morels for culinary uses since they can be assured to be insect, slug and dirt free and therefore do not need to be washed and cleaned like foraged morels. Since washing morels can negatively impact the texture, reliable cultivation may result in more versatility with this ingredient in the kitchen as well as making the delicacy more affordable and accessible.

== Toxicity ==
The consumption of &quot;Morchella&quot; species can have adverse effects. In 2023, a Montana sushi restaurant serving them was linked to 51 people who experienced gastrointestinal illness, with two reported deaths and three other hospitalizations. The consumption of raw morels in particular is advised against. An unknown toxin can be neutralized via cooking. Additionally, cooked morels can reportedly cause symptoms of upset stomach when consumed with alcohol.

When eating this fungus for the first time, it is advised to consume a small amount to minimize any allergic reaction. As with all fungi, morels for consumption must be clean and free of decay. Morels growing in old apple orchards previously treated with the deprecated insecticide lead arsenate may accumulate levels of toxic lead and arsenic that are unsuitable for human consumption.

== Uses ==
Morels, &quot;almost universally associated with spring,&quot; can be found in many habitats. Morel may be more likely to fruit during a period of increasing heat following a chilly period, a preference which is credited for their abundance in areas with cold winters.

Black morels (&quot;Morchella elata&quot;) are often found on land that has been disturbed by logging burning.

=== Nutrition ===

Raw morel mushrooms are 90% water, 5% carbohydrates, 3% protein, and 1% fat. A 100 gram reference amount supplies 31 calories, and is a rich source of iron (94% of the Daily Value, DV), manganese, phosphorus, zinc, and vitamin D (34% DV, if having been exposed to sunlight or artificial ultraviolet light). Raw morels contain moderate levels of several B vitamins (table).

=== Gastronomical value and culinary uses ===
They have been called &quot;prized delicacies...they are so esteemed in Europe that people used to set fire to their own forests in hopes of eliciting a bountiful morel crop the next spring!&quot;

Morels are a feature of many cuisines, including Provençal. Their flavor is prized by chefs worldwide, with recipes and preparation methods designed to highlight and preserve it. As with most edible fungi, they are best when collected or bought fresh. They are sometimes added to meat and poultry dishes and soups, and can be used as pasta fillings. As morels are known to contain thermolabile toxins, they must always be cooked before eating.

Morels can be preserved in several ways: They can be &#x27;flash frozen&#x27; by simply running under cold water or putting them in a bucket to soak for a few minutes, then spread on a baking tray and placed into a freezer. After freezing, they keep very well with the frozen glaze for a long time in airtight containers. However, when thawed they can sometimes turn slightly mushy, so they are best frozen after steaming or frying. Due to their natural porosity, morels may contain trace amounts of soil which cannot be easily washed out. Any visible soil should be removed with a brush, after cutting the body in half lengthwise, if needed. Mushroom hunters sometimes recommend soaking morels in a bowl of salt water briefly prior to cooking, although many chefs would disagree.

Drying is a popular and effective method for long-term storage, and morels are widely available commercially in this form. Any insect larvae which might be present in the fruit bodies usually drop out during the drying process.&lt;ref name=&quot;http://www.mssf.org/cookbook/morels.html&quot;&gt;Wild About Mushrooms: Morels. Mssf.org. Retrieved on 2012-04-17.&lt;/ref&gt; Dried morels can then be reconstituted by soaking for 10–20 minutes in warm water or milk, and the soaking liquid can be used as stock.

The flavor of morels is not just appreciated by humans; in Yellowstone National Park, black morels are also known to be consumed by grizzly bears (&quot;Ursus arctos horribilis&quot;).

== In popular culture ==
Morel hunting is a common springtime activity. Mushroom collectors may carry a mesh collecting bag, so the spores can scatter as one carries the harvest.

Every spring, hundreds of morel enthusiasts gather in Boyne City, Michigan for the National Morel Mushroom Festival, a century-old event. As one observer stated, &quot;if there is a modern, North American reenactment of Geoffrey Chaucer&#x27;s &quot;Canterbury Tales&quot; this is it.&quot; Other festivals and hunting competitions in North America include the Illinois State Morel Mushroom Hunting Championship, the Ottawa Midwest Morel Fest and the Mesick Michigan Mushroom Festival.

=== Vernacular names ===

&quot;Morchella&quot; species have been called by many local names; some of the more colorful include &quot;dryland fish&quot;, because when sliced lengthwise then breaded and fried, their outline resembles the shape of a fish; &quot;hickory chickens&quot;, as they are known in many parts of Kentucky; and &quot;merkels&quot; or &quot;miracles&quot;, based on folklore, of how a mountain family was saved from starvation by eating morels. In parts of West Virginia, they are known as &quot;molly moochers&quot;, &quot;muggins&quot;, or &quot;muggles&quot;. Due to the partial structural and textural similarity to some species of &quot;Porifera&quot; (sponges), other common names for any true morel are &quot;sponge mushroom&quot; and &quot;waffle mushroom&quot;. In the Appalachian woodlands, morels have also been called &quot;haystacks&quot;, or &quot;snakeheads&quot;. The Finnish vernacular name &quot;huhtasieni&quot;, refers to &quot;huhta&quot;, area cleared for agriculture by the slash and burn method.

The scientific name of the genus &quot;Morchella&quot; itself, is thought to have derived from &quot;morchel&quot;, an old German word close to &quot;Möhre&quot;, carrot or beet, due to similarity in shape.

== See also ==

==References==
==External links==

* 2000 Pezizales on Ascomycete.org
* MushroomExpert.com&#x27;s Morel section
* &quot;A Beginner&#x27;s Guide to Hunting Morel Mushrooms&quot;, from &quot;Field and Stream&quot;
* Colorado Morels </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q371101" start="15" end="26" title="Morchella" label="true morels"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="33" end="38" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="49" end="58" title="ascomycota" label="sac fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094250" start="99" end="108" title="Cup fungus" label="cup fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q660555" start="122" end="131" title="Pezizales" label="Pezizales"/>
<link wikidata="Q334460" start="133" end="141" title="division (mycology)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="142" end="152" title="Ascomycota" label="Ascomycota"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="173" end="178" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339" start="186" end="195" title="honeycomb" label="honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q694118" start="262" end="266" title="cap (mycology)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458730" start="289" end="296" title="gourmet" label="gourmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735570" start="320" end="327" title="Catalan cuisine" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="332" end="346" title="French cuisine" label="French cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067736" start="420" end="431" title="Fungiculture" label="cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="529" end="548" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="564" end="577" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="579" end="585" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="587" end="592" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="598" end="607" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="609" end="614" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="620" end="628" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129282" start="704" end="723" title="Morchella esculenta" label="Morchella esculenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="785" end="796" title="taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175" start="895" end="905" title="mycologist" label="mycologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="975" end="998" title="molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="1120" end="1128" title="endemism" label="endemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="1195" end="1207" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="1209" end="1224" title="biogeographical" label="biogeographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q863247" start="1242" end="1255" title="nomenclatural" label="nomenclatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339" start="1406" end="1415" title="honeycomb" label="honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q694118" start="1471" end="1475" title="Cap (mycology)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501815" start="1676" end="1687" title="false morel" label="false morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q900804" start="1737" end="1756" title="Gyromitra esculenta" label="Gyromitra esculenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463716" start="1770" end="1784" title="Verpa bohemica" label="Verpa bohemica"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="1969" end="1983" title="cardiac muscle" label="cardiac muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q852186" start="2014" end="2023" title="Mushroom poisoning" label="poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q423839" start="2152" end="2162" title="gyromitrin" label="gyromitrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="2175" end="2187" title="carcinogenic" label="carcinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q417347" start="2224" end="2243" title="monomethylhydrazine" label="monomethylhydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2384" end="2390" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q580989" start="2494" end="2503" title="Gyromitra" label="Gyromitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q580989" start="2876" end="2885" title="Gyromitra" label="Gyromitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003393" start="2961" end="2966" title="Verpa" label="Verpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003393" start="3100" end="3105" title="Verpa" label="Verpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463716" start="3127" end="3138" title="Verpa bohemica" label="V. bohemica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417061" start="3152" end="3161" title="Verpa conica" label="V. conica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003393" start="3375" end="3380" title="Verpa" label="Verpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132089" start="3483" end="3495" title="sporocarp (fungi)" label="fruit bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="3540" end="3551" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q627991" start="4105" end="4120" title="Morchella elata" label="Morchella elata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="4265" end="4273" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="4424" end="4436" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonymities"/>
<link wikidata="Q346451" start="4766" end="4792" title="Christiaan Hendrik Persoon" label="Christiaan Hendrik Persoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129282" start="4813" end="4832" title="Morchella esculenta" label="Morchella esculenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="4857" end="4869" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506142" start="4958" end="4986" title="Julius Vincenz von Krombholz" label="Julius Vincenz von Krombholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q374684" start="4991" end="5004" title="Émile Boudier" label="Émile Boudier"/>
<link wikidata="Q627991" start="5168" end="5183" title="Morchella elata" label="Morchella elata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15405" start="5254" end="5265" title="Elias Magnus Fries" label="Elias Fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="5296" end="5302" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323808" start="5356" end="5375" title="Morchella deliciosa" label="Morchella deliciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795398" start="5422" end="5442" title="Morchella semilibera" label="Morchella semilibera"/>
<link wikidata="Q123057" start="5495" end="5506" title="de Candolle" label="de Candolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323825" start="5546" end="5564" title="Morchella vulgaris" label="Morchella vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q540667" start="5596" end="5607" title="Samuel Frederick Gray" label="Samuel Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q346451" start="5719" end="5726" title="Christiaan Hendrik Persoon" label="Persoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061791" start="5738" end="5759" title="Morchella angusticeps" label="Morchella angusticeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064899" start="5823" end="5835" title="Charles Horton Peck" label="Charles Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q15413168" start="5851" end="5873" title="Morchella purpurascens" label="Morchella purpurascens"/>
<link wikidata="Q374684" start="5922" end="5929" title="Emile Boudier" label="Boudier"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588961" start="6088" end="6104" title="Morchella eximia" label="Morchella eximia"/>
<link wikidata="Q374684" start="6179" end="6186" title="Emile Boudier" label="Boudier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327882" start="6231" end="6247" title="Morchella conica" label="Morchella conica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093954" start="6374" end="6386" title="Nomen illegitimum" label="illegitimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860469" start="6519" end="6533" title="Index Fungorum" label="Index Fungorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323823" start="6784" end="6803" title="Morchella tomentosa" label="Morchella tomentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323794" start="6915" end="6934" title="Morchella anatolica" label="Morchella anatolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="6944" end="6949" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="6963" end="6969" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323817" start="7004" end="7025" title="Morchella rufobrunnea" label="Morchella rufobrunnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7182" end="7195" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16755720" start="7542" end="7563" title="Morchella australiana" label="Morchella australiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q766271" start="7575" end="7586" title="sclerophyll" label="sclerophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="7598" end="7607" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884516" start="7653" end="7672" title="Morchella fluvialis" label="Morchella fluvialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="7704" end="7709" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12954389" start="7777" end="7797" title="Morchella tridentina" label="Morchella tridentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885045" start="7877" end="7897" title="Morchella kakiicolor" label="Morchella kakiicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884561" start="7989" end="8008" title="Morchella palazonii" label="Morchella palazonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890740" start="8070" end="8091" title="Morchella laurentiana" label="Morchella laurentiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8103" end="8109" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890668" start="8120" end="8139" title="Morchella eohespera" label="Morchella eohespera"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="8259" end="8265" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="8314" end="8327" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884177" start="8343" end="8364" title="Morchella arbutiphila" label="Morchella arbutiphila"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884442" start="8381" end="8401" title="Morchella disparilis" label="Morchella disparilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323805" start="8431" end="8449" title="Morchella dunensis" label="Morchella dunensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8595" end="8617" title="Morchella conifericola" label="Morchella conifericola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8631" end="8650" title="Morchella feekensis" label="Morchella feekensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8664" end="8684" title="Morchella magnispora" label="Morchella magnispora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8701" end="8729" title="Morchella mediteterraneensis" label="Morchella mediteterraneensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323794" start="8787" end="8806" title="Morchella anatolica" label="Morchella anatolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323794" start="8830" end="8850" title="Morchella lanceolata" label="Morchella lanceolata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323817" start="8864" end="8885" title="Morchella rufobrunnea" label="Morchella rufobrunnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15413217" start="8938" end="8957" title="Morchella americana" label="Morchella americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15413217" start="8982" end="9003" title="Morchella californica" label="Morchella californica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15413217" start="9017" end="9038" title="Morchella claviformis" label="Morchella claviformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15413217" start="9052" end="9075" title="Morchella esculentoides" label="Morchella esculentoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q15413217" start="9089" end="9107" title="Morchella populina" label="Morchella populina"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901313" start="9121" end="9140" title="Morchella castaneae" label="Morchella castaneae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9165" end="9187" title="Morchella brunneorosea" label="Morchella brunneorosea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9201" end="9236" title="Morchella brunneorosea var. sordida" label="Morchella brunneorosea var. sordida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909536" start="9250" end="9270" title="Morchella diminutiva" label="Morchella diminutiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323805" start="9284" end="9302" title="Morchella dunensis" label="Morchella dunensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323805" start="9327" end="9358" title="Morchella esculenta f. dunensis" label="Morchella esculenta f. dunensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9372" end="9392" title="Morchella andalusiae" label="Morchella andalusiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129282" start="9406" end="9425" title="Morchella esculenta" label="Morchella esculenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129282" start="9450" end="9473" title="Morchella pseudoumbrina" label="Morchella pseudoumbrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129282" start="9487" end="9510" title="Morchella pseudoviridis" label="Morchella pseudoviridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884516" start="9524" end="9543" title="Morchella fluvialis" label="Morchella fluvialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875732" start="9557" end="9575" title="Morchella galilaea" label="Morchella galilaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884561" start="9589" end="9608" title="Morchella palazonii" label="Morchella palazonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909545" start="9622" end="9637" title="Morchella prava" label="Morchella prava"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267536" start="9651" end="9674" title="Morchella sceptriformis" label="Morchella sceptriformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267536" start="9698" end="9718" title="Morchella virginiana" label="Morchella virginiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323819" start="9732" end="9752" title="Morchella steppicola" label="Morchella steppicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909533" start="9766" end="9783" title="Morchella ulmaria" label="Morchella ulmaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909533" start="9807" end="9825" title="Morchella cryptica" label="Morchella cryptica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323825" start="9839" end="9857" title="Morchella vulgaris" label="Morchella vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9882" end="9899" title="Morchella acerina" label="Morchella acerina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9913" end="9933" title="Morchella anthracina" label="Morchella anthracina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9947" end="9963" title="Morchella lepida" label="Morchella lepida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9977" end="9995" title="Morchella robiniae" label="Morchella robiniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q127061" start="10009" end="10028" title="Morchella spongiola" label="Morchella spongiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061791" start="10083" end="10104" title="Morchella angusticeps" label="Morchella angusticeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884177" start="10118" end="10139" title="Morchella arbutiphila" label="Morchella arbutiphila"/>
<link wikidata="Q16755720" start="10153" end="10174" title="Morchella australiana" label="Morchella australiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15096960" start="10188" end="10205" title="Morchella brunnea" label="Morchella brunnea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10219" end="10241" title="Morchella conifericola" label="Morchella conifericola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323808" start="10255" end="10274" title="Morchella deliciosa" label="Morchella deliciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327882" start="10298" end="10314" title="Morchella conica" label="Morchella conica"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884442" start="10328" end="10348" title="Morchella disparilis" label="Morchella disparilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885533" start="10362" end="10379" title="Morchella dunalii" label="Morchella dunalii"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885533" start="10403" end="10419" title="Morchella fallax" label="Morchella fallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q627991" start="10433" end="10448" title="Morchella elata" label="Morchella elata"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890668" start="10462" end="10481" title="Morchella eohespera" label="Morchella eohespera"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588961" start="10495" end="10511" title="Morchella eximia" label="Morchella eximia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10536" end="10559" title="Morchella anthracophila" label="Morchella anthracophila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10573" end="10593" title="Morchella carbonaria" label="Morchella carbonaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632548" start="10607" end="10628" title="Morchella septimelata" label="Morchella septimelata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10642" end="10662" title="Morchella eximioides" label="Morchella eximioides"/>
<link wikidata="Q24893270" start="10676" end="10695" title="Morchella exuberans" label="Morchella exuberans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909529" start="10719" end="10737" title="Morchella capitata" label="Morchella capitata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10751" end="10770" title="Morchella feekensis" label="Morchella feekensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10784" end="10801" title="Morchella iberica" label="Morchella iberica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909541" start="10815" end="10834" title="Morchella importuna" label="Morchella importuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885045" start="10848" end="10868" title="Morchella kakiicolor" label="Morchella kakiicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885045" start="10892" end="10930" title="Morchella quercus-ilicis f. kakiicolor" label="Morchella quercus-ilicis f. kakiicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890740" start="10944" end="10965" title="Morchella laurentiana" label="Morchella laurentiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10979" end="10999" title="Morchella magnispora" label="Morchella magnispora"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067871" start="11013" end="11039" title="Morchella mediterraneensis" label="Morchella mediterraneensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909544" start="11053" end="11074" title="Morchella populiphila" label="Morchella populiphila"/>
<link wikidata="Q15414719" start="11088" end="11107" title="Morchella pulchella" label="Morchella pulchella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323815" start="11121" end="11140" title="Morchella punctipes" label="Morchella punctipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15413168" start="11154" end="11176" title="Morchella purpurascens" label="Morchella purpurascens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11201" end="11234" title="Morchella elata var. purpurascens" label="Morchella elata var. purpurascens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327882" start="11248" end="11264" title="Morchella conica" label="Morchella conica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11278" end="11312" title="Morchella conica var. purpurascens" label="Morchella conica var. purpurascens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11326" end="11354" title="Morchella conica var. crassa" label="Morchella conica var. crassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795398" start="11368" end="11388" title="Morchella semilibera" label="Morchella semilibera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11413" end="11428" title="Morchella gigas" label="Morchella gigas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11442" end="11476" title="Morchella gigas var. tintinnabulum" label="Morchella gigas var. tintinnabulum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11490" end="11507" title="Morchella hybrida" label="Morchella hybrida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11521" end="11537" title="Morchella undosa" label="Morchella undosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883364" start="11551" end="11572" title="Morchella varisiensis" label="Morchella varisiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11586" end="11620" title="Morchella esculenta var. crassipes" label="Morchella esculenta var. crassipes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11634" end="11647" title="Phallus gigas" label="Phallus gigas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11661" end="11675" title="Eromitra gigas" label="Eromitra gigas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11689" end="11704" title="Phallus undosus" label="Phallus undosus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11718" end="11735" title="Phallus crassipes" label="Phallus crassipes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11749" end="11767" title="Mitrophora hybrida" label="Mitrophora hybrida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11781" end="11814" title="Mitrophora hybrida var. crassipes" label="Mitrophora hybrida var. crassipes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11828" end="11845" title="Ptychoverpa gigas" label="Ptychoverpa gigas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11859" end="11875" title="Helvella hybrida" label="Helvella hybrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909546" start="11889" end="11914" title="Morchella septentrionalis" label="Morchella septentrionalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909548" start="11928" end="11947" title="Morchella sextelata" label="Morchella sextelata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909551" start="11961" end="11978" title="Morchella snyderi" label="Morchella snyderi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323823" start="11992" end="12011" title="Morchella tomentosa" label="Morchella tomentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12954389" start="12025" end="12045" title="Morchella tridentina" label="Morchella tridentina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12070" end="12094" title="Morchella quercus-ilicis" label="Morchella quercus-ilicis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12954389" start="12108" end="12127" title="Morchella frustrata" label="Morchella frustrata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12141" end="12160" title="Morchella elatoides" label="Morchella elatoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12174" end="12206" title="Morchella elatoides var. elagans" label="Morchella elatoides var. elagans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12220" end="12254" title="Morchella conica var. pseudoeximia" label="Morchella conica var. pseudoeximia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12305" end="12329" title="Morchella anteridiformis" label="Morchella anteridiformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12343" end="12360" title="Morchella apicata" label="Morchella apicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323800" start="12374" end="12393" title="Morchella bicostata" label="Morchella bicostata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12407" end="12432" title="Morchella conicopapyracea" label="Morchella conicopapyracea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12446" end="12465" title="Morchella crassipes" label="Morchella crassipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909532" start="12479" end="12499" title="Morchella deqinensis" label="Morchella deqinensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12513" end="12530" title="Morchella distans" label="Morchella distans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16755722" start="12544" end="12567" title="Morchella guatemalensis" label="Morchella guatemalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323806" start="12581" end="12600" title="Morchella herediana" label="Morchella herediana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12614" end="12631" title="Morchella hetieri" label="Morchella hetieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12645" end="12664" title="Morchella hortensis" label="Morchella hortensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12678" end="12696" title="Morchella hotsonii" label="Morchella hotsonii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12710" end="12729" title="Morchella hungarica" label="Morchella hungarica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12743" end="12761" title="Morchella inamoena" label="Morchella inamoena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12775" end="12795" title="Morchella intermedia" label="Morchella intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909543" start="12809" end="12829" title="Morchella meiliensis" label="Morchella meiliensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883418" start="12843" end="12862" title="Morchella miyabeana" label="Morchella miyabeana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12876" end="12896" title="Morchella neuwirthii" label="Morchella neuwirthii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12910" end="12932" title="Morchella norvegiensis" label="Morchella norvegiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12946" end="12966" title="Morchella patagonica" label="Morchella patagonica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12980" end="12996" title="Morchella patula" label="Morchella patula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055090" start="13010" end="13029" title="Morchella pragensis" label="Morchella pragensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13043" end="13060" title="Morchella procera" label="Morchella procera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13074" end="13098" title="Morchella pseudovulgaris" label="Morchella pseudovulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13112" end="13129" title="Morchella rielana" label="Morchella rielana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13143" end="13159" title="Morchella rigida" label="Morchella rigida"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883401" start="13173" end="13193" title="Morchella rigidoides" label="Morchella rigidoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13207" end="13226" title="Morchella smithiana" label="Morchella smithiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13240" end="13257" title="Morchella sulcata" label="Morchella sulcata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13271" end="13290" title="Morchella tasmanica" label="Morchella tasmanica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13304" end="13320" title="Morchella tatari" label="Morchella tatari"/>
<link wikidata="Q15414588" start="13334" end="13352" title="Morchella tibetica" label="Morchella tibetica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13366" end="13383" title="Morchella umbrina" label="Morchella umbrina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13397" end="13423" title="Morchella umbrinovelutipes" label="Morchella umbrinovelutipes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13437" end="13456" title="Morchella vaporaria" label="Morchella vaporaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="13487" end="13499" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="13596" end="13606" title="phenotype" label="phenotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="13729" end="13742" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="13767" end="13773" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="13811" end="13816" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323817" start="13888" end="13909" title="Morchella rufobrunnea" label="Morchella rufobrunnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323794" start="13926" end="13938" title="Morchella anatolica" label="M. anatolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129282" start="13984" end="13996" title="Morchella esculenta" label="M. esculenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q627991" start="14056" end="14064" title="Morchella elata" label="M. elata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323823" start="14118" end="14137" title="Morchella tomentosa" label="Morchella tomentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="14211" end="14221" title="tomentose" label="fine hairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q837377" start="14244" end="14253" title="sclerotium" label="sclerotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="14420" end="14427" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="14515" end="14529" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="14539" end="14545" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="14547" end="14553" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14555" end="14560" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="14562" end="14571" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="14581" end="14590" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752568" start="14599" end="14623" title="ancestral reconstruction" label="ancestral reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="14679" end="14701" title="Western United States" label="western North American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003393" start="14810" end="14815" title="Verpa" label="Verpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815148" start="14832" end="14841" title="Disciotis" label="Disciotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323794" start="15111" end="15130" title="Morchella anatolica" label="Morchella anatolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="15847" end="15866" title="Mediterranean basin" label="Mediterranean basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="15984" end="16003" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16064" end="16069" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="16075" end="16083" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129282" start="16107" end="16126" title="Morchella esculenta" label="Morchella esculenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="16184" end="16193" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="16212" end="16219" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q627991" start="16248" end="16256" title="Morchella elata" label="M. elata"/>
<link wikidata="Q966490" start="16324" end="16340" title="disturbed ground" label="disturbed ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875732" start="16374" end="16392" title="Morchella galilaea" label="Morchella galilaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="16577" end="16594" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067736" start="16648" end="16657" title="Fungiculture" label="cultivate"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="16890" end="16898" title="endemism" label="endemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15413217" start="17069" end="17081" title="Morchella americana" label="M. americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890668" start="17095" end="17107" title="Morchella eohespera" label="M. eohespera"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588961" start="17121" end="17130" title="Morchella eximia" label="M. eximia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24893270" start="17144" end="17156" title="Morchella exuberans" label="M. exuberans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875732" start="17170" end="17181" title="Morchella galilaea" label="M. galilaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909541" start="17195" end="17207" title="Morchella importuna" label="M. importuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909544" start="17221" end="17235" title="Morchella populiphila" label="M. populiphila"/>
<link wikidata="Q15414719" start="17249" end="17261" title="Morchella pulchella" label="M. pulchella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323817" start="17275" end="17289" title="Morchella rufobrunnea" label="M. rufobrunnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795398" start="17303" end="17316" title="Morchella semilibera" label="M. semilibera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909548" start="17330" end="17342" title="Morchella sextelata" label="M. sextelata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323819" start="17356" end="17369" title="Morchella steppicola" label="M. steppicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q12954389" start="17387" end="17400" title="Morchella tridentina" label="M. tridentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="17620" end="17633" title="introduced species" label="introductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q778143" start="17875" end="17884" title="biological dispersal" label="dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332985" start="17956" end="17964" title="Lineage (evolution)" label="lineages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323817" start="18104" end="18118" title="Morchella rufobrunnea" label="M. rufobrunnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12954389" start="18135" end="18148" title="Morchella tridentina" label="M. tridentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="18203" end="18224" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="Quaternary glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="18337" end="18346" title="symbiotic relationship" label="symbiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q260335" start="18350" end="18360" title="endophytic" label="endophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="18417" end="18427" title="saprotroph" label="saprotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="18617" end="18630" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="18645" end="18650" title="Abies" label="Abies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="18670" end="18675" title="Pinus" label="Pinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="18696" end="18703" title="Populus" label="Populus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="18726" end="18731" title="Ulmus" label="Ulmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="18751" end="18758" title="Quercus" label="Quercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q430057" start="18778" end="18785" title="Arbutus" label="Arbutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129324" start="18818" end="18826" title="Castanea (plant)" label="Castanea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="18851" end="18856" title="Alnus" label="Alnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q296910" start="18878" end="18882" title="Olea" label="Olea"/>
<link wikidata="Q104819" start="18910" end="18915" title="Malus" label="Malus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="18947" end="18955" title="Fraxinus" label="Fraxinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="19067" end="19072" title="Pinus" label="Pinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="19093" end="19098" title="Abies" label="Abies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25618" start="19118" end="19123" title="Larix" label="Larix"/>
<link wikidata="Q158771" start="19149" end="19160" title="Pseudotsuga" label="Pseudotsuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="19202" end="19209" title="Populus" label="Populus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="19229" end="19237" title="riparian zone" label="riparian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="19336" end="19344" title="Fraxinus" label="Fraxinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163025" start="19364" end="19372" title="Platanus" label="Platanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157236" start="19397" end="19409" title="Liriodendron" label="Liriodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="19445" end="19448" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q678847" start="19451" end="19462" title="Populus sect. Aigeiros" label="cottonwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="19472" end="19482" title="apple tree" label="apple tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="19497" end="19504" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272737" start="19532" end="19541" title="phenology" label="phenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188643" start="19642" end="19651" title="death cap" label="death cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q752507" start="19690" end="19702" title="sulphur tuft" label="sulphur tuft"/>
<link wikidata="Q131227" start="19747" end="19757" title="fly agaric" label="fly agaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501815" start="19825" end="19836" title="false morel" label="false morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q580989" start="19845" end="19854" title="Gyromitra" label="Gyromitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003393" start="19871" end="19876" title="Verpa" label="Verpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514169" start="19917" end="19925" title="Helvella" label="Helvella"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588961" start="20051" end="20060" title="Morchella eximia" label="M. eximia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909541" start="20074" end="20086" title="Morchella importuna" label="M. importuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323823" start="20100" end="20112" title="Morchella tomentosa" label="M. tomentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754865" start="20141" end="20151" title="Pyrophyte" label="pyrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="20234" end="20238" title="forest fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480332" start="20419" end="20427" title="wood ash" label="wood ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189711" start="20518" end="20531" title="Alkali soil" label="Alkaline soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312129" start="21051" end="21059" title="delicacy" label="delicacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="21072" end="21081" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22158" end="22182" title="The Danish Morel Project" label="The Danish Morel Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q227690" start="22375" end="22392" title="Agaricus bisporus" label="Agaricus bisporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q837377" start="22457" end="22466" title="Sclerotium" label="sclerotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="23247" end="23252" title="sushi" label="sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300099" start="23317" end="23341" title="gastrointestinal illness" label="gastrointestinal illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="23576" end="23589" title="upset stomach" label="upset stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="23835" end="23840" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q416871" start="23901" end="23914" title="lead arsenate" label="lead arsenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="23919" end="23929" title="bioaccumulation" label="accumulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="23946" end="23950" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="23955" end="23962" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q627991" start="24308" end="24323" title="Morchella elata" label="Morchella elata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="24457" end="24469" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21296145" start="24475" end="24482" title="protein (nutrient)" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="24491" end="24494" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="24536" end="24543" title="calorie" label="calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="24570" end="24574" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="24587" end="24598" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="24605" end="24614" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="24616" end="24626" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="24628" end="24632" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="24706" end="24723" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q183206" start="24772" end="24782" title="B vitamins" label="B vitamins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25086" end="25095" title="French cuisine#Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499072" start="25123" end="25127" title="chef" label="chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q654236" start="25229" end="25241" title="Edible mushroom" label="edible fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="25371" end="25376" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403956" start="25418" end="25430" title="thermolabile" label="thermolabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q386332" start="25535" end="25559" title="flash freezing" label="&amp;#x27;flash frozen&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q502335" start="25667" end="25678" title="Sheet pan" label="baking tray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415859" start="25895" end="25903" title="steaming" label="steaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q300472" start="25907" end="25913" title="frying" label="frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514687" start="26264" end="26270" title="Food drying" label="Drying"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="26391" end="26404" title="Larva" label="insect larvae"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="26833" end="26858" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="26906" end="26918" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957172" start="27194" end="27214" title="Boyne City, Michigan" label="Boyne City, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="27360" end="27376" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="27390" end="27406" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="27475" end="27488" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="27946" end="27954" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="28014" end="28022" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="28105" end="28118" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="28290" end="28298" title="Porifera" label="Porifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q375" start="28396" end="28402" title="waffle" label="waffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="28532" end="28539" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="28792" end="28798" title="German language" label="German"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220445" wikidata="Q620526" url="?curid=220445" title="Ascocarp">
<text>An ascocarp, or ascoma (: ascomata), is the fruiting body (sporocarp) of an ascomycete phylum fungus. It consists of very tightly interwoven hyphae and millions of embedded asci, each of which typically contains four to eight ascospores. Ascocarps are most commonly bowl-shaped (apothecia) but may take on a spherical or flask-like form that has a pore opening to release spores (perithecia) or no opening (cleistothecia).

== Classification ==
The ascocarp is classified according to its placement (in ways not fundamental to the basic taxonomy). It is called &quot;epigeous&quot; if it grows above ground, as with the morels, while underground ascocarps, such as truffles, are termed &quot;hypogeous&quot;. The structure enclosing the hymenium is divided into the types described below (apothecium, cleistothecium, etc.) and this character &quot;is&quot; important for the taxonomic classification of the fungus. Apothecia can be relatively large and fleshy, whereas the others are microscopic—about the size of flecks of ground pepper.

== Apothecium ==

An apothecium (plural: apothecia) is a wide, open, saucer-shaped or cup-shaped fruit body. It is sessile and fleshy. The structure of the apothecium chiefly consists of three parts: &quot;hymenium&quot; (upper concave surface), &quot;hypothecium&quot;, and &quot;excipulum&quot; (the &quot;foot&quot;). The asci are present in the hymenium layer. The asci are freely exposed at maturity. An example are the members of &quot;Dictyomycetes&quot;. Here the fertile layer is free, so that many spores can be dispersed simultaneously. The morel, &quot;Morchella&quot;, an edible ascocarp, not a mushroom, favored by gourmets, is a mass of apothecia fused together in a single large structure or cap. The genera &quot;Helvella&quot; and &quot;Gyromitra&quot; are similar.

== Cleistothecium ==

A cleistothecium (plural: cleistothecia) is a globose, completely closed fruit body with no special opening to the outside. The ascomatal wall is called &quot;peridium&quot; and typically consists of densely interwoven hyphae or &quot;pseudoparenchyma&quot; cells. It may be covered with hyphal outgrowth called &quot;appendages&quot;. The asci are globose, deliquescent, and scattered throughout the interior cavity i.e. as in &quot;Eurotium&quot; or arising in tufts from the basal region of ascocarps as in &quot;Erysiphe&quot;. In this case the ascocarp is round with the hymenium enclosed, so the spores do not automatically get released, and fungi with cleistothecia have had to develop new strategies to disseminate their spores. The truffles, for instance, have solved this problem by attracting animals such as wild boars, which break open the tasty ascocarps and spread the spores over a wide area. Cleistothecia are found mostly in fungi that have little room available for their ascocarps, for instance those that live under tree bark, or underground like truffles.

== Gymnothecium ==
Similar to a cleistothecium, a gymnothecium is a completely enclosed structure containing globose or pear-shaped, deliquescent asci. However, unlike the cleistothecium, the peridial wall of a gymnothecium consists of a loosely woven &quot;tuft&quot; of hyphae, often ornamented with elaborate coils or spines. Examples are the &quot;Gymnoascus&quot;, &quot;Talaromyces&quot; and the dermatophyte &quot;Arthroderma&quot;.

== Perithecium ==
Perithecia are flask shaped structures opening by a pore or &quot;ostiole&quot; (short papilla opening by a circular pore) through which the ascospores escape. The &quot;ostiolar canal&quot; may be lined by hair-like structures called &quot;periphyses&quot;. The unitunicate asci are usually cylindrical in shape, borne on a stipe (stalk), released from a pore, developed from the inner wall of the perithecium and arise from a basal plectenchyma-centrum. Examples are members of Sphaeriales and Hypocreales. Perithecia are also found in &quot;Xylaria&quot; (Dead Man&#x27;s Fingers, Candle Snuff), &quot;Nectria&quot;, &quot;Claviceps&quot; and &quot;Neurospora&quot;.

Sometimes the perithecia are &quot;free&quot; (individually visible from the outside), but in many species they are embedded in a dense sterile tissue of haploid cells called a &quot;stroma&quot; (plural: stromata). Some fungi have a shield-shaped layer called a clypeus over their perithecia.

== Pseudothecium ==

This is similar to a perithecium, but the asci are not regularly organised into a hymenium and they are bitunicate, having a double wall that expands when it takes up water and shoots the enclosed spores out suddenly to disperse them. Example species are Apple scab (&quot;Venturia inaequalis&quot;) and the horse chestnut disease &quot;Guignardia aesculi&quot;.

== See also ==
* Basidiocarp
* Conidium

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="3" end="11" title="Ascocarp" label="ascocarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="16" end="22" title="Ascocarp" label="ascoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="26" end="34" title="Ascocarp" label="ascomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132089" start="59" end="68" title="sporocarp (fungi)" label="sporocarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="76" end="86" title="ascomycete" label="ascomycete"/>
<link wikidata="Q193129" start="141" end="146" title="hypha" label="hypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="173" end="177" title="ascus" label="asci"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="226" end="235" title="ascospore" label="ascospore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="537" end="545" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q371101" start="620" end="625" title="morel" label="morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690965" start="665" end="673" title="truffles" label="truffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q914105" start="737" end="745" title="hymenium" label="hymenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q914105" start="1246" end="1254" title="hymenium" label="hymenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q371101" start="1592" end="1597" title="morel" label="morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514169" start="1770" end="1778" title="Helvella" label="Helvella"/>
<link wikidata="Q580989" start="1795" end="1804" title="Gyromitra" label="Gyromitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070853" start="2006" end="2014" title="peridium" label="peridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q115554948" start="2082" end="2098" title="pseudoparenchyma" label="pseudoparenchyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="2667" end="2676" title="boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624501" start="3278" end="3288" title="Gymnoascus" label="Gymnoascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690168" start="3302" end="3313" title="Talaromyces" label="Talaromyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q613894" start="3328" end="3340" title="dermatophyte" label="dermatophyte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3347" end="3358" title="Arthroderma" label="Arthroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357410" start="3451" end="3458" title="ostiole" label="ostiole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3865" end="3876" title="Sphaeriales" label="Sphaeriales"/>
<link wikidata="Q132255" start="3881" end="3892" title="Hypocreales" label="Hypocreales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625602" start="3929" end="3936" title="Xylaria" label="Xylaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708290" start="3990" end="3997" title="Nectria" label="Nectria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445454" start="4011" end="4020" title="Claviceps" label="Claviceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q309943" start="4037" end="4047" title="Neurospora" label="Neurospora"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="4476" end="4486" title="bitunicate" label="bitunicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q618365" start="4627" end="4637" title="Apple scab" label="Apple scab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779549" start="4709" end="4719" title="Guignardia" label="Guignardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821040" start="4753" end="4764" title="Basidiocarp" label="Basidiocarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q612960" start="4767" end="4775" title="Conidium" label="Conidium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220446" wikidata="Q723425" url="?curid=220446" title="Ascus">
<text>An ascus (; : asci) is the sexual spore-bearing cell produced in ascomycete fungi. Each ascus usually contains eight ascospores (or octad), produced by meiosis followed, in most species, by a mitotic cell division. However, asci in some genera or species can occur in numbers of one (e.g. &quot;Monosporascus cannonballus&quot;), two, four, or multiples of four. In a few cases, the ascospores can bud off conidia that may fill the asci (e.g. &quot;Tympanis&quot;) with hundreds of conidia, or the ascospores may fragment, e.g. some &quot;Cordyceps&quot;, also filling the asci with smaller cells. Ascospores are nonmotile, usually single celled, but not infrequently may be coenocytic (lacking a septum), and in some cases coenocytic in multiple planes. Mitotic divisions within the developing spores populate each resulting cell in septate ascospores with nuclei. The term ocular chamber, or oculus, refers to the epiplasm (the portion of cytoplasm not used in ascospore formation) that is surrounded by the &quot;bourrelet&quot; (the thickened tissue near the top of the ascus).

Typically, a single ascus will contain eight ascospores (or octad). The eight spores are produced by meiosis followed by a mitotic division. Two meiotic divisions turn the original diploid zygote nucleus into four haploid ones. That is, the single original diploid cell from which the whole process begins contains two complete sets of chromosomes. In preparation for meiosis, all the DNA of both sets is duplicated, to make a total of four sets. The nucleus that contains the four sets divides twice, separating into four new nuclei – each of which has one complete set of chromosomes. Following this process, each of the four new nuclei duplicates its DNA and undergoes a division by mitosis. As a result, the ascus will contain four pairs of spores. Then the ascospores are released from the ascus.

In many cases the asci are formed in a regular layer, the &quot;hymenium&quot;, in a fruiting body which is visible to the naked eye, here called an &quot;ascocarp&quot; or &quot;ascoma&quot;. In other cases, such as single-celled yeasts, no such structures are found. In rare cases asci of some genera can regularly develop inside older discharged asci one after another, e.g. &quot;Dipodascus&quot;.

Asci normally release their spores by bursting at the tip, but they may also digest themselves, passively releasing the ascospores either in a liquid or as a dry powder. Discharging asci usually have a specially differentiated tip, either a pore or an operculum. In some hymenium forming genera, when one ascus bursts, it can trigger the bursting of many other asci in the ascocarp resulting in a massive discharge visible as a cloud of spores – the phenomenon called &quot;puffing&quot;. This is an example of positive feedback. A faint hissing sound can also be heard for species of &quot;Peziza&quot; and other cup fungi.

Asci, notably those of &quot;Neurospora crassa&quot;, have been used in laboratories for studying the process of meiosis, because the four cells produced by meiosis line up in regular order. By modifying genes coding for spore color and nutritional requirements, the biologist can study crossing over and other phenomena. The formation of asci and their use in genetic analysis are described in detail in &quot;Neurospora crassa&quot;.

Asci of most Pezizomycotina develop after the formation of croziers at their base. The croziers help maintain a brief dikaryon. The compatible nuclei of the dikaryon merge forming a diploid nucleus that then undergoes meiosis and ultimately internal ascospore formation. Members of the Taphrinomycotina and Saccharomycotina do not form croziers.

==Classification==
The form of the ascus, the capsule which contains the sexual spores, is important for classification of the Ascomycota. There are four basic types of ascus.
*A unitunicate-operculate ascus has a &quot;lid&quot;, the Operculum, which breaks open when the spores are mature and allows the spores to escape. Unitunicate-operculate asci only occur in those ascocarps which have apothecia, for instance the morels. &#x27;Unitunicate&#x27; means &#x27;single-walled&#x27;.
*Instead of an operculum, a unitunicate-inoperculate ascus has an elastic ring that functions like a pressure valve. Once mature the elastic ring briefly expands and lets the spores shoot out. This type appears both in apothecia and in perithecia; an example is the illustrated &quot;Hypomyces chrysospermus&quot;.

*A bitunicate ascus is enclosed in a double wall. This consists of a thin, brittle outer shell and a thick elastic inner wall. When the spores are mature, the shell splits open so that the inner wall can take up water. As a consequence this begins to extend with its spores until it protrudes above the rest of the ascocarp so that the spores can escape into free air without being obstructed by the bulk of the fruiting body. Bitunicate asci occur only in pseudothecia and are found only in the classes Dothideomycetes and Chaetothyriomycetes (which were formerly united in the old class Loculoascomycetes). Examples: &quot;Venturia inaequalis&quot; (apple scab) and &quot;Guignardia aesculi&quot; (Brown Leaf Mold of Horse Chestnut).
*Prototunicate asci are mostly spherical in shape and have no mechanism for forcible dispersal. The mature ascus wall dissolves allowing the spores to escape, or it is broken open by other influences, such as animals. Asci of this type can be found both in perithecia and in cleistothecia, for instance with Dutch elm disease (&quot;Ophiostoma&quot;). This is something of a catch-all term for cases which do not fit into the other three ascus types, and they probably belong to several independent groups which evolved separately from unitunicate asci.

==Ascospores==

An ascospore is a spore contained in an ascus, or that was produced inside an ascus. This kind of spore is specific to fungi classified as ascomycetes (Ascomycota).

The ascospores of &quot;Blumeria graminis&quot; are formed and released under the humid conditions. After landing onto a suitable surface, unlike conidia, ascospores of &quot;Blumeria graminis&quot; showed a more variable developmental patterns.

The fungi &quot;Saccharomyces&quot; produces ascospores when grown on V-8 medium, acetate ascospore agar, or Gorodkowa medium. These ascospores are globose and located in asci. Each ascus contains one to four ascospores. The asci do not rupture at maturity. Ascospores are stained with Kinyoun stain and ascospore stain. When stained with Gram stain, ascospores are gram-negative while vegetative cells are gram-positive.

The fission yeast &quot;Schizosaccharomyces pombe&quot; is a single-celled haploid organism that reproduces asexually by mitosis and fission. However, exposure to the DNA damaging agent hydrogen peroxide induces pair-wise mating of haploid cells of opposite mating type to form transient diploid cells that then undergo meiosis to form asci, each with four ascospores. The production of viable ascospores depends on successful recombinational repair during meiosis. When this repair is defective a quality control mechanism prevents germination of damaged ascospores. These findings suggest that mating followed by meiosis is an adaptation for repairing DNA damage in the parental haploid cells in order to allow production of viable progeny ascospores.

==References==
==External links==
* IMA Mycological Glossary: Ascus
* APSnet Illustrated Glossary of Plant Pathology: Ascus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="3" end="8" title="Ascus" label="ascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="14" end="18" title="Ascus" label="asci"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="34" end="39" title="spore" label="spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="48" end="52" title="cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="65" end="75" title="Ascomycota" label="ascomycete"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="76" end="81" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="117" end="127" title="Ascus" label="ascospores"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="152" end="159" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="192" end="199" title="mitosis" label="mitotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588663" start="295" end="321" title="Monosporascus cannonballus" label="Monosporascus cannonballus"/>
<link wikidata="Q612960" start="406" end="413" title="conidia" label="conidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860414" start="449" end="457" title="Tympanis" label="Tympanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312238" start="539" end="548" title="Cordyceps" label="Cordyceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q346579" start="697" end="703" title="septum" label="septum"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="875" end="889" title="Ascus" label="ocular chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="894" end="900" title="Ascus" label="oculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="941" end="950" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="1184" end="1191" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="1206" end="1213" title="mitotic" label="mitotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="1264" end="1271" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="1272" end="1278" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="1297" end="1304" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="1419" end="1429" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="1468" end="1471" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q914105" start="1950" end="1958" title="hymenium" label="hymenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="2041" end="2049" title="ascocarp" label="ascocarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="2117" end="2122" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280023" start="2270" end="2280" title="Dipodascus" label="Dipodascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q918004" start="2800" end="2817" title="positive feedback" label="positive feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080155" start="2880" end="2886" title="Peziza" label="Peziza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094250" start="2903" end="2912" title="cup fungi" label="cup fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133459" start="2944" end="2961" title="Neurospora crassa" label="Neurospora crassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="3054" end="3058" title="cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="3119" end="3123" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="3202" end="3215" title="Chromosomal crossover" label="crossing over"/>
<link wikidata="Q387893" start="3365" end="3379" title="Pezizomycotina" label="Pezizomycotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189734" start="3411" end="3419" title="crozier (mycology)" label="croziers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923203" start="3470" end="3478" title="dikaryon" label="dikaryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="3534" end="3541" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="3570" end="3577" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133815" start="3638" end="3654" title="Taphrinomycotina" label="Taphrinomycotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q508019" start="3659" end="3675" title="Saccharomycotina" label="Saccharomycotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="3826" end="3836" title="Ascomycota" label="Ascomycota"/>
<link wikidata="Q447888" start="3934" end="3943" title="Operculum (botany)" label="Operculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q371101" start="4120" end="4125" title="morel" label="morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334037" start="4286" end="4300" title="Relief valve" label="pressure valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="4404" end="4413" title="Apothecium" label="apothecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="4421" end="4431" title="Perithecium" label="perithecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="4958" end="4970" title="Pseudothecium" label="pseudothecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132159" start="5005" end="5020" title="Dothideomycetes" label="Dothideomycetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066753" start="5025" end="5044" title="Chaetothyriomycetes" label="Chaetothyriomycetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q618365" start="5153" end="5163" title="apple scab" label="apple scab"/>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="5494" end="5504" title="Perithecium" label="perithecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620526" start="5512" end="5525" title="Cleistothecium" label="cleistothecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="5545" end="5562" title="Dutch elm disease" label="Dutch elm disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="5826" end="5831" title="spore" label="spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="5927" end="5932" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="5947" end="5957" title="ascomycete" label="ascomycete"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="5960" end="5970" title="Ascomycota" label="Ascomycota"/>
<link wikidata="Q337796" start="5998" end="6015" title="Blumeria graminis" label="Blumeria graminis"/>
<link wikidata="Q612960" start="6120" end="6127" title="conidia" label="conidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146293" start="6237" end="6250" title="Saccharomyces" label="Saccharomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236682" start="6668" end="6693" title="Schizosaccharomyces pombe" label="Schizosaccharomyces pombe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220455" wikidata="Q420225" url="?curid=220455" title="Monoamine neurotransmitter">
<text>Monoamine neurotransmitters are neurotransmitters and neuromodulators that contain one amino group connected to an aromatic ring by a two-carbon chain (such as -CH2-CH2-). Examples are dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin.

All monoamines are derived from aromatic amino acids like phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan by the action of aromatic amino acid decarboxylase enzymes. They are deactivated in the body by the enzymes known as monoamine oxidases which clip off the amine group.

Monoaminergic systems, i.e., the networks of neurons that use monoamine neurotransmitters, are involved in the regulation of processes such as emotion, arousal, and certain types of memory. It has also been found that monoamine neurotransmitters play an important role in the secretion and production of neurotrophin-3 by astrocytes, a chemical which maintains neuron integrity and provides neurons with trophic support.

Drugs used to increase or reduce the effect of monoamine neurotransmitters are used to treat patients with psychiatric and neurological disorders, including depression, anxiety, schizophrenia and Parkinson&#x27;s disease.

== Examples ==
;Classical monoamines
* Imidazoleamines:
** Histamine
* Catecholamines:
** Adrenaline (Ad; Epinephrine, Epi)
** Dopamine (DA)
** Noradrenaline (NAd; Norepinephrine, NE)
* Indolamines:
**Serotonin (5-HT)
**Melatonin (MT)

;Trace amines:
Specific transporter proteins called monoamine transporters that transport monoamines in or out of a cell exist. These are the dopamine transporter (DAT), serotonin transporter (SERT), and the norepinephrine transporter (NET) in the outer cell membrane and the vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT1 and VMAT2) in the membrane of intracellular vesicles.

After release into the synaptic cleft, monoamine neurotransmitter action is ended by reuptake into the presynaptic terminal. There, they can be repackaged into synaptic vesicles or degraded by the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO), which is a target of monoamine oxidase inhibitors, a class of antidepressants.

==Evolution==

Monoamine neurotransmitter systems occur in virtually all vertebrates, where the evolvability of these systems has served to promote the adaptability of vertebrate species to different environments.

A recent computational investigation of genetic origins shows that the earliest development of monoamines occurred 650 million years ago and that the appearance of these chemicals, necessary for active or participatory awareness and engagement with the environment, coincides with the emergence of bilaterian or “mirror” body in the midst of (or perhaps in some sense catalytic of?) the Cambrian Explosion. 
==See also==
*Monoamine reuptake inhibitor
*Monoamine receptor
* Monoamine oxidase
* Monoamine transporter
* Monoamine Hypothesis
* Biogenic amine
* Trace amine
* Monoamine nuclei
* Biology of depression

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q420225" start="0" end="27" title="Monoamine neurotransmitter" label="Monoamine neurotransmitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="32" end="48" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q905905" start="54" end="68" title="neuromodulator" label="neuromodulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="87" end="92" title="amino" label="amino"/>
<link wikidata="Q210390" start="115" end="128" title="aromaticity" label="aromatic ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="185" end="193" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="195" end="209" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="214" end="223" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="267" end="277" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170545" start="284" end="297" title="phenylalanine" label="phenylalanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="299" end="307" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="313" end="323" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q421186" start="341" end="374" title="aromatic amino acid decarboxylase" label="aromatic amino acid decarboxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="375" end="381" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q410867" start="441" end="458" title="monoamine oxidase" label="monoamine oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q14904569" start="797" end="811" title="neurotrophin-3" label="neurotrophin-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1072" end="1082" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="1084" end="1091" title="Anxiety disorder" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="1093" end="1106" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="1111" end="1135" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q328692" start="1177" end="1186" title="Imidazole" label="Imidazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="1197" end="1206" title="Histamine" label="Histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q271663" start="1209" end="1222" title="Catecholamine" label="Catecholamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="1228" end="1238" title="Adrenaline" label="Adrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="1265" end="1273" title="Dopamine" label="Dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="1282" end="1295" title="Noradrenaline" label="Noradrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025714" start="1324" end="1335" title="Indolamines" label="Indolamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="1339" end="1348" title="Serotonin" label="Serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="1358" end="1367" title="Melatonin" label="Melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1410" end="1417" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692421" start="1426" end="1447" title="monoamine transporter" label="monoamine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271947" start="1516" end="1536" title="dopamine transporter" label="dopamine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q410142" start="1544" end="1565" title="serotonin transporter" label="serotonin transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874257" start="1582" end="1608" title="norepinephrine transporter" label="norepinephrine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="1628" end="1641" title="cell membrane" label="cell membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105920" start="1650" end="1681" title="vesicular monoamine transporter" label="vesicular monoamine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031574" start="1683" end="1688" title="VMAT1" label="VMAT1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521094" start="1693" end="1698" title="VMAT2" label="VMAT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q189206" start="1733" end="1740" title="vesicle (biology)" label="vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643251" start="1767" end="1781" title="synaptic cleft" label="synaptic cleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="1941" end="1947" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q410867" start="1948" end="1965" title="monoamine oxidase" label="monoamine oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="1994" end="2022" title="monoamine oxidase inhibitors" label="monoamine oxidase inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="2035" end="2050" title="antidepressants" label="antidepressants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155077" start="2690" end="2718" title="Monoamine reuptake inhibitor" label="Monoamine reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590051" start="2720" end="2738" title="Monoamine receptor" label="Monoamine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q410867" start="2741" end="2758" title="Monoamine oxidase" label="Monoamine oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692421" start="2761" end="2782" title="Monoamine transporter" label="Monoamine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915062" start="2785" end="2805" title="Monoamine Hypothesis" label="Monoamine Hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q424455" start="2808" end="2822" title="Biogenic amine" label="Biogenic amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413778" start="2825" end="2836" title="Trace amine" label="Trace amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456816" start="2839" end="2855" title="Monoamine nuclei" label="Monoamine nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915062" start="2858" end="2879" title="Biology of depression" label="Biology of depression"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220457" wikidata="Q157114" url="?curid=220457" title="Cycad">
<text>Cycads are seed plants that typically have a stout and woody (ligneous) trunk with a crown of large, hard, stiff, evergreen and (usually) pinnate leaves. The species are dioecious, that is, individual plants of a species are either male or female. Cycads vary in size from having trunks only a few centimeters to several meters tall. They typically grow slowly and have long lifespans. Because of their superficial resemblance to palms or ferns, they are sometimes mistaken for them, but they are not closely related to either group.
Cycads are gymnosperms (naked-seeded), meaning their unfertilized seeds are open to the air to be directly fertilized by pollination, as contrasted with angiosperms, which have enclosed seeds with more complex fertilization arrangements. Cycads have very specialized pollinators, usually a specific species of beetle. Both male and female cycads bear cones (strobili), somewhat similar to conifer cones.

Cycads have been reported to fix nitrogen in association with various cyanobacteria living in the roots (the &quot;coralloid&quot; roots). These photosynthetic bacteria produce a neurotoxin called BMAA that is found in the seeds of cycads. This neurotoxin may enter a human food chain as the cycad seeds may be eaten directly as a source of flour by humans or by wild or feral animals such as bats, and humans may eat these animals. It is hypothesized that this is a source of some neurological diseases in humans. Another defence mechanism against herbivores is the accumulation of toxins in seeds and vegetative tissues; through horizontal gene transfer, cycads have acquired a family of genes (fitD) from a microbial organism, most likely a fungus, which gives them the ability to produce an insecticidal toxin.

Cycads all over the world are in decline, with four species on the brink of extinction and seven species having fewer than 100 plants left in the wild.

== Description ==

Cycads have a cylindrical trunk which usually does not branch. However, some types of cycads, such as &quot;Cycas zeylanica,&quot; can branch their trunks. The apex of the stem is protected by modified leaves called cataphylls. Leaves grow directly from the trunk, and typically fall when older, leaving a crown of leaves at the top. The leaves grow in a rosette, with new foliage emerging from the top and center of the crown. The trunk may be buried, so the leaves appear to be emerging from the ground, so the plant appears to be a basal rosette. The leaves are generally large in proportion to the trunk size, and sometimes even larger than the trunk.

The leaves are pinnate (in the form of bird feathers, pinnae), with a central leaf stalk from which parallel &quot;ribs&quot; emerge from each side of the stalk, perpendicular to it. The leaves are typically either compound (with leaflets emerging from the leaf stalk as &quot;ribs&quot;), or have edges (margins) so deeply cut () so as to appear compound. The Australian genus &quot;Bowenia&quot; and some Asian species of Cycas, like &quot;Cycas multipinnata&quot;, &quot;C. micholitzii&quot; and &quot;C. debaoensis&quot;, have leaves that are bipinnate, the leaflets each having their own subleaflets, growing in the same form on the leaflet as the leaflets do on the stalk.

== Confusion with palms ==
Due to superficial similarities in foliage and plant structure, cycads and palms are often mistaken for each other. They also can occur in similar climates. However, they belong to different phyla and as such are not closely related. The similar structure is the product of convergent evolution.

Beyond those superficial resemblances, there are a number of differences between cycads and palms. For one, both male and female cycads are gymnosperms and bear cones (strobili), while palms are angiosperms and so flower and bear fruit. The mature foliage looks very similar between both groups, but the young emerging leaves of a cycad resemble a fiddlehead fern before they unfold and take their place in the rosette, while the leaves of palms are just small versions of the mature frond. Another difference is in the stem. Both plants leave some scars on the stem below the rosette where there used to be leaves, but the scars of a cycad are helically arranged and small, while the scars of palms are a circle that wraps around the whole stem. The stems of cycads are also in general rougher and shorter than those of palms.

==Taxonomy==
The two extant families of cycads all belong to the order Cycadales, and are the Cycadaceae and Zamiaceae (including Stangeriaceae). These cycads have changed little since the Jurassic in comparison to some other plant divisions. Five additional families belonging to the Medullosales became extinct by the end of the Paleozoic Era.

Based on genetic studies, cycads are thought to be more closely related to &quot;Ginkgo&quot; than to other living gymnosperms. Both are thought to have diverged from each other during the early Carboniferous.

Classification of the Cycadophyta to the rank of family.

* Class Cycadopsida 
** Order Cycadales 
*** Suborder Cycadineae 
**** Family Cycadaceae 
***** Genus &quot;Cycas&quot;
*** Suborder Zamiineae 
**** Family Zamiaceae 
***** subfamily Diooideae 
****** Tribe Diooeae 
******* Genus &quot;Dioon&quot;
***** subfamily Zamioideae 
****** Tribe Encephalarteae 
******* Genus &quot;Macrozamia&quot;
******* Genus &quot;Lepidozamia&quot;
******* Genus &quot;Encephalartos&quot;
****** Tribe Zamieae 
******* Genus &quot;Bowenia&quot;
******* Genus &quot;Ceratozamia&quot;
******* Genus &quot;Stangeria&quot;
******* Genus &quot;Zamia&quot;
******* Genus &quot;Microcycas&quot;

=== Fossil genera ===
The following extinct cycad genera are known:

* &quot;Amuriella&quot; Late Jurassic, Russian Far East (leaf fragments)
* &quot;Androstrobus&quot; Triassic to Cretaceous, worldwide (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Antarcticycas&quot; Middle Triassic, Antarctica (known from the whole plant)
* ?&quot;Anthrophyopsis&quot; Late Triassic, worldwide (leaf form genus, possibly a pteridospermatophyte)
* &quot;Apoldia&quot; Triassic-Jurassic, Europe
* &quot;Archaeocycas&quot; Early Permian, Texas (leaf with sporophylls)
* &quot;Aricycas&quot; Late Triassic, Arizona (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Beania&quot; (=&quot;Sphaereda&quot;), Triassic to Jurassic, Europe &amp; Central Asia (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Behuninia&quot; Late Jurassic, Colorado &amp; Utah (fruiting structures)
* &quot;Bucklandia&quot; Middle Jurassic to Early Cretaceous, Europe and India (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Bureja&quot; Late Jurassic, Russia
* &quot;Cavamonocolpites&quot; Early Cretaceous, Brazil (pollen)
* &quot;Crossozamia&quot; Early to Late Permian, China (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Ctenis&quot; Mesozoic-Paleogene, Worldwide (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Ctenozamites&quot; Triassic-Cretaceous, worldwide (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Cycadenia&quot; Triassic, Pennsylvania (trunks)
* &quot;Cycadinorachis&quot; Late Jurassic, India (rachis)
* &quot;Fascisvarioxylon&quot; Late Jurassic, India (petrified wood)
* &quot;Gymnovulites&quot;, Latest Cretaceous/earliest Paleocene, India (seed)
* &quot;Heilungia&quot;, Late Jurassic to early Cretaceous, Russia &amp; Alaska (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Leptocycas&quot; Late Triassic, North Carolina &amp; China (known from the whole plant)
* &quot;Mesosingeria&quot;, Jurassic to Early Cretaceous, Antarctica &amp; Argentina (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Michelilloa&quot;, Late Triassic, Argentina (stem)
* ?&quot;Nikania&quot;, Early Cretaceous, Russia (leaf fragments)
* ?&quot;Nilssonia&quot;, Middle Permian to Late Cretaceous, worldwide (leaf form genus) (possibly not a cycad)
* ?&quot;Nilssoniocladus&quot;, Early to Late Cretaceous, United States &amp; Russia (stems, likely associated with &quot;Nilssonia&quot;, possibly deciduous)
* &quot;Palaeozamia&quot;, Middle Jurassic, England
* &quot;Paracycas&quot;, Middle Jurassic to Late Jurassic, Europe and Central Asia
* ?&quot;Phasmatocycas&quot;, Late Carboniferous to Early Permian, Kansas, Texas &amp; New Mexico (leaf with sporophylls)
* &quot;Pleiotrichium&quot;, Late Cretaceous, Germany (leaf)
* &quot;Pseudoctenis&quot;, Late Permian to Late Cretaceous, worldwide (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Sarmatiella&quot;, Late Triassic, Ukraine 
* &quot;Stangerites&quot;, Late Triassic to Early Jurassic, Virginia and Mexico (leaf form genus)
* &quot;Sueria&quot;, Early Cretaceous, Argentina (leaf)
* &quot;Taeniopteris&quot;, Carboniferous to Cretaceous, worldwide (polyphyletic leaf form genus, also includes bennettitales and marattialean ferns)

==Fossil record==

The oldest probable cycad foliage is known from the latest Carboniferous-Early Permian of South Korea and China, such as &quot;Crossozamia&quot;. Unambiguous fossils of cycads are known from the Early-Middle Permian onwards. Cycads were generally uncommon during the Permian. The two living cycad families are thought to have split from each other sometime between the Jurassic and Carboniferous. Cycads are thought to have reached their apex of diversity during the Mesozoic. Although the Mesozoic is sometimes called the &quot;Age of Cycads,&quot; some other groups of extinct seed plants with similar foliage, such as Bennettitales and Nilssoniales, that are not closely related, may have been more abundant. The oldest records of the modern genus &quot;Cycas&quot; are from the Paleogene of East Asia. Fossils assignable to Zamiaceae are known from the Cretaceous, with fossils assignable to living genera of the family known from the Cenozoic.

==Distribution==

The living cycads are found across much of the subtropical and tropical parts of the world, with a few in temperate regions such as in Australia. The greatest diversity occurs in South and Central America. They are also found in Mexico, the Antilles, southeastern United States, Australia, Melanesia, Micronesia, Japan, China, Southeast Asia, Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Madagascar, and southern and tropical Africa, where at least 65 species occur. Some can survive in harsh desert or semi-desert climates (xerophytic), others in wet rain forest conditions, and some in both. Some can grow in sand or even on rock, some in oxygen-poor, swampy, bog-like soils rich in organic material. Some are able to grow in full sun, some in full shade, and some in both. Some are salt tolerant (halophytes).

Species diversity of the extant cycads peaks at 17˚ 15&quot;N and 28˚ 12&quot;S, with a minor peak at the equator. There is therefore not a latitudinal diversity gradient towards the equator but towards the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. However, the peak near the northern tropic is largely due to &quot;Cycas&quot; in Asia and &quot;Zamia&quot; in the New World, whereas the peak near the southern tropic is due to &quot;Cycas&quot; again, and also to the diverse genus &quot;Encephalartos&quot; in southern and central Africa, and &quot;Macrozamia&quot; in Australia. Thus, the distribution pattern of cycad species with latitude appears to be an artifact of the geographical isolation of the remaining cycad genera and their species, and perhaps because they are partly xerophytic rather than simply tropical.

==Cultural significance==
Nuts of the &quot;Cycas orientis&quot; (&quot;nyathu&quot;) are coveted by the Yolngu in Australia&#x27;s Arnhem Land as a source of food. They are harvested on their dry season to leach its poison under water overnight before ground into a paste, wrapped under bark and cooked on open fire until done. Roots of &quot;Zamia integrifolia&quot; were used by the Seminole and other native peoples to produce Florida arrowroot by a similar process.

In Vanuatu, the cycad is known as &quot;namele&quot; and is an important symbol of traditional culture. It serves as a powerful taboo sign, and a pair of &quot;namele&quot; leaves appears on the national flag and coat of arms. Together with the nanggaria plant, another symbol of Vanuatu culture, the &quot;namele&quot; also gives its name to Nagriamel, an indigenous political movement.

==See also==

* Fossil Cycad National Monument, now withdrawn, in the U.S. state of South Dakota&#x27;

==References==
==External links==

* Site with thousands of large, high quality photos of cycads and associated flora. Includes information on habitat and cultivation. (Site is dead.)
* 
* One of the largest collections of cycads in the world in Florida, U.S.A.
* 
* Cycad nitrogen fixation
* Magazine article on cycad collectorship and cycad smuggling.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="0" end="6" title="Cycad" label="Cycads"/>
<link wikidata="Q25814" start="11" end="21" title="seed plant" label="seed plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q757163" start="62" end="70" title="ligneous" label="ligneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q193472" start="72" end="77" title="trunk (botany)" label="trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138208" start="85" end="90" title="crown (botany)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="114" end="123" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="138" end="145" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="170" end="179" title="dioecious" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="430" end="435" title="Arecaceae" label="palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="439" end="443" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="545" end="556" title="gymnosperms" label="gymnosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="587" end="599" title="fertilization" label="unfertilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="655" end="666" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="687" end="698" title="angiosperms" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="801" end="811" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="844" end="850" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653441" start="892" end="900" title="strobilus" label="strobili"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="923" end="935" title="conifer cone" label="conifer cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="968" end="980" title="nitrogen fixation" label="fix nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="1009" end="1022" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q407752" start="1118" end="1128" title="neurotoxin" label="neurotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q72486653" start="1136" end="1140" title="BMAA" label="BMAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1162" end="1166" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="1421" end="1441" title="neurological disease" label="neurological disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="1570" end="1594" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1636" end="1640" title="Pseudomonas_protegens#Insecticidal_activity" label="fitD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="1941" end="1952" title="cylindrical" label="cylindrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="1982" end="1988" title="branch" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857581" start="2035" end="2050" title="Cycas zeylanica" label="Cycas zeylanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061675" start="2143" end="2152" title="cataphyll" label="cataphyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q753457" start="2282" end="2289" title="rosette (botany)" label="rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="2599" end="2606" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="2638" end="2644" title="pinnation" label="pinnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q887004" start="2814" end="2822" title="leaflet (botany)" label="leaflets"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2889" end="2895" title="Leaf margin" label="margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134570" start="2968" end="2975" title="Bowenia" label="Bowenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10262637" start="3026" end="3044" title="Cycas multipinnata" label="Cycas multipinnata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848073" start="3058" end="3072" title="Cycas micholitzii" label="C. micholitzii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10262611" start="3089" end="3102" title="Cycas debaoensis" label="C. debaoensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="3131" end="3140" title="bipinnate" label="bipinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q262372" start="3198" end="3214" title="Self-similar" label="in the same form"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="3366" end="3371" title="Arecaceae" label="palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="3482" end="3487" title="Phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="3565" end="3585" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="3728" end="3738" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="3783" end="3793" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546960" start="3936" end="3951" title="fiddlehead fern" label="fiddlehead fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="4108" end="4112" title="Plant stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030012" start="4233" end="4242" title="Helical symmetry" label="helically"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="4445" end="4453" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="4488" end="4497" title="Cycadales" label="Cycadales"/>
<link wikidata="Q161073" start="4511" end="4521" title="Cycadaceae" label="Cycadaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133329" start="4526" end="4535" title="Zamiaceae" label="Zamiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133329" start="4547" end="4560" title="Stangeriaceae" label="Stangeriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q978608" start="4702" end="4714" title="Medullosales" label="Medullosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q149461" start="4845" end="4851" title="Ginkgo" label="Ginkgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="4959" end="4972" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q161073" start="5111" end="5121" title="Cycadaceae" label="Cycadaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161073" start="5141" end="5146" title="Cycas" label="Cycas"/>
<link wikidata="Q133329" start="5189" end="5198" title="Zamiaceae" label="Zamiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q135605" start="5269" end="5274" title="Dioon" label="Dioon"/>
<link wikidata="Q138789" start="5358" end="5368" title="Macrozamia" label="Macrozamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q144423" start="5395" end="5406" title="Lepidozamia" label="Lepidozamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q947957" start="5433" end="5446" title="Encephalartos" label="Encephalartos"/>
<link wikidata="Q134570" start="5495" end="5502" title="Bowenia" label="Bowenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q135250" start="5529" end="5540" title="Ceratozamia" label="Ceratozamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150991" start="5567" end="5576" title="Stangeria" label="Stangeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134842" start="5603" end="5608" title="Zamia" label="Zamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057029" start="5635" end="5645" title="Microcycas" label="Microcycas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5730" end="5739" title="Amuriella" label="Amuriella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5803" end="5815" title="Androstrobus" label="Androstrobus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5882" end="5895" title="Antarcticycas" label="Antarcticycas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5968" end="5982" title="Anthrophyopsis" label="Anthrophyopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130372" start="6043" end="6063" title="Pteridospermatophyta" label="pteridospermatophyte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6073" end="6080" title="Apoldia" label="Apoldia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6121" end="6133" title="Archaeocycas" label="Archaeocycas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6193" end="6201" title="Aricycas" label="Aricycas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6257" end="6263" title="Beania (plant)" label="Beania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6370" end="6379" title="Behuninia" label="Behuninia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6451" end="6461" title="Bucklandia" label="Bucklandia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6548" end="6554" title="Bureja (genus)" label="Bureja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6591" end="6607" title="Cavamonocolpites" label="Cavamonocolpites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6656" end="6667" title="Crossozamia" label="Crossozamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60898408" start="6729" end="6735" title="Ctenis" label="Ctenis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6798" end="6810" title="Ctenozamites" label="Ctenozamites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6874" end="6883" title="Cycadenia" label="Cycadenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6930" end="6944" title="Cycadinorachis" label="Cycadinorachis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6989" end="7005" title="Fascisvarioxylon" label="Fascisvarioxylon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7058" end="7070" title="Gymnovulites" label="Gymnovulites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7137" end="7146" title="Heilungia" label="Heilungia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7235" end="7245" title="Leptocycas" label="Leptocycas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106795750" start="7331" end="7343" title="Mesosingeria" label="Mesosingeria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7434" end="7445" title="Michelilloa" label="Michelilloa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7494" end="7501" title="Nikania" label="Nikania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13806770" start="7560" end="7569" title="Nilssonia (plant)" label="Nilssonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7672" end="7687" title="Nilssoniocladus" label="Nilssoniocladus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="7811" end="7820" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7830" end="7841" title="Palaeozamia" label="Palaeozamia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7882" end="7891" title="Paracycas" label="Paracycas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7966" end="7979" title="Phasmatocycas" label="Phasmatocycas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8087" end="8100" title="Pleiotrichium" label="Pleiotrichium"/>
<link wikidata="Q105425015" start="8148" end="8160" title="Pseudoctenis" label="Pseudoctenis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8237" end="8248" title="Sarmatiella" label="Sarmatiella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8288" end="8299" title="Stangerites" label="Stangerites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8386" end="8392" title="Sueria" label="Sueria"/>
<link wikidata="Q125952779" start="8443" end="8455" title="Taeniopteris" label="Taeniopteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q178286" start="8565" end="8577" title="Marattiales" label="marattialean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8732" end="8743" title="Crossozamia" label="Crossozamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132823" start="9226" end="9239" title="Bennettitales" label="Bennettitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q13806770" start="9244" end="9256" title="Nilssonia (plant)" label="Nilssoniales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="9620" end="9631" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="9636" end="9644" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="9752" end="9757" title="South America" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="9762" end="9777" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="9802" end="9808" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q166131" start="9814" end="9822" title="Antilles" label="Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9837" end="9850" title="United States of America" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="9852" end="9861" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="9863" end="9872" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="9874" end="9884" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="9886" end="9891" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9893" end="9898" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="9900" end="9914" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="9916" end="9926" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9928" end="9933" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="9935" end="9944" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="9946" end="9956" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="9962" end="9970" title="Southern Africa" label="southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="9984" end="9990" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="10010" end="10017" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="10051" end="10057" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="10073" end="10080" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212337" start="10083" end="10093" title="xerophytic" label="xerophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="10110" end="10121" title="rain forest" label="rain forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="10169" end="10173" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="10185" end="10189" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="10220" end="10223" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="10243" end="10259" title="organic material" label="organic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="10343" end="10347" title="Sodium chloride" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q332788" start="10358" end="10367" title="halophyte" label="halophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="10478" end="10485" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496857" start="10512" end="10542" title="Latitudinal gradients in species diversity" label="latitudinal diversity gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="10579" end="10595" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="10604" end="10623" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q212337" start="11161" end="11171" title="xerophytic" label="xerophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="11191" end="11199" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q10262640" start="11246" end="11260" title="Cycas orientis" label="Cycas orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q374277" start="11307" end="11313" title="Yolngu" label="Yolngu"/>
<link wikidata="Q329884" start="11334" end="11345" title="Arnhem Land" label="Arnhem Land"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11395" end="11405" title="Indigenous Australian seasons#North coast – Yolngu seasons" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506489" start="11546" end="11564" title="Zamia integrifolia" label="Zamia integrifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="11588" end="11596" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461711" start="11633" end="11650" title="Florida arrowroot" label="Florida arrowroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="11677" end="11684" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="11802" end="11807" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185285" start="11869" end="11882" title="Flag of Vanuatu" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717614" start="11919" end="11928" title="Cordyline terminalis" label="nanggaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885221" start="12017" end="12026" title="Nagriamel" label="Nagriamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473462" start="12079" end="12109" title="Fossil Cycad National Monument" label="Fossil Cycad National Monument"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220458" wikidata="Q2334076" url="?curid=220458" title="Prime Minister of Norway">
<text>The prime minister of Norway (, which directly translates to &quot;minister of state&quot;) is the head of government and chief executive of Norway. The prime minister and Cabinet (consisting of all the most senior government department heads) are collectively accountable for their policies and actions to the monarch, to the Storting (Parliament of Norway), to their political party, and ultimately the electorate. In practice, since it is nearly impossible for a government to stay in office against the will of the Storting, the prime minister is primarily answerable to the Storting. The prime minister is almost always the leader of the majority party in the Storting, or the leader of the senior partner in the governing coalition.

Norway has a constitution, which was adopted on 17 May 1814. The position of prime minister is the result of legislation. Modern prime ministers have few statutory powers, but provided they can command the support of their parliamentary party. Prime ministers control both the legislature and the executive (the cabinet) and hence wield considerable &quot;de facto&quot; powers. the prime minister of Norway is Jonas Gahr Støre, of the Labour Party, replacing Erna Solberg of Conservative Party, who resigned in October 2021.

Unlike their counterparts in the rest of Europe, Norwegian prime ministers do not have the option of advising the king to dissolve the Storting and call a snap election. The constitution requires that the Storting serve out its full four-year term. If the prime minister loses the Storting&#x27;s confidence, they must resign.

==See also==
* List of heads of government of Norway
* Regjeringskvartalet

==References==
==External links==
*Government Official Homepage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="4" end="28" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="prime minister of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="99" end="117" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="122" end="137" title="chief executive" label="chief executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="141" end="147" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770421" start="172" end="179" title="Cabinet of Norway" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="261" end="272" title="Accountability#Political accountability" label="accountable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="311" end="318" title="Monarchy of Norway" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="327" end="358" title="Storting" label="Storting (Parliament of Norway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616040" start="369" end="384" title="List of political parties in Norway" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q642673" start="753" end="765" title="Constitution of Norway" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q467948" start="1151" end="1167" title="Jonas Gahr Støre" label="Jonas Gahr Støre"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="1176" end="1188" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q291644" start="1200" end="1212" title="Erna Solberg" label="Erna Solberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="1216" end="1234" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="1422" end="1435" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q815814" start="1610" end="1647" title="List of heads of government of Norway" label="List of heads of government of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512114" start="1650" end="1669" title="Regjeringskvartalet" label="Regjeringskvartalet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220459" wikidata="Q23663215" url="?curid=220459" title="South African">
<text>South African may relate to:

* The nation of South Africa
* South African Airways
* South African English
* South African people
* Languages of South Africa
* Southern Africa

==See also==
* 
* South Africa (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23663215" start="0" end="13" title="South African" label="South African"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="46" end="58" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223763" start="61" end="82" title="South African Airways" label="South African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="85" end="106" title="South African English" label="South African English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185967" start="109" end="129" title="South African people" label="South African people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454806" start="132" end="157" title="Languages of South Africa" label="Languages of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="160" end="175" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565363" start="195" end="224" title="South Africa (disambiguation)" label="South Africa (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220460" wikidata="Q297216" url="?curid=220460" title="Waxed paper">
<text>Waxed paper (also wax paper, waxpaper, or paraffin paper) is paper that has been made moisture-proof and grease-proof through the application of wax.

The practice of oiling parchment or paper in order to make it semi-translucent or moisture-proof goes back at least to the Middle Ages. Paper impregnated or coated with purified beeswax was widely used throughout the 19th century to retain or exclude moisture, or to wrap odorous products. Gustave Le Gray introduced the use of waxed paper for photographic negatives in 1851. Natural wax was largely replaced for the making of waxed paper (or paraffine paper) after Herman Frasch developed ways of purifying paraffin and coating paper with it in 1876. Waxed paper is commonly used in cooking for its non-stick properties, and wrapping food for storage, such as cookies, as it keeps water out or in. It is also used in arts and crafts.

==Food preparation==
Waxed paper is not recommended for baking use in an oven, as it will smoke. Parchment paper is better for this use.

In a microwave, waxed paper can be used to prevent splatters by covering the food when microwave cooking. Since the paper is mostly unaffected by microwaves, it will not heat to the point of combustion under normal usage. This makes waxed paper more functional than plastic wrap which will melt at higher temperatures, or aluminium foil, which is not safe for use in most microwave ovens.

==Other uses==
Safety razor blades are traditionally wrapped in waxed paper to make handling them less dangerous.

From the early 1950s to the mid-1990s, waxed paper was used as a common wrapping for sports card packages (O-Pee-Chee, Topps, Donruss, etc.). It was notorious for leaving wax markings on the back card where the waxed paper was heated to be sealed. Waxed paper was used as a way to keep the enclosed piece of bubble gum protected. In the mid-1990s, sports card manufacturers stopped including pieces of bubble gum in packs of sports cards, thus ending the need for waxed paper packs. Plastic (often, mylar) or other plastic/paper blends were used from then on.

A version of the paper, trademarked Waxtite, was used to protect early packages of Kellogg&#x27;s cereal.

Waxed paper is also commonly used to attach pattern pieces to fabric while cutting it for sewing. One presses an iron over the waxed paper briefly and attaches it to the cloth, making it easier to trace while cutting.

Waxed paper&#x27;s particularly high dielectric strength makes it a practical electrical insulator, although modern materials have surpassed and mostly replaced it. Common applications are coil winding separators and capacitor dielectrics, and other applications requiring resilience against a potential difference up to the order of a few thousand volts per layer.

In photography, waxed paper can be used as a light diffuser. Making waxed paper roses was a hobby among Sri Lankan women.

==Environmental issues==
There are multiple environmental issues concerned with waxed paper. Though it is biodegradable in its unaltered form, oft-applied additives such as petroleum rid it of that quality. Waxed paper also cannot be recycled.

==See also==
* Greaseproof paper
* Glassine
* Parchment
* Parchment paper (baking)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q297216" start="0" end="11" title="Waxed paper" label="Waxed paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q297216" start="18" end="27" title="Waxed paper" label="wax paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q297216" start="29" end="37" title="Waxed paper" label="waxpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q297216" start="42" end="56" title="Waxed paper" label="paraffin paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="61" end="66" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="145" end="148" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q226697" start="174" end="183" title="parchment" label="parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="274" end="285" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="329" end="336" title="beeswax" label="beeswax"/>
<link wikidata="Q982549" start="441" end="456" title="Gustave Le Gray" label="Gustave Le Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="495" end="516" title="photographic negative" label="photographic negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q77524" start="617" end="630" title="Herman Frasch" label="Herman Frasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q177540" start="659" end="667" title="Paraffin wax" label="paraffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="735" end="742" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266" start="812" end="818" title="cookie" label="cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="869" end="884" title="handicraft" label="arts and crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q798500" start="984" end="999" title="Parchment paper" label="Parchment paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="1112" end="1129" title="microwave cooking" label="microwave cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="1171" end="1181" title="microwaves" label="microwaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="1216" end="1226" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q356700" start="1291" end="1303" title="plastic wrap" label="plastic wrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q447349" start="1347" end="1361" title="aluminium foil" label="aluminium foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="1397" end="1411" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219606" start="1437" end="1449" title="safety razor" label="razor blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318753" start="1838" end="1848" title="bubble gum" label="bubble gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="2013" end="2020" title="Plastic" label="Plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q441961" start="2029" end="2034" title="mylar" label="mylar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197545" start="2045" end="2065" title="plastic-coated paper" label="plastic/paper blends"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975724" start="2127" end="2134" title="Waxtite" label="Waxtite"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="2174" end="2188" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q343241" start="2454" end="2473" title="dielectric strength" label="dielectric strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="2495" end="2515" title="electrical insulator" label="electrical insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="2634" end="2643" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="2787" end="2798" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939557" start="2852" end="2869" title="waxed paper roses" label="waxed paper roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="2888" end="2897" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q970275" start="3167" end="3184" title="Greaseproof paper" label="Greaseproof paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515155" start="3187" end="3195" title="Glassine" label="Glassine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3198" end="3207" title="Parchment#Plant-based parchment" label="Parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q798500" start="3210" end="3234" title="Parchment paper (baking)" label="Parchment paper (baking)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220464" wikidata="Q1054722" url="?curid=220464" title="Polishing">
<text>Polishing is the process of creating a smooth and shiny surface by rubbing it or by applying a chemical treatment, leaving a clean surface with a significant specular reflection (still limited by the index of refraction of the material according to the Fresnel equations). In some materials (such as metals, glasses, black or transparent stones), polishing is also able to reduce diffuse reflection to minimal values.

When an unpolished surface is magnified thousands of times, it usually looks like a succession of mountains and valleys. By repeated abrasion, those &quot;mountains&quot; are worn down until they are flat or just small &quot;hills&quot;. The process of polishing with abrasives starts with a coarse grain size and gradually proceeds to the finer ones to efficiently flatten the surface imperfections and to obtain optimal results.

==Mechanical properties==
The strength of polished products can be higher than their unpolished counterparts owing to the removal of stress concentrations present in the rough surface during the polishing process. These concentrations take the form of corners and other defects, which magnify the local stress beyond the inherent strength of the material.

==Types==
===Metal Working===
Other polishing processes include:
* Burnishing
* Mass finishing
**Tumble finishing
**Vibratory finishing
* Sodablasting

===Woodworking===
* French polishing
* Wood finishing

===Other===
* Chemical-mechanical polishing, which is used in semiconductor fabrication
* Fabrication and testing of optical components
* Flame polishing, a type of polishing used on glass and thermoplastics
* Ultra-fine, abrasive paste polishing, polishing for soft or fragile work surfaces
* Vapor polishing, a method of polishing plastics to optical clarity

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1054722" start="0" end="9" title="Polishing" label="Polishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079524" start="158" end="177" title="specular reflection" label="specular reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="200" end="219" title="index of refraction" label="index of refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q838055" start="253" end="270" title="Fresnel equations" label="Fresnel equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154504" start="380" end="398" title="diffuse reflection" label="diffuse reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q372301" start="687" end="695" title="abrasive" label="abrasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q466491" start="718" end="728" title="grain size" label="grain size"/>
<link wikidata="Q542690" start="984" end="1004" title="stress concentration" label="stress concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529936" start="1275" end="1285" title="Burnishing (metal)" label="Burnishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784038" start="1288" end="1302" title="Mass finishing" label="Mass finishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q925936" start="1305" end="1321" title="Tumble finishing" label="Tumble finishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530642" start="1324" end="1343" title="Vibratory finishing" label="Vibratory finishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553210" start="1346" end="1358" title="Sodablasting" label="Sodablasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040889" start="1380" end="1396" title="French polishing" label="French polishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172976" start="1399" end="1413" title="Wood finishing" label="Wood finishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069404" start="1429" end="1458" title="Chemical-mechanical polishing" label="Chemical-mechanical polishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428142" start="1505" end="1550" title="Fabrication and testing of optical components" label="Fabrication and testing of optical components"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457174" start="1553" end="1568" title="Flame polishing" label="Flame polishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915333" start="1709" end="1724" title="Vapor polishing" label="Vapor polishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220465" wikidata="Q752800" url="?curid=220465" title="Asystole">
<text>Asystole (New Latin, from Greek privative a &quot;not, without&quot; + &quot;systolē&quot; &quot;contraction&quot;) is the absence of ventricular contractions in the context of a lethal heart arrhythmia (in contrast to an induced asystole on a cooled patient on a heart-lung machine and general anesthesia during surgery necessitating stopping the heart). Asystole is the most serious form of cardiac arrest and is usually irreversible. Also referred to as cardiac flatline, asystole is the state of total cessation of electrical activity from the heart, which means no tissue contraction from the heart muscle and therefore no blood flow to the rest of the body.

Asystole should not be confused with very brief pauses below 3 seconds in the heart&#x27;s electrical activity that can occur in certain less severe abnormal rhythms. Asystole is different from very fine occurrences of ventricular fibrillation, though both have a poor prognosis, and untreated fine VF will lead to asystole. Faulty wiring, disconnection of electrodes and leads, and power disruptions should be ruled out.

Asystolic patients (as opposed to those with a &quot;shockable rhythm&quot; such as coarse or fine ventricular fibrillation, or unstable ventricular tachycardia that is not producing a pulse, which can potentially be treated with defibrillation) usually present with a very poor prognosis. Asystole is found initially in only about 28% of cardiac arrest cases in hospitalized patients, but only 15% of these survive, even with the benefit of an intensive care unit, with the rate being lower (6%) for those already prescribed drugs for high blood pressure.

Asystole is treated by cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) combined with an intravenous vasopressor such as epinephrine (a.k.a. adrenaline). Sometimes an underlying reversible cause can be detected and treated (the so-called &quot;Hs and Ts&quot;, an example of which is hypokalaemia). Several interventions previously recommended—such as defibrillation (known to be ineffective on asystole, but previously performed in case the rhythm was actually very fine ventricular fibrillation) and intravenous atropine—are no longer part of the routine protocols recommended by most major international bodies. 1 mg epinephrine by IV every 3–5 minutes is given for asystole.

Survival rates in a cardiac arrest patient with asystole are much lower than a patient with a rhythm amenable to defibrillation; asystole is itself not a &quot;shockable&quot; rhythm. Even in those cases where an individual suffers a cardiac arrest with asystole and it is converted to a less severe shockable rhythm (ventricular fibrillation, or ventricular tachycardia), this does not necessarily improve the person&#x27;s chances of survival to discharge from the hospital, though if the case was witnessed by a civilian, or better, a paramedic, who gave good CPR and cardiac drugs, this is an important confounding factor to be considered in certain select cases. Out-of-hospital survival rates (even with emergency intervention) are less than 2 percent.

==Cause==
Possible underlying causes, which may be treatable and reversible in certain cases, include the Hs and Ts.
* Hypovolemia
* Hypoxia
* Hydrogen ions (acidosis)
* Hypothermia
* Hyperkalemia or hypokalemia
* Toxins (e.g. drug overdose)
* Cardiac tamponade
* Tension pneumothorax
* Thrombosis (myocardial infarction or pulmonary embolism)

While the heart is asystolic, there is no blood flow to the brain unless CPR or internal cardiac massage (when the chest is opened and the heart is manually compressed) is performed, and even then it is a small amount. After many emergency treatments have been applied but the heart is still unresponsive, it is time to consider pronouncing the patient dead. Even in the rare case that a rhythm reappears, if asystole has persisted for fifteen minutes or more, the brain will have been deprived of oxygen long enough to cause severe hypoxic brain damage, resulting in brain death or persistent vegetative state.
==See also==
* Agonal heart rhythm
* Ictal asystole

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q752800" start="0" end="8" title="Asystole" label="Asystole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933398" start="32" end="43" title="privative a" label="privative a"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="186" end="202" title="heart arrhythmia" label="heart arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q552304" start="264" end="282" title="heart-lung machine" label="heart-lung machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="287" end="305" title="general anesthesia" label="general anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="393" end="407" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q752800" start="457" end="473" title="Asystole" label="cardiac flatline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="548" end="553" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q848662" start="884" end="908" title="ventricular fibrillation" label="ventricular fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q56002" start="1225" end="1248" title="ventricular tachycardia" label="ventricular tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="1318" end="1332" title="defibrillation" label="defibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="1533" end="1552" title="intensive care unit" label="intensive care unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511166" start="1624" end="1643" title="vasopressor" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="1669" end="1698" title="cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="cardiopulmonary resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511166" start="1734" end="1745" title="vasopressor" label="vasopressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="1754" end="1765" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5924120" start="1877" end="1886" title="Hs and Ts" label="Hs and Ts"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="1917" end="1929" title="hypokalaemia" label="hypokalaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="2147" end="2155" title="atropine" label="atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5924120" start="3179" end="3188" title="Hs and Ts" label="Hs and Ts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320276" start="3192" end="3203" title="Hypovolemia" label="Hypovolemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="3206" end="3213" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="Hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="3216" end="3224" title="Hydrogen" label="Hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185089" start="3231" end="3239" title="acidosis" label="acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="3243" end="3254" title="Hypothermia" label="Hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="3257" end="3269" title="Hyperkalemia" label="Hyperkalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="3273" end="3284" title="hypokalemia" label="hypokalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="3287" end="3292" title="Toxin" label="Toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="3300" end="3313" title="drug overdose" label="drug overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q929313" start="3317" end="3334" title="Cardiac tamponade" label="Cardiac tamponade"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="3337" end="3357" title="Tension pneumothorax" label="Tension pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q261327" start="3360" end="3370" title="Thrombosis" label="Thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="3372" end="3393" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="3397" end="3415" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="3491" end="3494" title="Cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="CPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="3498" end="3522" title="internal cardiac massage" label="internal cardiac massage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="3771" end="3775" title="dead" label="dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249526" start="3951" end="3958" title="cerebral hypoxia" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="3959" end="3971" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q223867" start="3986" end="3997" title="brain death" label="brain death"/>
<link wikidata="Q139720" start="4001" end="4028" title="persistent vegetative state" label="persistent vegetative state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11849882" start="4045" end="4064" title="Agonal heart rhythm" label="Agonal heart rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986769" start="4067" end="4081" title="Ictal asystole" label="Ictal asystole"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220466" wikidata="Q1810587" url="?curid=220466" title="U.S. list of most-wanted Iraqis">
<text>In April 2003, the United States drew up a list of most-wanted Iraqis, consisting of the 55 members of the deposed Ba&#x27;athist Iraqi regime whom they most wanted to capture. The list was turned into a set of playing cards for distribution to United States-led Coalition troops. Later, in 2003, the list was renumbered so that it mostly conformed to the order of the playing cards (see most-wanted Iraqi playing cards).

== List ==
* Total 55
* Dead: 33
* Imprisoned: 4
* Released: 14
* At large: 4

== See also ==

* 2003 invasion of Iraq
* Iraqi insurgency (2003–2011)
* 2003 Iraq war timeline
* High-value target
* Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards
* Torture and murder in Iraq
*USA kill or capture strategy in Iraq
*Joint Special Operations Command Task Force in the Iraq War

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Personality Identification Playing Cards&quot; - a U.S. Department of Defense page showing the most wanted Iraqi playing cards
* &quot;&#x27;Chemical Ali&#x27; sentenced to death in Iraq&quot; - news article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="19" end="32" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810587" start="43" end="69" title="U.S. list of most-wanted Iraqis" label="list of most-wanted Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108185" start="115" end="142" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraq" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraqi regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q47883" start="211" end="223" title="playing card" label="playing card"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="245" end="279" title="Multi-National Force – Iraq" label="United States-led Coalition troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123232" start="388" end="419" title="most-wanted Iraqi playing cards" label="most-wanted Iraqi playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="520" end="541" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="544" end="572" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–2011)" label="Iraqi insurgency (2003–2011)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806247" start="575" end="597" title="2003 Iraq war timeline" label="2003 Iraq war timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617698" start="600" end="617" title="High-value target" label="High-value target"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123232" start="620" end="651" title="Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards" label="Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845450" start="654" end="680" title="Torture and murder in Iraq" label="Torture and murder in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865882" start="682" end="718" title="U.S. kill or capture strategy in Iraq" label="USA kill or capture strategy in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687297" start="720" end="779" title="Joint Special Operations Command Task Force in the Iraq War" label="Joint Special Operations Command Task Force in the Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="874" end="900" title="United States Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220469" wikidata="Q5468030" url="?curid=220469" title="Ford v Quebec (AG)">
<text>Ford v Quebec (AG), [1988] 2 SCR 712 is a landmark Supreme Court of Canada decision in which the Court struck down part of the &quot;Charter of the French Language&quot;, commonly known as &quot;Bill 101&quot;. This law had prohibited the use of commercial signs written in languages other than French and required businesses to use only the French versions of their names. The court ruled that Bill 101 violated the freedom of expression as guaranteed in the &quot;Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms&quot;.

==Background==
The appeal, launched by the government of Quebec, consolidated many cases initiated by Montreal-area merchants such as Montreal florist Hyman Singer and West Island wool shop owner Valerie Ford. Following complaints, the Office québécois de la langue française had instructed them to inform and serve their customers in French and replace their bilingual French and English signs with unilingual French ones. They had been fined for violation of the &quot;Charter of the French Language&quot; and decided to fight the case in court with the backing of Alliance Quebec. The Supreme Court of Canada upheld the decisions of the Quebec Superior Court and the Quebec Court of Appeal.

==Aftermath==
In late 1989, shortly after the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision, Premier of Quebec Robert Bourassa&#x27;s Liberal Party of Quebec government passed Bill 178, making minor amendments to the &quot;Charter of the French Language&quot;. Recognizing that the amendments did not follow the Supreme Court&#x27;s ruling, the provincial legislature invoked section 33 of the &quot;Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms&quot; (also known as the notwithstanding clause) to shield Bill 178 from review by courts for five years.

This move was politically controversial, both among Quebec nationalists, who were unhappy with the changes to the &quot;Charter of the French Language&quot;; and among English-speaking Quebecers, who opposed the use of the notwithstanding clause. Tension over this issue was a contributing factor to the failure of the Meech Lake Accord, among other political repercussions.

The law was challenged under International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Human Rights Committee found a violation of article 19 which guarantees right to opinion and freedom of expression. The State was ordered to remedy the violation by an amendment to the law. 

In 1993, the &quot;Charter of the French Language&quot; was amended in the manner suggested by the Supreme Court of Canada. Bill 86 was enacted by the Bourassa government to amend the &quot;Charter&quot;. It now states that French must be predominant on commercial signs, but a language other than French may also be used. Accordingly, the law no longer invokes the notwithstanding clause.

==See also==
* List of Supreme Court of Canada cases (Dickson Court)
* Demolinguistics of Quebec

==References==
==External links==
*Charter of the French language
* Article critical of the decision &quot;The implications of accommodation&quot;, Policy Options, May 1990</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="51" end="74" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067781" start="133" end="163" title="Charter of the French Language" label="Charter of the French Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067781" start="195" end="203" title="Bill 101" label="Bill 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="295" end="301" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="417" end="438" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="466" end="505" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="571" end="577" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="616" end="624" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564277" start="682" end="693" title="West Island" label="West Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578454" start="750" end="789" title="Office québécois de la langue française" label="Office québécois de la langue française"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="884" end="890" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="895" end="902" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067781" start="985" end="1015" title="Charter of the French Language" label="Charter of the French Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838006" start="1081" end="1096" title="Alliance Quebec" label="Alliance Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="1102" end="1125" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001124" start="1154" end="1175" title="Quebec Superior Court" label="Quebec Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000989" start="1184" end="1206" title="Quebec Court of Appeal" label="Quebec Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="1286" end="1303" title="Premier of Quebec" label="Premier of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q650980" start="1304" end="1319" title="Robert Bourassa" label="Robert Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631384" start="1327" end="1350" title="Liberal Party of Quebec" label="Liberal Party of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258112" start="1369" end="1377" title="Bill 178" label="Bill 178"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865565" start="1569" end="1579" title="Section Thirty-three of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="section 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="1593" end="1632" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865565" start="1658" end="1680" title="notwithstanding clause" label="notwithstanding clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141508" start="1792" end="1811" title="Quebec nationalism" label="Quebec nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388245" start="1908" end="1933" title="English-speaking Quebecer" label="English-speaking Quebecer"/>
<link wikidata="Q835352" start="2059" end="2076" title="Meech Lake Accord" label="Meech Lake Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258127" start="2519" end="2526" title="Bill 86" label="Bill 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598719" start="2801" end="2854" title="List of Supreme Court of Canada cases (Dickson Court)" label="List of Supreme Court of Canada cases (Dickson Court)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044425" start="2857" end="2882" title="Demolinguistics of Quebec" label="Demolinguistics of Quebec"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220475" wikidata="Q368716" url="?curid=220475" title="Historical regions in present-day Ukraine">
<text>This is a list of historical regions in present-day Ukraine.

==Main historical regions==
== Traditional regions ==
The traditional names of the regions of Ukraine are important geographic, historical, and ethnographic identifiers.
* Over-Dnieper Ukraine, or Great Ukraine
** Land of Kyiv
*** Right-bank Ukraine (east of Zhytomyr Oblast, Kyiv Oblast, Cherkasy Oblast), Central Ukraine
*** Polesia, Land of Turov (north of Kyiv Oblast, east of Brest Oblast, west of Gomel Oblast), Northern Ukraine
** Land of Pereyaslav (predominantly Poltava Oblast and east of Kyiv Oblast), southern part of Left-bank Ukraine, Little Russia, Central Ukraine
** Land of Chernihiv (predominantly Chernihiv Oblast, west of Bryansk Oblast, east of Gomel Oblast), northern part of Left-bank Ukraine, Little Russia, Northern Ukraine
** Severia (Sumy Oblast, Kharkiv Oblast, Kursk Oblast, Belgorod Oblast)
** Sloboda Ukraine (mostly Kharkiv Oblast)
* Ruthenia, Kingdom of Rus, Western Ukraine, Western Oblast, Lesser Poland
** Volhynia (Volyn Oblast, Rivne Oblast, west of Zhytomyr Oblast, north of Ternopil Oblast, north of Khmelnytsky Oblast), former principality
** Chełm, Belz, San River, Przemyśl (east of Podkarpackie Voivodeship and Lublin Voivodeship), former principality and a constituent land of Ruthenia
** Berestia (west of Brest Oblast, south of Podlaskie Voivodeship)
** Galicia (Lviv Oblast, Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast, Ternopil Oblast)
***Red Ruthenia
*** Prykarpattia (Boikos and Lemkos, collectively Rusyns)
*** Pokuttia (Hutsuls)
* Podolia (Khmelnytsky Oblast, Vinnytsia Oblast, north of Odesa Oblast, west of Kirovohrad Oblast), Lesser Poland
* Zaporizhzhia (Dnipropetrovsk Oblast, east of Kirovohrad Oblast), New Serbia, Central Ukraine
* Pontic steppe, Wild Fields, New Russia
** Donbas (&quot;Donets Basin&quot;) (Donetsk Oblast, Luhanks Oblast), also known as Cuman Land, Slavo-Serbia, Eastern Ukraine
** Azov Littoral (Zaporizhzhia Oblast, south of Donetsk Oblast, southwest of Rostov Oblast)
** Black Sea Littoral, Southern Ukraine
*** Over-Buh, Yedisan, Transnistria (Odesa Oblast, Mykolaiv Oblast)
*** Bugeac (Budzhak/Bujak) (southwest of Odesa Oblast)
*** Tavria (Kherson Oblast)
* Crimea (&quot;Krym&quot;), also known as Tavria, Taurida
* Transcarpathia / Carpathian Ruthenia, Subcarpathian Rus, Carpatho-Ukraine and many others
** Maramureș
* Northern Bukovina (Chernivtsi Oblast)

==Contemporary regions==
Geopolitical, historical, and cultural factors play a role in assigning different areas of Ukraine to semi-official regions. The map on the right shows the approximate locations of some broad-brush regions. The terms &quot;Central Ukraine&quot;, &quot;Eastern Ukraine&quot;, &quot;Southern Ukraine&quot;, and &quot;Western Ukraine&quot; occur in common usage. There is no clear definition of the boundaries of such regions, but rather a general reference. Lists of what may constitute such regions might include:

* Central Ukraine, a more vague term, often denotes what is not included in Western or South-Eastern definitions.
* Eastern Ukraine may mean either the Don basin, Sloboda Ukraine, continental Taurida regions etc.
* Southern Ukraine often includes the whole Taurida, the Kryvyi Rih basin, and the regions of Mykolayiv and Odesa oblasts. Alternatively it may include the Don basin, in particularly the adjacent land to the Azov Sea.
* Western Ukraine may mean either the historic region of Galicia, or may also include Volhynia, Podolia, Transcarpathia, and/or Bukovina.

Other terms are rarely used – such as &quot;South-western Ukraine&quot;, which can denote either Transcarpathia, or Budjak. Sometimes the term &quot;South-eastern Ukraine&quot; is used to define both regions of the Southern and Eastern Ukraine. Due to the shape of the country, in narrow definition, term &quot;Northern Ukraine&quot; is often used to denote either the bulge of Chernihiv/Sumy oblasts or, in broader terms, the whole of Polesia. &quot;North-western Ukraine&quot; almost exclusively refers to the historic region of Volhynia. This makes the term &quot;North-eastern Ukraine&quot; rarest of them all – it is either used as synonym for the narrow definition of Northern Ukraine, or as synonym for Sloboda Ukraine (particularly Sumy Oblast).

== Historical states ==
* Kievan Rus (a state of Early East Slavs), (879–1240)
* Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia (1199–1349)
* Cossack Hetmanate (1649–1764)
* Central Rada of the Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic (1917–1918)
* Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic of Soviets (1917–1918)
* Odesa Soviet Republic (1918)
* Donetsk–Krivoy Rog Soviet Republic (1918)
* Ukrainian Soviet Republic (1918)
* Hetmanate of the Ukrainian State (1918)
* West Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic (1918–1919)
* Kholodny Yar Republic (1919-1922)
* Directorate of the Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic (1918–1920)
* Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (1919–1991)
* Galician Soviet Socialist Republic (1920)
* Carpatho-Ukraine (1938–1939)
* Ukrainian national government (1941)
* Reichskommissariat Ukraine (1941-1944)
* Ukraine (1991–present)

==See also==

* Geography of Ukraine
* ISO 3166-2:UA
* List of places named after people (Ukraine)

== References ==

* Paul Robert Magosci, &quot;Ukraine: A Historical Atlas&quot;, 1985. University of Toronto Press, Toronto. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="52" end="59" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322328" start="234" end="246" title="Dnieper Ukraine" label="Over-Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322328" start="259" end="272" title="Great Ukraine" label="Great Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q842604" start="293" end="311" title="Right-bank Ukraine" label="Right-bank Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208987" start="389" end="396" title="Polesia" label="Polesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068981" start="592" end="609" title="Left-bank Ukraine" label="Left-bank Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068981" start="760" end="777" title="Left-bank Ukraine" label="Left-bank Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481850" start="814" end="821" title="Severia" label="Severia"/>
<link wikidata="Q598570" start="886" end="901" title="Sloboda Ukraine" label="Sloboda Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="1004" end="1012" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q234184" start="1146" end="1151" title="Chełm" label="Chełm"/>
<link wikidata="Q156565" start="1153" end="1157" title="Belz" label="Belz"/>
<link wikidata="Q216488" start="1159" end="1168" title="San River" label="San River"/>
<link wikidata="Q208473" start="1170" end="1178" title="Przemyśl" label="Przemyśl"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="1363" end="1370" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q616206" start="1429" end="1441" title="Red Ruthenia" label="Red Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084170" start="1446" end="1458" title="Prykarpattia" label="Prykarpattia"/>
<link wikidata="Q891187" start="1460" end="1465" title="Boiko" label="Boiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q837881" start="1471" end="1476" title="Lemko" label="Lemko"/>
<link wikidata="Q140420" start="1492" end="1498" title="Rusyns" label="Rusyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312454" start="1504" end="1512" title="Pokuttia" label="Pokuttia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828398" start="1514" end="1520" title="Hutsul" label="Hutsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q191607" start="1525" end="1532" title="Podolia" label="Podolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341483" start="1639" end="1651" title="Zaporizhzhia (region)" label="Zaporizhzhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281856" start="1704" end="1714" title="New Serbia (historical province)" label="New Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672600" start="1749" end="1760" title="Wild Fields" label="Wild Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q605714" start="1776" end="1782" title="Donbas" label="Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q377414" start="1870" end="1882" title="Slavo-Serbia" label="Slavo-Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1995" end="2013" title="Black Sea Littoral" label="Black Sea Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q214662" start="2104" end="2110" title="Budjak" label="Bugeac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="2185" end="2191" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629621" start="2234" end="2241" title="Taurida" label="Taurida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148511" start="2244" end="2280" title="Carpathian Ruthenia" label="Transcarpathia / Carpathian Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950644" start="2301" end="2317" title="Carpatho-Ukraine" label="Carpatho-Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975458" start="2337" end="2346" title="Maramureș" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="2358" end="2366" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502431" start="2929" end="2944" title="Central Ukraine" label="Central Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181386" start="3043" end="3058" title="Eastern Ukraine" label="Eastern Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641546" start="3142" end="3158" title="Southern Ukraine" label="Southern Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729457" start="3360" end="3375" title="Western Ukraine" label="Western Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148511" start="3594" end="3608" title="Carpathian Ruthenia" label="Transcarpathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214662" start="3613" end="3619" title="Budjak" label="Budjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q167874" start="3875" end="3884" title="Chernihiv Oblast" label="Chernihiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q170446" start="3885" end="3889" title="Sumy Oblast" label="Sumy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208987" start="3933" end="3940" title="Polesia" label="Polesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="4028" end="4036" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q598570" start="4207" end="4222" title="Sloboda Ukraine" label="Sloboda Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170446" start="4237" end="4248" title="Sumy Oblast" label="Sumy Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="4278" end="4288" title="Kievan Rus" label="Kievan Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="4301" end="4317" title="Early East Slavs" label="Early East Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q239502" start="4333" end="4360" title="Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia" label="Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212439" start="4375" end="4392" title="Cossack Hetmanate" label="Cossack Hetmanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190704" start="4407" end="4419" title="Central Rada" label="Central Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q243610" start="4427" end="4459" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381337" start="4474" end="4517" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Soviets" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078820" start="4532" end="4553" title="Odesa Soviet Republic" label="Odesa Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61427" start="4563" end="4597" title="Donetsk–Krivoy Rog Soviet Republic" label="Donetsk–Krivoy Rog Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470459" start="4607" end="4632" title="Ukrainian Soviet Republic" label="Ukrainian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508143" start="4642" end="4674" title="Ukrainian State" label="Hetmanate of the Ukrainian State"/>
<link wikidata="Q457167" start="4684" end="4721" title="West Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="West Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167518" start="4736" end="4757" title="Kholodny Yar Republic" label="Kholodny Yar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599614" start="4772" end="4783" title="Directorate of Ukraine" label="Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="4838" end="4873" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61385" start="4888" end="4922" title="Galician Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Galician Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q950644" start="4932" end="4948" title="Carpatho-Ukraine" label="Carpatho-Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470663" start="4963" end="4992" title="Ukrainian national government (1941)" label="Ukrainian national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q46315" start="5002" end="5028" title="Reichskommissariat Ukraine" label="Reichskommissariat Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="5043" end="5050" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q277597" start="5083" end="5103" title="Geography of Ukraine" label="Geography of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5106" end="5119" title="ISO 3166-2:UA" label="ISO 3166-2:UA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5122" end="5165" title="List of places named after people#Ukraine" label="List of places named after people (Ukraine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="5255" end="5276" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220477" wikidata="Q110436" url="?curid=220477" title="Cory Doctorow">
<text>Cory Efram Doctorow (; born 17 July 1971) is a Canadian-British blogger, journalist, and science fiction author who served as co-editor of the blog &quot;Boing Boing&quot;. He is an activist in favour of liberalising copyright laws and a proponent of the Creative Commons organization, using some of its licences for his books. Some common themes of his work include digital rights management, file sharing, and post-scarcity economics.

==Life and career==
Cory Efram Doctorow was born in Toronto, Ontario, on 17 July 1971. He is of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. His paternal grandfather was born in what is now Poland and his paternal grandmother was from Leningrad, Russia. Both fled Nazi Germany&#x27;s advance eastward during World War II, and as a result Doctorow&#x27;s father was born in a displaced persons camp near Baku, Azerbaijan. His grandparents and father emigrated to Canada from the Soviet Union. Doctorow&#x27;s mother&#x27;s family were Ukrainian-Russian Romanians.

Doctorow is a friend of Columbia law professor Tim Wu, dating to their time together to elementary school. Doctorow went to summer camp as a young teenager at what he has described as a &quot;hippy summer camp&quot; at Grindstone Island, near Portland, Ontario, that was influential on his intellectual life and development. He quit high school, received his Ontario Academic Credit (high school diploma) from the SEED School in Toronto, and attended four universities without obtaining a degree.

Cory Doctorow has stated both that he is not related to the American novelist E. L. Doctorow, and that he may be a third cousin once removed of the novelist. Thomas Rankin in &quot;Guide to Literary Masters &amp; Their Works&quot; (2007) describes Doctorow as &quot;a distant cousin of author E.L. Doctorow&quot;.

In June 1999, Doctorow co-founded the free software P2P company Opencola with John Henson and Grad Conn, which was sold to the Open Text Corporation of Waterloo, Ontario, in the summer of 2003. The company used a drink called OpenCola as part of its promotional campaign.
Doctorow later relocated to London and worked as European Affairs Coordinator for the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) for four years, helping to establish the Open Rights Group, before leaving the EFF to pursue writing full-time in January 2006; Doctorow remained a Fellow of the EFF for some time after his departure from the EFF Staff. He was named the 2006–2007 Canadian Fulbright Chair for Public Diplomacy at the USC Center on Public Diplomacy, sponsored jointly by the Royal Fulbright Commission, the Integrated Media Systems Center, and the University of Southern California (USC) Center on Public Diplomacy. The professorship included a one-year writing and teaching residency at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles, United States. He then returned to London, but remained a frequent public speaker on copyright issues.

In 2009, Doctorow became the first Independent Studies Scholar in Virtual Residence at the University of Waterloo in Ontario. He was a student in the program during 1993–94, but left without completing a thesis. Doctorow was also a visiting professor at the Open University in the United Kingdom from September 2009 to August 2010. In 2012 he was awarded an honorary doctorate from The Open University.

Doctorow married Alice Taylor in October 2008; they have a daughter named Poesy Emmeline Fibonacci Nautilus Taylor Doctorow, who was born in 2008. Doctorow became a British citizen by naturalisation on 12 August 2011.

In 2015, Doctorow decided to leave London and move to Los Angeles, expressing disappointment at London&#x27;s &quot;death&quot; after Britain&#x27;s choice of Conservative government; he stated at the time, &quot;London is a city whose two priorities are being a playground for corrupt global elites who turn neighbourhoods into soulless collections of empty safe-deposit boxes in the sky, and encouraging the feckless criminality of the finance industry. These two facts are not unrelated.&quot; He rejoined the EFF in January 2015 to campaign for the eradication of digital rights management (DRM).

Doctorow left &quot;Boing Boing&quot; in January 2020, and soon started a solo blogging project titled &quot;Pluralistic&quot;. The circumstances surrounding Doctorow&#x27;s exit from the website were unclear at the time, although Doctorow acknowledged that he remained a co-owner of &quot;Boing Boing&quot;. Given the end of the 19-year association between Doctorow and &quot;Boing Boing&quot;, MetaFilter described this news as &quot;the equivalent of the Beatles breaking up&quot; for the blog world. Doctorow&#x27;s exit was not acknowledged by Boing Boing, with his name being quietly removed from the list of editors on 29 January 2020.

===Other work, activism, and fellowships===
Doctorow served as Canadian Regional Director of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America in 1999.

In 2007, together with Austrian art group monochrom, he initiated the &quot;Instant Blitz Copy Fight&quot; project, which asks people from all over the world to take flash pictures of copyright warnings in movie theaters.

On 31 October 2005, Doctorow was involved in a controversy concerning digital rights management with Sony-BMG, as told in &quot;Wikinomics&quot;, a book by Don Tapscott and Anthony D. Williams.

As a user of the Tor anonymity network for more than a decade during his global travels, Doctorow publicly supports the network; furthermore, Boing Boing operates a &quot;high speed, high-quality exit node.&quot;

Doctorow was the keynote speaker at the July 2016 Hackers on Planet Earth conference. He also presented on enshittification at the 2024 conference, HOPE XV.

He is a member of the Democratic Socialists of America.

==Fiction==

Doctorow began selling fiction when he was 17 years old, and sold several stories, followed by publication of the story &quot;Craphound&quot; in 1998.

&quot;Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom&quot;, Doctorow&#x27;s first novel, was published in January 2003, and was the first novel released under one of the Creative Commons licences, allowing readers to circulate the electronic edition as long as they neither made money from it nor used it to create derived works. The electronic edition was released simultaneously with the print edition. In February 2004, it was re-released with a different Creative Commons license that allowed derivative works such as fan fiction, but still prohibited commercial usage.

&quot;Down and Out...&quot; was nominated for a Nebula Award, and won the Locus Award for Best First Novel in 2004. A semi-sequel short story named &quot;Truncat&quot; was published on Salon.com in August 2003.

His novel &quot;Someone Comes to Town, Someone Leaves Town,&quot; published in June 2005, was chosen to launch the Sci-Fi Channel&#x27;s book club, Sci-Fi Essentials (now defunct).

Doctorow&#x27;s other novels have been released with Creative Commons licences that allow derived works and prohibit commercial usage, and he has used the model of making digital versions available, without charge, at the same time that print versions are published.

His Sunburst Award-winning short-story collection &quot;A Place So Foreign and Eight More&quot; was also published in 2004: &quot;0wnz0red&quot; from this collection was nominated for the 2004 Nebula Award for Best Novelette.

Doctorow released the bestselling novel &quot;Little Brother&quot; in 2008 with a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike licence. It was nominated for a Hugo Award for Best Novel in 2009, and won the 2009 Prometheus Award, Sunburst Award, and the 2009 John W. Campbell Memorial Award.

His novel &quot;Makers&quot; was released in October 2009, and was serialised for free on the Tor Books website.

Doctorow released another young adult novel, &quot;For the Win&quot;, in May 2010. The novel is available free on the author&#x27;s website as a Creative Commons download, and is also published in traditional paper format by Tor Books. The book is about &quot;greenfarming&quot;, and concerns massively multiplayer online role-playing games.

Doctorow&#x27;s short-story collection &quot;With a Little Help&quot; was released in printed format on 3 May 2011. It is a project to demonstrate the profitability of Doctorow&#x27;s method of releasing his books in print and subsequently for free under Creative Commons.

In September 2012, Doctorow released &quot;The Rapture of the Nerds&quot;, a novel written in collaboration with Charles Stross.

Doctorow&#x27;s young adult novel &quot;Pirate Cinema&quot; was released in October 2012. It won the 2013 Prometheus Award.

In February 2013, Doctorow released &quot;Homeland&quot;, the sequel to his novel &quot;Little Brother&quot;. It won the 2014 Prometheus Award (Doctorow&#x27;s third novel to win this award).

His novel &quot;Walkaway&quot; was released in 2017.

In March 2019, Doctorow released &quot;Radicalized&quot;, a collection of four self-contained science-fiction novellas dealing with how life in America could be in the near future. The book was selected for the 2020 edition of &quot;Canada Reads&quot;, in which it was defended by Akil Augustine.

&quot;Attack Surface&quot;, a standalone adult novel set in the &quot;Little Brother&quot; universe, was released on 13 October 2020.

His novel called &quot;Red Team Blues&quot;, a financial thriller about cybersecurity, was released in April 2023. It features a character named Martin Hench.

Standalone hopepunk novel &quot;The Lost Cause&quot;, set in 2050s California about mitigating and surviving climate change impacts amidst the legacy of contemporary political divisions, was published in November 2023.

A second novel featuring forensic accountant Martin Hench was published in February 2024: &quot;The Bezzle&quot; is centered around the financial (mis-)management of privately owned prisons.

==Nonfiction and other writings==
Doctorow&#x27;s nonfiction works include his first book, &quot;The Complete Idiot&#x27;s Guide to Publishing Science Fiction&quot; (co-written with Karl Schroeder and published in 2000), his contributions to Boing Boing, the blog he co-edits, as well as regular columns in the magazines &quot;Popular Science&quot; and &quot;Make&quot;. He is a contributing writer to &quot;Wired&quot; magazine, and contributes occasionally to other magazines and newspapers such as the &quot;New York Times Sunday Magazine&quot;, &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;, &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction&quot; magazine, and the &quot;Boston Globe&quot;.

In 2004, he wrote an essay on Wikipedia included in &quot;The Anthology at the End of the Universe&quot;, comparing Internet attempts at Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide-type resources, including a discussion of the Wikipedia article about himself. Doctorow contributed the foreword to &quot;Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Music and Culture&quot; (The MIT Press, 2008) edited by Paul D. Miller a.k.a. DJ Spooky. He also was a contributing writer to the book &quot;Worldchanging: A User&#x27;s Guide for the 21st Century&quot;.

He popularised the term &quot;metacrap&quot; by a 2001 essay titled &quot;Metacrap: Putting the torch to seven straw-men of the meta-utopia.&quot; Some of his nonfiction published between 2001 and 2007 has been collected by Tachyon Publications as &quot;Content: Selected Essays on Technology, Creativity, Copyright, and the Future of the Future&quot;. In 2016, he wrote the article &quot;Mr. Robot Killed the Hollywood-Hacker&quot; (published on &quot;MIT Technology Review&quot;) as a review of the TV show &quot;Mr. Robot&quot; and argued for a better portrayal and understanding of technology, computers and their risks and consequences in our modern world.

His essay &quot;You Can&#x27;t Own Knowledge&quot; is included in the Freesouls book project.

He is the originator of Doctorow&#x27;s Law: &quot;Anytime someone puts a lock on something you own, against your wishes, and doesn&#x27;t give you the key, they&#x27;re not doing it for your benefit.&quot;

Writing in &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 2022, Doctorow listed the many problems confronting Facebook and suggested that its future would be increasingly fraught.

==Opinions==
===Intellectual property===
Doctorow believes that copyright laws should be liberalised to allow for free sharing of all digital media. He has also advocated filesharing. He argues that copyright holders should have a monopoly on &quot;selling&quot; their own digital media and that copyright laws should not be operative unless someone attempts to sell a product that is under someone else&#x27;s copyright.

Doctorow is an opponent of digital rights management and claims that it limits the free sharing of digital media and frequently causes problems for legitimate users (including registration problems that lock users out of their own purchases and prevent them from being able to move their media to other devices).

He was a keynote speaker at the 2014 international conference CopyCamp in Warsaw, Poland with the presentation &quot;Information Doesn&#x27;t Want to Be Free.&quot;

===Enshittification===

In criticising the decay in usefulness of online platforms, Doctorow in 2022 coined the neologism &quot;enshittification&quot;, (which he calls &quot;enpoopification&quot; on public airwaves) which he defines as a degradation of an online environment caused by greed:

Here is how platforms die: first, they are good to their users; then they abuse their users to make things better for their business customers; finally, they abuse those business customers to claw back all the value for themselves. Then, they die. I call this &quot;enshittification&quot;, and it is a seemingly inevitable consequence arising from the combination of the ease of changing how a platform allocates value, combined with the nature of a &quot;two sided market,&quot; where a platform sits between buyers and sellers, hold each hostage to the other, raking off an ever-larger share of the value that passes between them.

The word gained traction in 2023, where it was used by a variety of sources in reference to several major platforms discontinuing free features in order to further their monetization or taking other actions that were seen to degrade functionality. In its annual vote, the American Dialect Society designated enshittification as 2023&#x27;s Word of the Year.

In November 2024, the Australian Macquarie Dictionary selected it as its word of the year, defining it as follows:

The gradual deterioration of a service or product brought about by a reduction in the quality of service provided, especially of an online platform, and as a consequence of profit-seeking.

==In popular culture==
The webcomic &quot;xkcd&quot; has occasionally featured a partially fictional version of Doctorow who lives in a hot air balloon up in the &quot;blogosphere&quot; (&quot;above the tag clouds&quot;) and wears a red cape and goggles, such as in the comic &quot;Blagofaire&quot;. When Doctorow won the 2007 EFF Pioneer Award, the presenters gave him a red cape, goggles and a balloon.

The novel &quot;Ready Player One&quot; features a mention of Doctorow as being the newly re-elected President of the OASIS User Council (with Wil Wheaton as his vice-president) in the year 2044, saying that, &quot;those two geezers had been doing a kick-ass job of protecting user rights for over a decade.&quot;

The comedic role-playing game &quot;Kingdom of Loathing&quot; features a boss-fight against a monster named Doctor Oh, who is described as wearing a red cape and goggles. The commentary before the fight and assorted hit, miss and fumble messages during the battle make reference to Doctorow&#x27;s advocacy for open-source sharing and freedom of media.

==Awards==
* 2000 John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer
* 2004 Locus Award for Best First Novel for &quot;Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom&quot;
* 2004 Sunburst Award for &quot;A Place So Foreign and Eight More&quot;
* 2006 Locus Award for Best Novelette for &quot;I, Robot&quot;
* 2007 Locus Award for Best Novelette for &quot;When Sysadmins Ruled the Earth&quot;
* 2007 The Electronic Frontier Foundation Pioneer Award

=== For &quot;Little Brother&quot; ===
* 2009 John W. Campbell Memorial Award
* 2009 Prometheus Award
* 2009 Sunburst Award
* 2009 White Pine Award
* 2018 Inkpot Award

;For &quot;Pirate Cinema&quot;
* 2013 Prometheus Award

=== For &quot;Homeland&quot; ===
* 2014 Prometheus Award

==Selected bibliography==
In chronological sequence, unless otherwise indicated

===Fiction===

==== Novels ====
*
* 
*&quot;The Great Big Beautiful Tomorrow&quot;, 2011, 
* (with Charles Stross)
*

===== Little Brother Universe =====
*

===== Martin Hench series =====
*

==== Graphic novels ====
*&quot;In Real Life&quot;. Illustrated by Jen Wang. First Second. 2014. .
*&quot;Poesy the Monster Slayer&quot;. Illustrated by Matt Rockefeller. First Second. 2020. .

==== Collections ====
* or 
* 
** Other instance: 

==== Short fiction ====
===Non-fiction===
* 
* Paper for the O&#x27;Reilly Emerging Technologies Conference, 2004.
* 
* 
* 
* 
*&quot;The Internet Con: How to Seize the Means of Computation&quot; (2023)
===Anthology===
*&quot;Tesseracts Eleven&quot; with Holly Phillips (2007)

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* – official site
* Pluralistic, daily links by Cory Doctorow
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Information Doesn&#x27;t Want to Be Free&quot;, Cory Doctorow presentation at the CopyCamp 2014 conference

===Interviews===
* 2019 interview with Doctorow at Cyberpunks.com
* 2020 interview with Doctorow by Johannes Grenzfurthner in &quot;The Free Lunch&quot; magazine
* 2022 interview with Doctorow at sfss.space</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q110436" start="0" end="19" title="Cory Doctorow" label="Cory Efram Doctorow"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="64" end="68" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="73" end="83" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="89" end="104" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q891048" start="154" end="165" title="Boing Boing" label="Boing Boing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="217" end="226" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="255" end="271" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="367" end="392" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="394" end="406" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975790" start="412" end="425" title="post scarcity" label="post-scarcity"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="490" end="497" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="499" end="506" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="534" end="550" title="Ashkenazi Jewish" label="Ashkenazi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="654" end="663" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="683" end="695" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="727" end="739" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="794" end="810" title="displaced person" label="displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="822" end="838" title="Baku, Azerbaijan" label="Baku, Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="881" end="887" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="897" end="909" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149089" start="1007" end="1019" title="Columbia Law School" label="Columbia law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804525" start="1030" end="1036" title="Tim Wu" label="Tim Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609474" start="1202" end="1219" title="Grindstone Island (Ontario)" label="Grindstone Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909073" start="1226" end="1243" title="Portland, Ontario" label="Portland, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094589" start="1342" end="1365" title="Ontario Academic Credit" label="Ontario Academic Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389650" start="1397" end="1408" title="SEED School (Toronto)" label="SEED School"/>
<link wikidata="Q335232" start="1559" end="1573" title="E. L. Doctorow" label="E. L. Doctorow"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="1834" end="1847" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="1848" end="1851" title="Peer-to-peer" label="P2P"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025791" start="1923" end="1944" title="Open Text Corporation" label="Open Text Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q639408" start="1948" end="1965" title="Waterloo, Ontario" label="Waterloo, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q257260" start="2022" end="2030" title="OpenCola (drink)" label="OpenCola"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2096" end="2102" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="2154" end="2184" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397639" start="2232" end="2249" title="Open Rights Group" label="Open Rights Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="2447" end="2456" title="Fulbright" label="Fulbright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758100" start="2467" end="2483" title="Public Diplomacy" label="Public Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866335" start="2491" end="2521" title="USC Center on Public Diplomacy" label="USC Center on Public Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042904" start="2580" end="2611" title="Integrated Media Systems Center" label="Integrated Media Systems Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="2765" end="2798" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2802" end="2813" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="3010" end="3032" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="3177" end="3192" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726119" start="3340" end="3352" title="Alice Taylor (businesswoman)" label="Alice Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="3507" end="3521" title="naturalisation" label="naturalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="3701" end="3713" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="4110" end="4141" title="Digital rights management" label="digital rights management (DRM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="4598" end="4609" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139144" start="4610" end="4621" title="Break-up of the Beatles" label="breaking up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="4885" end="4931" title="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q268779" start="4984" end="4993" title="monochrom" label="monochrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="5235" end="5260" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="5266" end="5274" title="Sony-BMG" label="Sony-BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q825718" start="5293" end="5303" title="Wikinomics" label="Wikinomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q202044" start="5377" end="5398" title="Tor (anonymity network)" label="Tor anonymity network"/>
<link wikidata="Q22678" start="5624" end="5647" title="Hackers on Planet Earth" label="Hackers on Planet Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q164182" start="5754" end="5786" title="Democratic Socialists of America" label="Democratic Socialists of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015406" start="5960" end="5993" title="Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom" label="Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q284742" start="6111" end="6136" title="Creative Commons licences" label="Creative Commons licences"/>
<link wikidata="Q836950" start="6256" end="6268" title="derived work" label="derived work"/>
<link wikidata="Q461524" start="6463" end="6474" title="fan fiction" label="fan fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="6564" end="6576" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="6590" end="6601" title="Locus Award" label="Locus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="6701" end="6710" title="Salon.com" label="Salon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559667" start="6744" end="6786" title="Someone Comes to Town, Someone Leaves Town" label="Someone Comes to Town, Someone Leaves Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="6843" end="6849" title="Science fiction" label="Sci-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366000" start="7182" end="7196" title="Sunburst Award" label="Sunburst Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658859" start="7234" end="7267" title="A Place So Foreign and Eight More" label="A Place So Foreign and Eight More"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658859" start="7308" end="7316" title="0wnz0red" label="0wnz0red"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="7371" end="7383" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865620" start="7451" end="7465" title="Little Brother (Cory Doctorow novel)" label="Little Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="7573" end="7598" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q142392" start="7625" end="7641" title="Prometheus Award" label="Prometheus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030402" start="7672" end="7703" title="John W. Campbell Memorial Award" label="John W. Campbell Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739298" start="7722" end="7728" title="Makers (Cory Doctorow novel)" label="Makers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="7800" end="7809" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233720" start="7846" end="7863" title="young adult novel" label="young adult novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747905" start="7871" end="7882" title="For the Win" label="For the Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759446" start="8480" end="8504" title="The Rapture of the Nerds" label="The Rapture of the Nerds"/>
<link wikidata="Q345249" start="8550" end="8564" title="Charles Stross" label="Charles Stross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233720" start="8583" end="8600" title="young adult novel" label="young adult novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197787" start="8607" end="8620" title="Pirate Cinema (novel)" label="Pirate Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q142392" start="8673" end="8689" title="Prometheus Award" label="Prometheus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q10563546" start="8734" end="8742" title="Homeland (Cory Doctorow novel)" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142392" start="8818" end="8834" title="Prometheus Award" label="Prometheus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q30068660" start="8901" end="8909" title="Walkaway (Doctorow novel)" label="Walkaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795576" start="8978" end="8989" title="Radicalized (Doctorow book)" label="Radicalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031998" start="9172" end="9184" title="Canada Reads" label="Canada Reads"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9220" end="9234" title="Akil Augustine" label="Akil Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124325347" start="9564" end="9578" title="The Lost Cause (novel)" label="The Lost Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156472" start="10041" end="10102" title="The Complete Idiot&amp;#x27;s Guide to Publishing Science Fiction" label="The Complete Idiot&amp;#x27;s Guide to Publishing Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193467" start="10126" end="10140" title="Karl Schroeder" label="Karl Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q891048" start="10186" end="10197" title="Boing Boing" label="Boing Boing"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="10271" end="10286" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437564" start="10303" end="10307" title="Make (magazine)" label="Make"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="10352" end="10357" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="10455" end="10485" title="New York Times Sunday Magazine" label="New York Times Sunday Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="10499" end="10517" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="10531" end="10560" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="10591" end="10603" title="Boston Globe" label="Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q707084" start="11005" end="11014" title="DJ Spooky" label="DJ Spooky"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="11162" end="11170" title="metacrap" label="metacrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673867" start="11356" end="11376" title="Tachyon Publications" label="Tachyon Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844729" start="11647" end="11656" title="Mr. Robot" label="Mr. Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501161" start="11865" end="11874" title="Freesouls" label="Freesouls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="12115" end="12127" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="12189" end="12197" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="12431" end="12442" title="filesharing" label="filesharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="12710" end="12735" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q18525527" start="13059" end="13067" title="CopyCamp" label="CopyCamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="13071" end="13077" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="13275" end="13284" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q122584861" start="13291" end="13307" title="enshittification" label="enshittification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14260" end="14272" title="monetization#Revenue from business operations" label="monetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q463842" start="14362" end="14386" title="American Dialect Society" label="American Dialect Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14430" end="14446" title="American Dialect Society#Word of the Year" label="Word of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113225" start="14482" end="14502" title="Macquarie Dictionary" label="Macquarie Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="14782" end="14790" title="webcomic" label="webcomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13915" start="14797" end="14801" title="xkcd" label="xkcd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="14891" end="14906" title="hot air balloon" label="hot air balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q374132" start="14923" end="14934" title="blogosphere" label="blogosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q31323" start="15082" end="15099" title="EFF Pioneer Award" label="EFF Pioneer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906523" start="15177" end="15193" title="Ready Player One" label="Ready Player One"/>
<link wikidata="Q264699" start="15303" end="15314" title="Wil Wheaton" label="Wil Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="15487" end="15504" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061681" start="15511" end="15530" title="Kingdom of Loathing" label="Kingdom of Loathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="15548" end="15558" title="Boss (video games)" label="boss-fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q276453" start="15569" end="15576" title="monster" label="monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q958630" start="15847" end="15889" title="John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer" label="John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090893" start="15897" end="15929" title="Locus Award for Best First Novel" label="Locus Award for Best First Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366000" start="15987" end="16001" title="Sunburst Award" label="Sunburst Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658859" start="16012" end="16045" title="A Place So Foreign and Eight More" label="A Place So Foreign and Eight More"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008964" start="16059" end="16089" title="Locus Award for Best Novelette" label="Locus Award for Best Novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967461" start="16100" end="16108" title="I, Robot (Cory Doctorow)" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008964" start="16122" end="16152" title="Locus Award for Best Novelette" label="Locus Award for Best Novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="16211" end="16241" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q142392" start="16342" end="16358" title="Prometheus Award" label="Prometheus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995195" start="16388" end="16404" title="White Pine Award" label="White Pine Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687578" start="16412" end="16424" title="Inkpot Award" label="Inkpot Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q142392" start="16464" end="16480" title="Prometheus Award" label="Prometheus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q142392" start="16522" end="16538" title="Prometheus Award" label="Prometheus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q345249" start="16720" end="16734" title="Charles Stross" label="Charles Stross"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081050" start="16880" end="16888" title="Jen Wang" label="Jen Wang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16966" end="16982" title="Matt Rockefeller" label="Matt Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q90384" start="17682" end="17704" title="Johannes Grenzfurthner" label="Johannes Grenzfurthner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220478" wikidata="Q4698795" url="?curid=220478" title="Airliners (magazine)">
<text>Airliners was an American magazine dedicated to the airline industry. It was published bimonthly. The title was first published by World Transport Press in 1988. From the 100th issue (July/August 2006) it was produced by Airliners Publications. For a time, the editorial headquarters of the magazine was in Castro Valley, California, although it later was based in Miami.

The civil aviation magazine included articles about the world of commercial aircraft and air carriers, including new low cost airlines, changes at legacy companies, jetliners such as the Airbus A380 and Boeing 787, trips around the world, historical airlines, adventurous flights, airliner crashes and pictures of airliner liveries.

Featured authors included John Adlard, Sebastian Schmitz, Dave Nichols, Ben Wang, Bill Hough, Joel Chusid, Royal King, Robbie Shaw, and Cody Diamond. Photographers contributed images of airlines, aircraft, personnel, facilities and operations.

The magazine&#x27;s first editor was John Wegg, who left &quot;Airliners&quot; to found &quot;Airways Magazine&quot; in 1994. Subsequent editors were Bryant Pettit, Nick Veronico, Jon Proctor, David Kaufman and Jay Selman. Starting with the November/December 2007 issue, the editor was Dwayne Darnell. On December 11, 2009, Darnell announced that he was leaving, and that designer/Creative Director Robert Christensen would lead the magazine.

In 2010, Robert Christensen announced plans for a series of online initiatives, releasing e-book formats of the print magazine and establishing a social media presence. The magazine was re-titled &quot;Airliners &amp; Airports&quot;. Popular components of past issues such as the Air Photo News section were being returned to the magazine&#x27;s pages, but around the end of December 2012 the magazine abruptly ceased publishing and the website is no longer active.

==References==
==External links==
*Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="52" end="59" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020700" start="307" end="320" title="Castro Valley" label="Castro Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="322" end="332" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="365" end="370" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q190915" start="490" end="507" title="low cost airlines" label="low cost airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="560" end="571" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="576" end="586" title="Boeing 787" label="Boeing 787"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220479" wikidata="Q374857" url="?curid=220479" title="Pugwash, Nova Scotia">
<text>Pugwash is an incorporated village in Cumberland County, Nova Scotia, Canada, located on the Northumberland Strait at the mouth of the Pugwash River. It had a population of 746 as of the 2021 census. The name Pugwash is derived from the Mi&#x27;kmaq word Pakwesk (also written as Pagwĕsk), meaning &quot;a shoal&quot;, in reference to a reef near the mouth of the harbour.

The village is home to fishing, salt mining, small-scale manufacturing, and tourism. Pugwash sits atop a salt deposit measuring thick and is home to the largest underground salt mine in Atlantic Canada, with shipments from its port, as well as by rail from a facility at Oxford Junction.

==History==
The end of glaciation began 13,500 years ago and ended with the region becoming largely ice-free 11,000 years ago. The earliest evidence of Paleo-Indian settlement in the region follows rapidly after deglaciation.

What is now the Northumberland Shore, including Pugwash, is part of the Mi&#x27;kma&#x27;ki, the territory of the Mi&#x27;kmaq, who have inhabited it for 13,500 years. Early colonial maps of the area describe West Pugwash as &quot;Indian land&quot;.

The Chignecto peninsula was settled by Acadians from the 1660s onward, this period ended with the with Expulsion and the Bay of Fundy Campaign during the French and Indian War. Wallace and nearby Tatamagouche were the first villages in Acadia to be burned because they were important ports through which Acadians supplied the French Fortress Louisbourg.

British colonial settlement began with the arrival of the United Empire Loyalists, coming to Chignecto in 1790, and then with the Seaman family, formerly of New York State, moving to farm the mouth of River Phillip in 1795, and ultimately purchasing what became the Pugwash town site from the Mi&#x27;kmaw in 1802.

Pugwash is home to many descendants of Highland Scots who immigrated to the region in the 19th century. All street signs in the town are bilingual, with both English and Gaelic translations. The village celebrates its Scottish heritage each July 1, with the annual Gathering of the Clans and Fisherman&#x27;s Regatta. The Pugwash area, and indeed the entire north shore of Nova Scotia, is famed for its warm waters and sandy beaches. Some claim the waters in summer here are the warmest waters north of the Carolinas in the United States.

The Crowley Memorial was erected in 1870 at Pugwash by the Legislature of Nova Scotia in honour of Mary E. Crowley, who died October 1869, aged 12 years after rescuing her younger brother and sister from a house fire. This is believed to be the first public monument erected to a female in Canada.

In 1898 a fire destroyed the entire town leaving 1,200 people homeless, with &quot;The New York Times&quot; reporting 200 dwellings, 5 churches, 20 stores, 3 hotels, and several mills&quot; were destroyed, and that the &quot;town was little insured.&quot;

Pugwash is famous for being the site of an international conference of scholars organized by Bertrand Russell in 1957, and hosted by Pugwash&#x27;s native son, steel magnate Cyrus Eaton (1883–1979), at the lodge on property owned by the Pugwash Park Commission located at the north end of Water Street in the village. This conference brought high-level scientists from both sides of the Cold War divide to state their opposition to nuclear weapons. This meeting was a follow-up to an earlier statement of notables whose signatories had included Albert Einstein and Linus Pauling, the Russell–Einstein Manifesto. The name Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs has since been used to refer to the group.

A myth about the village is that the children&#x27;s cartoon character Captain Pugwash was named after the international organization that takes its name from the town, but the character, a pirate, in fact first appeared in 1950, several years before the planning of the first Pugwash conference took place.

== Today ==
Visitors entering Pugwash were once greeted by roadside signs announcing that they were entering the &quot;Home of the Thinkers&quot;, but the signs have since been replaced by a newer slogan &quot;World Famous for Peace&quot;. The switch was made in response to the 1995 awarding of the Nobel Prize to the International Pugwash conferences &quot;for their efforts to diminish the part played by nuclear arms in international politics and in the longer run to eliminate such arms&quot;.

The village has an elementary school, named after Cyrus Eaton, as well as a regional high school that draws students from around rural Cumberland County. It has a farmers&#x27; market that runs on Saturdays during the summer months.

The Pugwash railway station currently houses the Pugwash Library and North Cumberland Historical Society. The building was designed by Sir Sandford Fleming and completed in 1892, is a registered historic site under the Heritage Property Act of Nova Scotia.

The village was hit by a tornado in 1999, a rarity in Nova Scotia.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Pugwash had a population of 746 living in 343 of its 458 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 736. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

== Economy ==
Pugwash sits on the dividing line between two fishing areas making it the only place on the Northumberland Strait to have two fishing seasons. The first one takes place in May and June and the second in mid-August and mid-October. Many boats fish out of the Pugwash harbour, carrying up to 300 lobster traps at a time.

The village is home of the Canadian Salt Company Mine the only salt mine and only underground mine in Nova Scotia. This mine has been open since 1959. The majority of the mine runs under the Pugwash River, some under solid ground, but not under the village. The plant produces industrial grades salt, salt blocks for farm use and refined salt for domestic consumption. The mine produces approximately 1,200,000 tones of salt per year. The salt is distributed by road or from the company owned ship-loading facility for which large ships can be seen in the harbour from early spring to late autumn.

The creation of pewter crafts and souvenirs is another important industry in Pugwash.

== Government ==
The Village of Pugwash is governed by a Commission composed of a five Commissioners elected at-large, who elect a chair and vice chair from their numbers The chair of the Commission is Brent Wilson. Day-to-day activities are managed by a village clerk who is accountable to Commission. Terms overlap and elections are held every year for one or two seats. The village&#x27;s operating budget is $$281,100 in fiscal 2023.

Pugwash is also a part of the Municipality of Cumberland. Municipal Council is responsible for all facets of the municipal government, including directly delivered and shared or regional services. Directly delivered services include services such fire, public works, roads, as well as the municipally owned and operated electrical and water utilities. The municipality participates in shared services, such as library services and policing. The municipal operating budget was $7.6 million in the 2019/20 fiscal year.

The provincial legislation that creates and empowers the a village and a municipal council is the Nova Scotia Municipal Government Act.

Pugwash is represented by Elizabeth Smith-McCrossin in the Nova Scotia House of Assembly and Stephen Ellis in Canada&#x27;s House of Commons.

== Climate ==
Pugwash has a humid continental climate (Dfb) characterized by warm summers with cool nights and long, cold, and snowy winters.

==Notable people==
*Charles Aubrey Eaton (1868–1953), clergyman and politician who served in the United States House of Representatives, representing the from 1925 to 1933, and the from 1933 to 1953
*Cyrus S. Eaton
*Norman MacKenzie
*James Dewar, inventor of Twinkies

==Parks==
*Gulf Shore Provincial Park
*Heather Beach Provincial Park 
==References==
==External links==
*Village of Pugwash Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q374857" start="0" end="7" title="Pugwash, Nova Scotia" label="Pugwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="27" end="34" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559621" start="38" end="55" title="Cumberland County, Nova Scotia" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="57" end="68" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="70" end="76" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359415" start="93" end="114" title="Northumberland Strait" label="Northumberland Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q22619351" start="135" end="148" title="Pugwash River" label="Pugwash River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="187" end="198" title="2021 Canadian Census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q13321" start="237" end="249" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq language" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="479" end="483" title="sodium chloride" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="552" end="556" title="mining" label="mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="560" end="575" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115389" start="645" end="660" title="Oxford Junction, Nova Scotia" label="Oxford Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="679" end="696" title="Last glacial period" label="end of glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="815" end="827" title="Paleo-Indian" label="Paleo-Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27943532" start="962" end="981" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kma&amp;#x27;ki" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kma&amp;#x27;ki"/>
<link wikidata="Q495751" start="1004" end="1016" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="1180" end="1188" title="Acadians" label="Acadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723587" start="1244" end="1253" title="Expulsion of the Acadians" label="Expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874200" start="1262" end="1283" title="Bay of Fundy Campaign (1755)" label="Bay of Fundy Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="1295" end="1316" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962713" start="1318" end="1325" title="Wallace, Nova Scotia" label="Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395416" start="1337" end="1349" title="Tatamagouche, Nova Scotia" label="Tatamagouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q540062" start="1474" end="1493" title="Fortress Louisbourg" label="Fortress Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="1860" end="1865" title="Scottish people" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2734" end="2752" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="3001" end="3017" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q593304" start="3082" end="3093" title="Cyrus Eaton" label="Cyrus Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3295" end="3303" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="3340" end="3355" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="3453" end="3468" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="3473" end="3486" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q331878" start="3492" end="3518" title="Russell–Einstein Manifesto" label="Russell–Einstein Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q381282" start="3529" end="3577" title="Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs" label="Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036770" start="3693" end="3708" title="Captain Pugwash" label="Captain Pugwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522620" start="4594" end="4614" title="farmers&amp;#x27; market" label="farmers&amp;#x27; market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258982" start="4669" end="4692" title="Pugwash railway station" label="Pugwash railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q41411" start="4800" end="4820" title="Sir Sandford Fleming" label="Sir Sandford Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739015" start="4884" end="4920" title="Heritage Property Act (Nova Scotia)" label="Heritage Property Act of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="5017" end="5042" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="5056" end="5073" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="5325" end="5332" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359415" start="5371" end="5392" title="Northumberland Strait" label="Northumberland Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="5573" end="5580" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030542" start="5626" end="5647" title="Canadian Salt Company" label="Canadian Salt Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="5701" end="5712" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="5946" end="5966" title="Table salt" label="domestic consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q852372" start="6214" end="6220" title="pewter" label="pewter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559621" start="6754" end="6780" title="Cumberland County, Nova Scotia" label="Municipality of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="6837" end="6857" title="municipal government" label="municipal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30095405" start="7405" end="7430" title="Elizabeth Smith-McCrossin" label="Elizabeth Smith-McCrossin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320273" start="7438" end="7467" title="Nova Scotia House of Assembly" label="Nova Scotia House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q108687492" start="7472" end="7485" title="Stephen Ellis (politician)" label="Stephen Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="7503" end="7519" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="7550" end="7575" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7577" end="7580" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Dfb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063600" start="7685" end="7705" title="Charles Aubrey Eaton" label="Charles Aubrey Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="7762" end="7800" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q593304" start="7865" end="7879" title="Cyrus S. Eaton" label="Cyrus S. Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052537" start="7881" end="7897" title="Norman MacKenzie (politician)" label="Norman MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171763" start="7899" end="7910" title="James Dewar (baker)" label="James Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q525586" start="7924" end="7932" title="Twinkie" label="Twinkies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220481" wikidata="Q6621936" url="?curid=220481" title="List of grunge albums">
<text>This article is a list of [[grunge]] albums and EPs with articles on English Wikipedia. They appear on at least one cited album list and are described as &quot;grunge&quot; by AllMusic (). Although citations could be found describing each of these as &quot;grunge&quot;, in some cases the designation would be controversial, particularly for those bands that are considered Post-grunge.

In addition, several artists not typically associated with grunge music have released albums displaying a grunge sound, including Manic Street Preachers with &quot;Gold Against the Soul&quot; (1993), R.E.M. with &quot;Monster&quot; (1994), and Def Leppard with Slang (1996).

== List of albums ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6621936" start="18" end="51" title="List of grunge albums" label="list of [[grunge]] albums and EPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q328" start="69" end="86" title="English Wikipedia" label="English Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="176" end="184" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379671" start="374" end="385" title="Post-grunge" label="Post-grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q217025" start="518" end="540" title="Manic Street Preachers" label="Manic Street Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534580" start="552" end="573" title="Gold Against the Soul" label="Gold Against the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="588" end="594" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q1457873" start="606" end="613" title="Monster (R.E.M. album)" label="Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="632" end="643" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q953945" start="649" end="654" title="Slang (album)" label="Slang"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220483" wikidata="Q476656" url="?curid=220483" title="Rhodospirillales">
<text>The Rhodospirillales are an order of Pseudomonadota.

== Notable Families ==
The &quot;Acetobacteraceae&quot; comprise the acetic acid bacteria, which are heterotrophic and produce acetic acid during their respiration.

The &quot;Rhodospirillaceae&quot; include mainly purple nonsulfur bacteria, which produce energy through photosynthesis.

== Phylogeny ==
The currently accepted taxonomy is based on the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN). The phylogeny is based on whole-genome analysis.

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q476656" start="4" end="20" title="Rhodospirillales" label="Rhodospirillales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962137" start="37" end="51" title="Pseudomonadota" label="Pseudomonadota"/>
<link wikidata="Q32299" start="87" end="103" title="Acetobacteraceae" label="Acetobacteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048822" start="123" end="143" title="acetic acid bacteria" label="acetic acid bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159344" start="155" end="168" title="heterotrophic" label="heterotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="181" end="192" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q24301" start="230" end="247" title="Rhodospirillaceae" label="Rhodospirillaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335274" start="269" end="294" title="purple bacteria" label="purple nonsulfur bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="325" end="339" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595107" start="406" end="461" title="List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature" label="List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220501" wikidata="Q748145" url="?curid=220501" title="Seedsnipe">
<text>The seedsnipes are a small family, Thinocoridae, of small gregarious waders which have adapted to a herbivorous diet. The family is divided into two genera, &quot;Attagis&quot; and &quot;Thinocorus&quot;, each containing two species. The family has a South American distribution, in the Andean and Patagonian regions. The relationships with other families within the order Charadriiformes are uncertain; it has been suggested that the plains wanderer of Australia, the jacanas and the painted snipes are their closest relatives. The plains wanderer in particular has a similar feeding ecology, although differs markedly in breeding biology. The family&#x27;s common name is misleading, as they do not resemble true snipe, having short bills on small heads, and seeds do not form a major part of the diet. One species &quot;Thinocorus rumicivorus&quot; is however known to feed on the fleshy flower petal appendages of &quot;Calceolaria uniflora&quot;, a species of Scrophularaceae. In the process of feeding on these sugar rich appendages, they also pollinate the flowers.

They resemble grouse, quail and sandgrouse, only with long wings. The seedsnipes in the genus &quot;Thinocorus&quot; are smaller, ranging in size from a sparrow to a snipe, whereas the genus &quot;Attagis&quot; are larger, the size of a ptarmigan. They have short legs (but long toes) and tails. The colour of their plumage is generally cryptic. There is some sexual dimorphism in the plumage of the &quot;Thinocorus&quot; species, the males have grey faces, necks and breasts.

Seedsnipes inhabit a variety of harsh environments, including grasslands, grass steppes, semi-arid deserts and alpine habitats. The rufous-bellied seedsnipe ranges as far up as to the snowline (5500 m).

Their 2–3 eggs are laid in a shallow scrape on the ground.

== Species ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Seedsnipe videos on the Internet Bird Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748145" start="4" end="14" title="Seedsnipe" label="seedsnipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="27" end="33" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q748145" start="35" end="47" title="Seedsnipe" label="Thinocoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="69" end="74" title="wader" label="wader"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="100" end="111" title="Herbivore" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="149" end="155" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220919" start="163" end="170" title="Attagis" label="Attagis"/>
<link wikidata="Q945732" start="187" end="197" title="Thinocorus" label="Thinocorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="251" end="264" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="287" end="293" title="Andes" label="Andean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="298" end="307" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25978" start="373" end="388" title="Charadriiformes" label="Charadriiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q665606" start="435" end="450" title="plains wanderer" label="plains wanderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="454" end="463" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768434" start="469" end="475" title="Jacana (genus)" label="jacana"/>
<link wikidata="Q494623" start="485" end="498" title="painted snipe" label="painted snipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469018" start="715" end="720" title="snipe" label="snipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="735" end="740" title="beak" label="bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942312" start="924" end="944" title="Calceolaria uniflora" label="Calceolaria uniflora"/>
<link wikidata="Q201240" start="1088" end="1094" title="grouse" label="grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072584" start="1096" end="1101" title="quail" label="quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q179983" start="1106" end="1116" title="sandgrouse" label="sandgrouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28922" start="1227" end="1234" title="Old World sparrow" label="sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q205930" start="1311" end="1320" title="rock ptarmigan" label="ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="1390" end="1397" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q196327" start="1411" end="1418" title="Crypsis" label="cryptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="1434" end="1451" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="1459" end="1466" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="1615" end="1624" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="1633" end="1639" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="1652" end="1658" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="1671" end="1678" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268282" start="1685" end="1709" title="rufous-bellied seedsnipe" label="rufous-bellied seedsnipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q659503" start="1767" end="1771" title="Bird egg" label="eggs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220509" wikidata="Q1762471" url="?curid=220509" title="Rhetorical device">
<text>In rhetoric, a rhetorical device, persuasive device, or stylistic device is a technique that an author or speaker uses to convey to the listener or reader a meaning with the goal of persuading them towards considering a topic from a perspective, using language designed to encourage or provoke an emotional display of a given perspective or action. They seek to make a position or argument more compelling than it would otherwise be.

==Sonic devices==
Sonic devices depend on sound. Sonic rhetoric is used as a clearer or swifter way of communicating content in an understandable way. Sonic rhetoric delivers messages to the reader or listener by prompting a certain reaction through auditory perception.

=== Alliteration ===

Alliteration is the repetition of the sound of an initial consonant or consonant cluster in subsequent syllables.

=== Assonance ===
Assonance is the repetition of similar vowel sounds across neighbouring words.

=== Consonance ===
Consonance is the repetition of consonant sounds across words which have been deliberately chosen. It is different from alliteration as it can happen at any place in the word, not just the beginning.

In the following example, the &quot;k&quot; sound is repeated five times.

=== Cacophony ===
Cacophony refers to the use of unpleasant sounds, such as the Plosive consonants &quot;k&quot;, &quot;g&quot;, &quot;t&quot;, &quot;d&quot;, &quot;p&quot; and &quot;b&quot;, the hissing sounds &quot;sh&quot; and &quot;s&quot;, and also the affricates &quot;ch&quot; and &quot;j&quot;, in rapid succession in a line or passage, creating a harsh and discordant effect.
=== Onomatopoeia ===
Onomatopoeia is the use of words that attempt to emulate a sound. When used colloquially, it is often accompanied by multiple exclamation marks and in all caps. It is common in comic strips and some cartoons.

Some examples: &quot;smek&quot;, &quot;thwap&quot;, &quot;kaboom&quot;, &quot;ding-dong&quot;, &quot;plop&quot;, &quot;bang&quot; and &quot;pew&quot;.

== Word repetition ==
Word repetition rhetorical devices operate via repeating words or phrases in various ways, usually for emphasis.

=== Anadiplosis/Conduplicatio ===
Anadiplosis involves repeating the last word(s) of one sentence, phrase or clause at or near the beginning of the next.
Conduplicatio is similar, involving repeating a key word in subsequent clauses.

=== Anaphora/Epistrophe/Symploce/Epanalepsis ===
Anaphora is repeating the same word(s) at the beginning of successive sentences, phrases or clauses.

Epistrophe is repeating the same word(s) at the end.
Symploce is a simultaneous combination of both anaphora and epistrophe, but repeating different words at the start and end.

Epanalepsis repeats the same word(s) at the beginning and end.

=== Epizeuxis/Antanaclasis ===
Epizeuxis is repetition of the same word without interruption.

Antanaclasis is repetition of the same word but in a different sense. The repeated word has two different meanings in the context of the sentence. Antanaclasis is often used when the repeated word has multiple definitions or ways it may be interpreted. Authors typically use this rhetorical strategy in order to emphasize a certain word that contributes to the overarching theme or idea, to create a rhythm in their writing, or to give off a witty or humorous tone. This can take advantage of polysemy. 

=== Diacope ===
Diacope is the repetition of a word or phrase after an intervening word or clause.

== Word relation ==
Word relation rhetorical devices operate via deliberate connections between words within a sentence.

=== Antithesis/Antimetabole/Chiasmus ===
Antithesis involves putting together two opposite ideas in a sentence to achieve a contrasting effect. Contrast is emphasised by parallel but similar structures of the opposing phrases or clauses to draw the listeners&#x27; or readers&#x27; attention. Compared to chiasmus, the ideas must be opposites.
Antimetabole involves repeating but reversing the order of words, phrases or clauses. The exact same words are repeated, as opposed to antithesis or chiasmus.
Chiasmus involves parallel clause structure but in reverse order for the second part. This means that words or elements are repeated in the reverse order. The ideas thus contrasted are often related but not necessarily opposite.

=== Asyndeton/Polysyndeton ===
Asyndeton is the removal of conjunctions like &quot;or&quot;, &quot;and&quot;, or &quot;but&quot; where it might have been expected.

Polysyndeton is the use of more conjunctions than strictly needed. This device is often combined with anaphora.
=== Auxesis/Catacosmesis ===
Auxesis is arranging words in a list from least to most significant. This can create climax.
Catacosmesis, the opposite, involves arranging them from most to least significant.
This can create anticlimax for humour or other purposes.
=== Oxymoron ===
An oxymoron is a 2-word paradox often achieved through the deliberate use of antonyms. This creates an internal contradiction that can have rhetorical effect.
=== Zeugma ===
Zeugma involves the linking of two or more words or phrases that occupy the same position in a sentence to another word or phrase in the same sentence. This can take advantage of the latter word having multiple meanings depending on context to create a clever use of language that can make the sentence and the claim thus advanced more eloquent and persuasive.

In the following examples, 2 nouns (as direct objects) are linked to the same verb which must then be interpreted in 2 different ways.

Zeugma is sometimes defined broadly to include other ways in which one word in a sentence can relate to two or more others. Even simple constructions like multiple subjects linked to the same verb are then &quot;zeugma without complication&quot;.

== Discourse level ==
Discourse level rhetorical devices rely on relations between phrases, clauses and sentences. Often they relate to how new arguments are introduced into the text or how previous arguments are emphasized. Examples include antanagoge, apophasis, aporia, hypophora, metanoia and procatalepsis.

=== Amplification/Pleonasm ===
Amplification involves repeating a word or expression while adding more detail, to emphasise what might otherwise be passed over. This allows one to call attention to and expand a point to ensure the reader realizes its importance or centrality in the discussion.
Pleonasm involves using more words than necessary to describe an idea. This creates emphasis and can introduce additional elements of meaning.
=== Antanagoge ===
Antanagoge involves &quot;placing a good point or benefit next to a fault criticism, or problem in order to reduce the impact or significance of the negative point&quot;.
One scenario involves a situation when one is unable to respond to a negative point and chooses instead to introduce another point to reduce the accusation&#x27;s significance.

Antanagoge can also be used to positively interpret a negative situation:
=== Apophasis ===
Apophasis is the tactic of bringing up a subject by denying that it should be brought up. It is also known as paralipsis, occupatio, praeteritio, preterition, or parasiopesis.

=== Aporia ===
Aporia is the rhetorical expression of doubt.

When the rhetorical question posed is answered, this is also an instance of hypophora.

===Diasyrmus===
Rejecting an argument through ridiculous comparison.

=== Derision ===
This involves setting up an opposing position to ridicule without offering a counterargument.
=== Enthymeme ===
Syllogism which omits either one of the premises or the conclusion. The omitted part must be clearly understood by the reader. Sometimes this depends on contextual knowledge.
(Modern Singapore is currently years old.)

=== Hyperbole ===
Hyperbole is deliberate exaggeration. This can be for literary effect:
Or for argumentative effect:
=== Hypophora ===
The use of hypophora is the technique whereby one asks a question and then proceeds to answer the question.

=== Innuendo ===
This device indirectly implies an accusation without explicitly stating it. This can be combined with apophasis.
=== Metanoia ===
Metanoia qualifies a statement or by recalling or rejecting it in part or full, and then re-expressing it in a better, milder, or stronger way. A negative is often used to do the recalling.

=== Procatalepsis ===
By anticipating and answering a possible objection, procatalepsis allows an argument to continue while rebutting points opposing it. It is a relative of hypophora.
=== Understatement ===
Understatement, or meiosis, involves deliberately understating the importance, significance or magnitude of a subject.

A subtype of understatement is litotes, which uses negation:
==Irony and imagery==
=== Irony ===
Irony is the figure of speech where the words of a speaker intends to express a meaning that is directly opposite of the said words.

=== Metaphor ===
Metaphor connects two different things to one another. It is frequently invoked by the verb &quot;to be&quot;. The use of metaphor in rhetoric is primarily to convey to the audience a new idea or meaning by linking it to an already familiar idea or meaning. The literary critic and rhetorician, I. A. Richards, divides a metaphor into two parts: the vehicle and the tenor.

In the following example, Romeo compares Juliet to the sun (the vehicle), and this metaphor connecting Juliet to the sun shows that Romeo sees Juliet as being radiant and regards her as an essential being (the tenor).

In the example below, John Green compares a toddler to the sun because they do not want to go to bed.

=== Personification ===
Personification is the representation of animals, inanimate objects and ideas as having human attributes.
=== Simile ===
Simile compares two different things that resemble each other in at least one way using &quot;like&quot; or &quot;as&quot; to explain the comparison.
=== Metonymy ===
Metonymy is a figure of speech where a thing or concept is referred to indirectly by the name of an attribute or adjunct for that of the thing meant. For example, &quot;crown&quot; to denote king or queen.

==== Synecdoche ====
A synecdoche is a class of metonymy, often by means of either mentioning a part for the whole or conversely the whole for one of its parts. Examples from common English expressions include &quot;suits&quot; (for &quot;businessmen&quot;), &quot;boots&quot; (for &quot;soldiers&quot;, a pars pro toto), and &quot;America&quot; (for &quot;the United States of America&quot;, &quot;totum pro parte&quot;).

==See also==
*Figure of speech
*Glossary of rhetorical terms
*Rhetorical modes
*Stylistic device

==References==
==External links==
*Handbook of rhetorical devices
*List of Fallacious Arguments
*Online Resource of Rhetorical Devices
*Rhetorical Figures in Sound</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="3" end="11" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762471" start="15" end="32" title="Rhetorical device" label="rhetorical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762471" start="34" end="51" title="Rhetorical device" label="persuasive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762471" start="56" end="72" title="Rhetorical device" label="stylistic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q484495" start="729" end="741" title="Alliteration" label="Alliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q191092" start="862" end="871" title="Assonance" label="Assonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="961" end="971" title="Consonance" label="Consonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q733671" start="1255" end="1264" title="Cacophony" label="Cacophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="1317" end="1335" title="Plosive consonants" label="Plosive consonants"/>
<link wikidata="Q463543" start="1342" end="1343" title="Voiceless velar stop" label="k"/>
<link wikidata="Q507127" start="1357" end="1358" title="Voiced velar stop" label="g"/>
<link wikidata="Q124429035" start="1372" end="1373" title="Voiceless alveolar stop" label="t"/>
<link wikidata="Q335591" start="1387" end="1388" title="Voiced alveolar stop" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q237623" start="1402" end="1403" title="Voiceless bilabial stop" label="p"/>
<link wikidata="Q242797" start="1420" end="1421" title="Voiced bilabial stop" label="b"/>
<link wikidata="Q51600" start="1433" end="1447" title="Sibilant" label="hissing sounds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1454" end="1456" title="Voiceless postalveolar fricative#Voiceless palato-alveolar fricative" label="sh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1473" end="1474" title="Voiceless alveolar fricative#Voiceless alveolar sibilant" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="1495" end="1505" title="Affricate consonant" label="affricates"/>
<link wikidata="Q518603" start="1512" end="1514" title="Voiceless postalveolar affricate" label="ch"/>
<link wikidata="Q778145" start="1531" end="1532" title="Voiced postalveolar affricate" label="j"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="1643" end="1655" title="Onomatopoeia" label="Onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166764" start="1769" end="1785" title="exclamation mark" label="exclamation mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960579" start="1794" end="1802" title="all caps" label="all caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274479" start="2074" end="2083" title="Repetition (rhetorical device)" label="repeating"/>
<link wikidata="Q483690" start="2175" end="2186" title="Anadiplosis" label="Anadiplosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274479" start="2295" end="2308" title="Conduplicatio" label="Conduplicatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q486050" start="2425" end="2433" title="Anaphora (rhetoric)" label="Anaphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q963102" start="2527" end="2537" title="Epistrophe" label="Epistrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q660149" start="2580" end="2588" title="Symploce" label="Symploce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167367" start="2705" end="2716" title="Epanalepsis" label="Epanalepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q993201" start="2800" end="2809" title="Epizeuxis" label="Epizeuxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463842" start="2864" end="2876" title="Antanaclasis" label="Antanaclasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191928" start="3357" end="3365" title="polysemy" label="polysemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270242" start="3385" end="3392" title="Diacope" label="Diacope"/>
<link wikidata="Q487994" start="3632" end="3642" title="Antithesis" label="Antithesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q577968" start="3935" end="3947" title="Antimetabole" label="Antimetabole"/>
<link wikidata="Q528728" start="4094" end="4102" title="Chiasmus" label="Chiasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q747668" start="4355" end="4364" title="Asyndeton" label="Asyndeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q426492" start="4489" end="4501" title="Polysyndeton" label="Polysyndeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36484" start="4521" end="4533" title="Conjunction (grammar)" label="conjunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873202" start="4630" end="4637" title="Auxesis (figure of speech)" label="Auxesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122956" start="4715" end="4721" title="Climax (rhetoric)" label="climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q117549977" start="4723" end="4735" title="Catacosmesis" label="Catacosmesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122956" start="4823" end="4833" title="Anticlimax (figure of speech)" label="anticlimax"/>
<link wikidata="Q169429" start="4884" end="4892" title="oxymoron" label="oxymoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q196984" start="5055" end="5061" title="Zeugma and syllepsis" label="Zeugma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770941" start="6043" end="6053" title="antanagoge" label="antanagoge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376885" start="6055" end="6064" title="apophasis" label="apophasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q261262" start="6066" end="6072" title="aporia" label="aporia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641379" start="6074" end="6083" title="hypophora" label="hypophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068990" start="6085" end="6093" title="Metanoia (rhetoric)" label="metanoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190629" start="6098" end="6111" title="procatalepsis" label="procatalepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320447" start="6145" end="6158" title="Amplification (linguistics)" label="Amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q188741" start="6409" end="6417" title="Pleonasm" label="Pleonasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770941" start="6571" end="6581" title="Antanagoge" label="Antanagoge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376885" start="7012" end="7021" title="Apophasis" label="Apophasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q261262" start="7204" end="7210" title="Aporia" label="Aporia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641379" start="7327" end="7336" title="hypophora" label="hypophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342" start="7538" end="7547" title="Syllogism" label="Syllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181036" start="7775" end="7784" title="Hyperbole" label="Hyperbole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641379" start="7904" end="7913" title="hypophora" label="hypophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376885" start="8121" end="8130" title="apophasis" label="apophasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068990" start="8149" end="8157" title="Metanoia (rhetoric)" label="Metanoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190629" start="8414" end="8427" title="procatalepsis" label="procatalepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641379" start="8515" end="8524" title="hypophora" label="hypophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939210" start="8549" end="8563" title="Understatement" label="Understatement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278958" start="8568" end="8575" title="Meiosis (figure of speech)" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q324939" start="8700" end="8707" title="litotes" label="litotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="8766" end="8771" title="Irony" label="Irony"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="8917" end="8925" title="Metaphor" label="Metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q718585" start="9212" end="9226" title="I. A. Richards" label="I. A. Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q207174" start="9637" end="9652" title="Personification" label="Personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q199714" start="9758" end="9764" title="Simile" label="Simile"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="9925" end="9933" title="Metonymy" label="Metonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="10155" end="10165" title="synecdoche" label="synecdoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="10180" end="10188" title="metonymy" label="metonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736444" start="10226" end="10246" title="Pars pro toto" label="a part for the whole"/>
<link wikidata="Q286394" start="10261" end="10291" title="Totum pro parte" label="the whole for one of its parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q736444" start="10438" end="10451" title="pars pro toto" label="pars pro toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q286394" start="10531" end="10546" title="totum pro parte" label="totum pro parte"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690215" start="10570" end="10586" title="Figure of speech" label="Figure of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017605" start="10588" end="10616" title="Glossary of rhetorical terms" label="Glossary of rhetorical terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320446" start="10618" end="10634" title="Rhetorical modes" label="Rhetorical modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182545" start="10636" end="10652" title="Stylistic device" label="Stylistic device"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220512" wikidata="Q734677" url="?curid=220512" title="Sheathbill">
<text>The sheathbills are a family of birds, Chionidae. Classified in the wader order Charadriiformes, the family consists of one genus, &quot;Chionis&quot; with two species. They breed on subantarctic islands and the Antarctic Peninsula, and the snowy sheathbill migrates to the Falkland Islands and coastal southern South America in the southern winter; they are the only bird family endemic as breeders to the Antarctic region. They are also the only Antarctic birds without webbed feet.

==Taxonomy==
The genus &quot;Chionis&quot; was introduced in 1788 by the German naturalist Johann Reinhold Forster. The type species is the snowy sheathbill. The genus name is from the Ancient Greek meaning snow. 

==Description==
They have white plumage including a thick layer of down, with only the face and leg colours distinguishing the two species. They look plump and dove-like, but are believed to be similar to the ancestors of the modern gulls and terns. There is a rudimentary spur on the &quot;wrist&quot; (carpal) joint, as in plovers. The skin around the eye is bare, as is the skin above the bill, which has carbuncular swellings. They derive their English name from the horny sheath which partially covers the upper mandible of their stout bills. They are commonly known in the Antarctic as &quot;Mutts&quot; because of their call which is a soft &quot;Mutt, mutt, mutt&quot;

==Behaviour==
Sheathbills habitually walk on the ground, somewhat like rails. They fly only when alarmed or in migration, looking like pigeons.

===Food and feeding===
The sheathbills are scavengers and opportunistic feeders, consuming invertebrates, faeces, and carrion—including seal afterbirths and stillborn seal pups—between the tidelines. They also take many chicks and eggs from penguins and cormorants.

The bird has also been observed to directly pilfer milk from the elephant seals’ teats.

===Breeding===
During the penguin breeding season, which is also the sheathbill breeding season, pairs of sheathbills in penguin colonies maintain territories covering a number of penguin nests. Two mated sheathbills often work together to harass adult penguins, nimbly avoiding their attempts to peck; they gain access to the eggs or chicks or steal the krill that the adult penguins regurgitate to feed their chicks. Near the few human settlements of the region, they boldly forage for offal. Because of this diet, they spend a good deal of time cleaning themselves.

They lay two or three blotchy white eggs in crevices or rock cavities. The nests are lined messily with seaweed, stones, feathers, guano, bones, and occasionally plastic trash; even dead chicks may not be removed. Incubation lasts 28 to 32 days, and the young fledge 50 to 60 days later.

==Taxonomy==
Genetic studies of the order Charadriiformes show the sheathbills to be a sister group of the thick-knees of the family Burhinidae. These two groups together are a sister group to Recurvostridae-Haematopodidae and Charadriidae. Recent research on the Magellanic plover (&quot;Pluvianellus socialis&quot;) of southern South America has indicated it too may be classified within the sheathbill family. 

The two species:




==References==

==External links==
*Sheathbill videos on the Internet Bird Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q734677" start="4" end="15" title="Sheathbill" label="sheathbills"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="22" end="28" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="32" end="36" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q734677" start="39" end="48" title="Sheathbill" label="Chionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25978" start="80" end="95" title="Charadriiformes" label="Charadriiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141556" start="183" end="195" title="subantarctic" label="subantarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185605" start="212" end="231" title="Antarctic Peninsula" label="Antarctic Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q844766" start="241" end="257" title="snowy sheathbill" label="snowy sheathbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="274" end="290" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="312" end="325" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="380" end="387" title="endemism in birds" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213570" start="577" end="600" title="Johann Reinhold Forster" label="Johann Reinhold Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="606" end="618" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q844766" start="626" end="642" title="snowy sheathbill" label="snowy sheathbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="671" end="684" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="733" end="740" title="Feather" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="861" end="865" title="dove" label="dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="934" end="938" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q33140745" start="944" end="948" title="tern" label="tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q139321" start="1026" end="1032" title="plover" label="plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1150" end="1157" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q26623" start="1450" end="1455" title="rail (bird)" label="rails"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="1514" end="1520" title="pigeon" label="pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="1660" end="1664" title="seal (animal)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="1755" end="1758" title="Egg (biology)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="1765" end="1772" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="1778" end="1787" title="cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q185231" start="1856" end="1870" title="elephant seals" label="elephant seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479109" start="2225" end="2230" title="kleptoparasitism" label="steal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29498" start="2235" end="2240" title="krill" label="krill"/>
<link wikidata="Q145854" start="2872" end="2882" title="Burhinidae" label="Burhinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q845621" start="3003" end="3020" title="Magellanic plover" label="Magellanic plover"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220517" wikidata="Q311796" url="?curid=220517" title="Fuad II of Egypt">
<text>Fuad II (, full name: Ahmed Fuad bin Farouk bin Ahmed Fuad bin Ismail bin Ibrahim bin Muhammad Ali; born 16 January 1952), or alternatively Ahmed Fuad II (), is a member of the Egyptian Muhammad Ali dynasty. As an infant, he formally reigned as the last King of Egypt and the Sudan from July 1952 to June 1953, when he was deposed.

==Birth and reign==

The son of King Farouk and his second wife Queen Narriman, Crown Prince Ahmed Fuad was born on 16 January 1952 in Abdeen Palace. He was delivered at 8:30a.m. and named after his grandfather Fuad I. Fuad had three half-sisters from Farouk&#x27;s previous marriage with Queen Farida: princesses Farial, Fawzia and Fadia. As women could not inherit the Egyptian throne, Farouk&#x27;s first cousin, Prince Mohammed Ali Tewfik, was heir presumptive until Fuad&#x27;s birth. Immediately following his birth, Fuad was granted the title of Prince of the Sa&#x27;id. He was styled accordingly as Ahmed Fuad, Prince of the Sa&#x27;id.

On 23 July 1952, the Free Officers led by Mohamed Naguib and Gamal Abdel Nasser started the beginning the Egyptian revolution to dispose the Muhammad Ali non-Egyptian dynasty. On 26 July, Farouk was ordered to abdicate in favour of the crown prince and leave Egypt. Farouk abdicated and went into exile in Italy. His family, including Fuad, joined him in exile. By stepping down, Farouk had wished that the forces opposing the monarchy would be placated, and that Fuad could unify the country during his reign.

===Regency===
On Farouk&#x27;s abdication, the army proclaimed that Fuad was now King Fuad II of Egypt and the Sudan, at only 6 months of age. The country was now ruled by Nasser, Naguib and the other Free Officers. Naguib promised to maintain a constitutional monarchy with a regency council holding power until Fuad came of age. Fuad&#x27;s constitutional powers were assumed by the Cabinet until 2 August 1952, when a regency body, but not a council, was established. Prince Muhammad Abdel Moneim was appointed regent and led the body. The regency body had no actual powers, however, these having been effectively assumed by the Revolutionary Command Council which was led by Naguib. The body was dissolved on 7 September 1952 and Moneim was appointed the sole prince regent, though he still had no actual powers when serving in this role.

The monarchy was formally abolished on 18 June 1953: Egypt was declared a republic for the first time in its history, and Naguib became its first ever President. Fuad was officially deposed and stripped of his royal titles.

==Life in exile==

Following Fuad&#x27;s deposition, Fuad and his half-sisters were sent to live in Switzerland while Farouk remained in Italy, settling in Rome. Queen Narriman returned to Egypt in 1953 after wanting a divorce, and Farouk insisted that Fuad remain abroad. In 1958, Fuad was stripped of his Egyptian citizenship.

Farouk would visit Fuad two or three times each year before the former&#x27;s unexpected death, possibly from a heart attack, in 1965, when Fuad was 13 years old. Fuad believes that Farouk was &quot;poisoned by enemies&quot;. When he died, there were rumours in the press that he had been poisoned by Egyptian intelligence, though there is no known evidence to confirm this. After Farouk&#x27;s death, Fuad was guaranteed protection by Prince Rainier III of Monaco and his wife Princess Grace. Fuad would later become friends with Rainier in his early adulthood, when he visited Monte Carlo every summer. He has a Monégasque passport, on which he is named His Royal Highness Prince Ahmed Fouad Farouk.

Growing up, Fuad and his half-sisters lived in Cully, a small village on Lake Geneva, under the care of a nanny, governess and bodyguard. Fuad attended the local public school where he was bullied and then went to middle school in Lausanne, before later attending the Institut Le Rosey, an elite and prestigious private boarding school. He completed his secondary education, obtaining a French baccalaureate, before studying at the University of Geneva. He graduated with a degree in politics and economics in 1975.

In 1973, President Anwar Sadat lifted Fuad&#x27;s and his half-sisters&#x27; exile. Fuad&#x27;s Egyptian citizenship was restored in 1974. He has occasionally visited Egypt ever since, with his first visit occurring in 1991. On his Egyptian passport he has no titles and is simply identified as Ahmed Fuad with job description &quot;previous king of Egypt&quot;. He is a Sisi-Supporter and has been granted a diplomatic passort by president Abdelfattah Al-Sisi as well as a private plane and financial support.

==Marriage==

Fuad immigrated to Paris after graduating from university. In Paris, he set up a real estate business and married Dominique-France Loeb-Picard, a Jewish woman of Alsatian origin, in a civil ceremony in Paris on 16 April 1976. She then converted to Sunni Islam, and the two had a religious wedding in Monaco on 5 October 1977. Loeb-Picard changed her name to Fadila Farouk. Egyptian monarchists addressed her as Queen Fadila of Egypt, a nickname coined by the media. She then formally assumed the title of Queen of Egypt. In 1996, she and Fuad divorced, and he stripped her of her title.

After years of divorce proceedings which began in 1999, the marriage was formally dissolved in 2008. Fuad found the divorce &quot;deeply painful&quot; and suffered from depression and poor health. Since the divorce Fadila has been known as Princess Fadila of Egypt.

=== Issue ===
Fuad and Fadila had three children before their divorce: Prince Muhammad Ali, Prince of the Sa&#x27;id (born 5 February 1979), Princess Fawzia-Latifa (born 12 February 1982) and Prince Fakhruddin (born 25 August 1987). The family lived together in Paris until the parents&#x27; divorce. After the divorce, Fuad was estranged with his children until . Fuad has four grandchildren.

== Later life ==
After his divorce with Fadila, Fuad returned to Switzerland to stay close with his half-sisters.

In May 2010, he recorded a television interview with ONTV and talked about his visits to Egypt, how he felt about the Egyptian people, and their view of his late father.

Fuad II supported the candidacy of Field Marshal Abdel Fattah el-Sisi as President of Egypt in October 2013. However, in 2023 &quot;The Economist&quot; reported that some Egyptians were clamoring for his return as Egypt&#x27;s ruler as frustration with Sisi&#x27;s rule deepened.

==Ancestry==
#Ibrahim Agha
#Muhammad Ali of Egypt, 1769–1849
#Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt, 1789–1848
#Isma&#x27;il Pasha, 1830–1895
#Fuad I of Egypt, 1868–1936
#Farouk of Egypt, 1920–1965
#Fuad II of Egypt, b. 1952
==See also==
*Egyptian Revolution of 1952
*List of monarchs of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty
*List of shortest-reigning monarchs

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

*Egyptian Royalty by Ahmed S. Kamel, Hassan Kamel Kelisli-Morali, Georges Soliman and Magda Malek
*L&#x27;Egypte D&#x27;Antan... Egypt in Bygone Days by Max Karkegi</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q311796" start="0" end="7" title="Fuad II of Egypt" label="Fuad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q311796" start="22" end="98" title="Fuad II of Egypt" label="Ahmed Fuad bin Farouk bin Ahmed Fuad bin Ismail bin Ibrahim bin Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q311796" start="140" end="153" title="Fuad II of Egypt" label="Ahmed Fuad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q142913" start="186" end="206" title="Muhammad Ali dynasty" label="Muhammad Ali dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412228" start="254" end="281" title="King of Egypt and the Sudan" label="King of Egypt and the Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="323" end="330" title="1952 Egyptian revolution" label="deposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="365" end="376" title="King Farouk" label="King Farouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q256870" start="397" end="411" title="Narriman Sadek" label="Queen Narriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="413" end="425" title="Crown Prince" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q307747" start="468" end="481" title="Abdeen Palace" label="Abdeen Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q311839" start="544" end="550" title="Fuad I" label="Fuad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319146" start="622" end="634" title="Queen Farida" label="Queen Farida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984031" start="647" end="653" title="Farial of Egypt" label="Farial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116131" start="655" end="661" title="Princess Fawzia Farouk of Egypt" label="Fawzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273670" start="666" end="671" title="Fadia of Egypt" label="Fadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774203" start="749" end="775" title="Mohammed Ali Tewfik" label="Prince Mohammed Ali Tewfik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="781" end="797" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244409" start="886" end="910" title="Prince of the Sa&amp;#x27;id" label="Prince of the Sa&amp;#x27;id"/>
<link wikidata="Q781607" start="1001" end="1014" title="Free Officers Movement (Egypt)" label="Free Officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q104392" start="1022" end="1036" title="Mohamed Naguib" label="Mohamed Naguib"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="1041" end="1059" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="1086" end="1105" title="Egyptian revolution of 1952" label="Egyptian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="1277" end="1282" title="exile" label="exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1738" end="1761" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="1769" end="1784" title="regency council" label="regency council"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="1810" end="1821" title="came of age" label="came of age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206677" start="1877" end="1884" title="Cabinet of Egypt" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120248" start="1970" end="1991" title="Muhammad Abdel Moneim" label="Muhammad Abdel Moneim"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2006" end="2012" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479116" start="2124" end="2153" title="Egyptian Revolutionary Command Council" label="Revolutionary Command Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q729924" start="2256" end="2269" title="prince regent" label="prince regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314398" start="2353" end="2371" title="Declaration of the Republic" label="formally abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="2487" end="2496" title="President of Egypt" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2661" end="2672" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2717" end="2721" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q630014" start="3192" end="3213" title="Egyptian intelligence" label="Egyptian intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="3334" end="3355" title="Rainier III of Monaco" label="Rainier III of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="3369" end="3383" title="Princess Grace" label="Princess Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="3470" end="3481" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284009" start="3505" end="3524" title="Monégasque passport" label="Monégasque passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q661664" start="3641" end="3646" title="Cully, Switzerland" label="Cully"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="3667" end="3678" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q936969" start="3700" end="3705" title="nanny" label="nanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540278" start="3707" end="3716" title="governess" label="governess"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="3721" end="3730" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="3808" end="3821" title="middle school" label="middle school"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="3825" end="3833" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q627122" start="3862" end="3879" title="Institut Le Rosey" label="Institut Le Rosey"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="3914" end="3929" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q798022" start="3981" end="4001" title="French baccalaureate" label="French baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q503473" start="4026" end="4046" title="University of Geneva" label="University of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="4130" end="4141" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q307871" start="4482" end="4486" title="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi" label="Sisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q307871" start="4552" end="4571" title="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi" label="Abdelfattah Al-Sisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119782" start="4751" end="4779" title="Dominique-France Loeb-Picard" label="Dominique-France Loeb-Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899152" start="4799" end="4814" title="Alsatian Jew" label="Alsatian origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="4885" end="4896" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586136" start="5142" end="5156" title="Queen of Egypt and Sudan" label="Queen of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="5394" end="5404" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746213" start="5563" end="5608" title="Muhammad Ali, Prince of the Sa&amp;#x27;id" label="Prince Muhammad Ali, Prince of the Sa&amp;#x27;id"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511800" start="5633" end="5655" title="Princess Fawzia-Latifa of Egypt" label="Princess Fawzia-Latifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013143" start="5821" end="5830" title="Family estrangement" label="estranged"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119371" start="6055" end="6059" title="ONTV (Egypt)" label="ONTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="6208" end="6221" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q307871" start="6222" end="6242" title="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi" label="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="6246" end="6264" title="President of Egypt" label="President of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="6305" end="6318" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="6482" end="6503" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311789" start="6516" end="6538" title="Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt" label="Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159378" start="6551" end="6569" title="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha" label="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q311839" start="6582" end="6597" title="Fuad I of Egypt" label="Fuad I of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="6610" end="6625" title="Farouk of Egypt" label="Farouk of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="6678" end="6705" title="Egyptian Revolution of 1952" label="Egyptian Revolution of 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265575" start="6707" end="6751" title="List of monarchs of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty" label="List of monarchs of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639464" start="6753" end="6787" title="List of shortest-reigning monarchs" label="List of shortest-reigning monarchs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220521" wikidata="Q3683703" url="?curid=220521" title="Diamonds (1975 film)">
<text>Diamonds is a 1975 Israeli-American heist film directed by Menahem Golan and Arik Dichner. Robert Shaw stars in a dual role as twin brothers. Richard Roundtree, Barbara Hershey and Shelley Winters has supporting roles. The film was also released as Diamond Shaft, although it has no relation to the &quot;Shaft&quot; films other than having Roundtree in the cast.

==Plot==
Charles Hodgson (Shaw) is a British aristocrat who decides to become a thief as a way of getting at his twin brother, Earl (Shaw), a security expert who has built a supposedly impregnable vault in Tel Aviv, which holds a cache of diamonds. For the caper, Charles enlists Archie (Roundtree), a heist expert, and Sally. He also becomes acquainted with an American woman, Zelda Shapiro (Winters), who is in Israel looking for a new husband.

==Cast==
* Robert Shaw as Charles Hodgson / Earl Hodgson
* Richard Roundtree as Archie
* Barbara Hershey as Sally (credited as Barbara Seagull)
* Shelley Winters as Zelda Shapiro
* Shaike Ophir as Moshe
* Yosef Shiloach as Mustafa
* Gadi Yagil as Gaby
* Yehuda Efroni as Salzburg

==Production==
===Casting===
Menahem Golan, the film&#x27;s director, aimed to create an international picture with a foreign cast and in the English language, in the hopes of securing distribution beyond Israel. Golan met with veteran agent John Gaines in Hollywood to discuss casting English actor, Robert Shaw, who was in final negotiations to star &quot;End of the Game&quot; (1975). Upon reading the script, Gaines encouraged Golan to consider casting his other clients, Barbara Hershey and Richard Roundtree. Golan was interested in Hershey but was considering Michael York and David Hemmings for the role of Archie.

===Filming===
Golan and Dichner were inspired by the Israel Diamond Exchange in Tel Aviv and decided to shoot the film on location in Israel. Scenes were also filmed in London on Bond Street. Towards the end of filming, Shaw&#x27;s actress wife Mary Ure died at their recently rented Mayfair home from an accidental overdose, and was discovered by Shaw.

==Reception==
Film critic Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars in a review published by the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; on 1 January 1975. Ebert was impressed by the casting but felt that it did not hold up compared to masterpiece films from the heist film genre.

==See also==
* List of American films of 1975

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q496523" start="36" end="46" title="heist film" label="heist film"/>
<link wikidata="Q542003" start="59" end="72" title="Menahem Golan" label="Menahem Golan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313727" start="91" end="102" title="Robert Shaw (actor)" label="Robert Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q446493" start="142" end="159" title="Richard Roundtree" label="Richard Roundtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q229042" start="161" end="176" title="Barbara Hershey" label="Barbara Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q202144" start="181" end="196" title="Shelley Winters" label="Shelley Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q596260" start="305" end="310" title="Shaft (1971 film)" label="Shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="571" end="579" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="604" end="611" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q313727" start="824" end="835" title="Robert Shaw (actor)" label="Robert Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q446493" start="872" end="889" title="Richard Roundtree" label="Richard Roundtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q229042" start="902" end="917" title="Barbara Hershey" label="Barbara Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q202144" start="959" end="974" title="Shelley Winters" label="Shelley Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q205000" start="994" end="1006" title="Shaike Ophir" label="Shaike Ophir"/>
<link wikidata="Q657077" start="1018" end="1032" title="Yosef Shiloach" label="Yosef Shiloach"/>
<link wikidata="Q542003" start="1123" end="1136" title="Menahem Golan" label="Menahem Golan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1236" end="1252" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1299" end="1305" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313727" start="1395" end="1406" title="Robert Shaw (actor)" label="Robert Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196505" start="1452" end="1467" title="End of the Game" label="End of the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q229042" start="1570" end="1585" title="Barbara Hershey" label="Barbara Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q446493" start="1590" end="1607" title="Richard Roundtree" label="Richard Roundtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q298777" start="1661" end="1673" title="Michael York" label="Michael York"/>
<link wikidata="Q310217" start="1678" end="1692" title="David Hemmings" label="David Hemmings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637814" start="1771" end="1794" title="Israel Diamond Exchange" label="Israel Diamond Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="1798" end="1806" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1852" end="1858" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1887" end="1893" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q892187" start="1897" end="1908" title="Bond Street" label="Bond Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q264759" start="1963" end="1971" title="Mary Ure" label="Mary Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="2002" end="2009" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="2023" end="2042" title="accidental overdose" label="accidental overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="2099" end="2110" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="2182" end="2199" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="2305" end="2316" title="masterpiece" label="masterpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q496523" start="2332" end="2342" title="heist film" label="heist film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561536" start="2366" end="2396" title="List of American films of 1975" label="List of American films of 1975"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220523" wikidata="Q2121032" url="?curid=220523" title="Spades (card game)">
<text>Spades is a trick-taking card game devised in the United States in the 1930s. It can be played as either a partnership or solo/&quot;cutthroat&quot; game. The object is to take the number of tricks that were bid before play of the hand began. Spades is a descendant of the whist family of card games, which also includes bridge, hearts, and oh hell. Its major difference as compared to other whist variants is that, instead of trump being decided by the highest bidder or at random, the spade suit always trumps, hence the name.

==History==
Spades was devised in the Midwest of the United States in the late 1930s. Bridge author, George Coffin ascertained that it originated in Cincinnati between 1937 and 1939. The game is descended from Whist and is closely related to Bridge, Pinochle and Euchre. It appears like a simplification of contract bridge such that a skilled spades player can learn bridge relatively quickly, the major additional rules being dynamic trump, the auction, dummy play, and rubber scoring.

The game&#x27;s rise to popularity in the U.S. came during World War II, when it was spread by soldiers traveling around the globe. The game&#x27;s popularity in the armed forces stems from its simplicity compared to Bridge and Euchre and the fact that it can be more easily interrupted than Poker, all of which were also popular military card games. After the war, veterans brought the game back home to the U.S., where due to the GI Bill it spread to, and became popular among, college students as well as in-home games. It also remained widely popular in countries in which U.S. troops were stationed, both in WWII and later deployments.

==Overview==
;Number of players: Two or more. The game is most commonly played with four players in pairs, &quot;partnership spades&quot;.

;The deck: Standard 52-card deck. Spades may also be played with one or two Jokers or with predetermined cards removed. When playing with six or more players, a second deck is often used.

;Rank of suit: Spades are always trump. Other suits have no intrinsic value during play, but a card of the suit led in the current trick will beat a card of any other suit, except a spade. If a tiebreaker is needed in a draw for deal, the most common suit order in Bridge from low to high is .

;Rank of cards: Highest to lowest: Ace, King, Queen, Jack, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2.

;Object of the game: To score points, generally 500. Points are accrued by winning at least the number of tricks bid in each hand. They are lost by failing to take at least that many, or in some cases by taking too many.

;Counter bidding: The first team that bids has an option to counter-bid their opponent.

== Rules ==

===The deal===
The first dealer is chosen by a draw for &quot;first spade&quot; or &quot;highest card&quot;. Thereafter the deal passes to the dealer&#x27;s left after each hand. The dealer shuffles, and the player to the right is given the opportunity to &quot;cut&quot; the cards to prevent the dealer stacking the deck. The entire deck is then dealt face-down one card at a time in clockwise order. With four players, each player should receive 13 cards. The players then pick up their cards, verify the correct count of the cards, and arrange them as desired. The most common arrangement is by suit, then rank.

A misdeal is a deal in which all players have not received the same number of cards, or a player has dealt out of turn. A misdeal may be discovered immediately by counting the cards after they are dealt, or it may be discovered during play of a hand. If a single card is misdealt and discovered before players in question have seen their cards, the player that is short a card can pull a card at random from the player with an extra card. Otherwise a hand is misdealt. The hand is considered void and the hand must be redealt by the same dealer, unless the reason for the redeal is the hand was dealt out of turn.

===Bidding===
Each player bids the number of tricks they expect to take. The player to the left of the dealer starts the bidding. Bidding continues in a clockwise direction, ending with the dealer. As spades are always trump, no trump suit is named during bidding as with some other variants. A bid of &quot;zero&quot; is called &quot;nil&quot;. Players must bid at least one if they don&#x27;t want to bid &quot;nil&quot; (see below).

In partnership spades, the standard rule is that the bids by the two members of each partnership are added together.

====Blind and nil bidding====
Two very common variants of bidding are for a player or partnership to bid &quot;blind&quot;, without having looked at their cards, or to bid &quot;nil&quot;, stating that they will not take a single trick during play of the hand. These bids give the partnership a bonus if the players exactly meet their bid, but penalizes them if the players takes more or fewer. 

A combined bid of two &quot;blind nil&quot; is usually allowed and is worth both the blind and nil bonuses or penalties. In some variants, the player bidding nil passes one or two of their cards (depending on the variant rules) to their partner and receives an equal number of cards back from said partner. Nil passing may be allowed only in the case of a blind nil. Usually teams must be down by 100 points to bid blind nil.

===Game play===
Each hand consists of a number of tricks. A four-handed game consists of thirteen tricks using all fifty-two cards. The player on the dealer&#x27;s left makes the opening lead by playing a single card of their choice. Players in clockwise fashion then play cards of their choice. They must follow suit if possible. Otherwise they may play any card, including a trump spade. 

Once a card has left the hand of a player, it stands and cannot be retrieved, unless the player who threw the card makes an effort to correct their mistake before the next player lays down a card.

A common variant rule, borrowed from Hearts, is that a player may not lead spades until a spade has been played to trump another trick. This prevents a player who is &quot;long&quot; in spades (having a large number of them) from leading spades one after the other at the beginning of the hand to deplete them and thus prevent other players using them as trumps. The act of playing the first spade in a hand is known as &quot;breaking spades&quot;, derived from its parent rule, &quot;breaking hearts&quot;. When a player leads with a spade after spades has been broken, the other players must follow suit.

Another common variant rule, also borrowed from Hearts, is that a player cannot lead spades in the first trick.

The trick is won or taken by the player who played the highest card of the led suit. If trumps were played, the highest trump card wins. The player who wins the trick gathers the cards up into a facedown arrangement that allows players to count the number of tricks taken. The contents of each trick can &quot;not&quot; be viewed after this point, except to determine whether a player reneged. 

The number of tricks a player has won cannot be disguised. If asked, each player must count out their tricks until everyone has agreed on the &quot;trick count&quot;. The player who wins any given trick, leads the next. Play continues until all players have exhausted their hands, which should occur on the same last trick. Otherwise, it is declared a misdeal.

====Reneging====

A partnership reneges on their contract if they violate the rules of play. Most often this happens when a player plays offsuit when they could have—and therefore should have—followed suit. This may not be noticed until later in the game.

Common penalties for reneging are for the reneging player to automatically lose their bid, or for the reneger to have three tricks added to their bid as a penalty, meaning that the team may still make contract but must take three additional tricks to do so. It does not matter whether the player reneged on purpose.

===Scoring===
Once the final trick is played, the hand is then scored. Many variants for scoring exist. What follows is the basic method. All players must align tricks earned from time played consecutively to last hand

====Contract score====
Once a hand is completed, the players count the number of tricks they took and, in the case of partnerships or teams, the members&#x27; trick counts are summed to form a team count.

Each player&#x27;s or team&#x27;s trick count is then compared to their contract. If the player or team made at least the number of tricks bid, 10 points for each bid trick are awarded. A bid of 5 would earn 50 points if made. If a team did not make its contract, it was &quot;set&quot; and 10 points for each bid trick are deducted from the team&#x27;s score. E.g.: six bid and any number less than six taken, results in minus 60 points.

If a player/team took &quot;more&quot; tricks than they bid, a single point is scored for each overtrick, called an &quot;overtrick&quot;, &quot;bag&quot;, or &quot;sandbag&quot;. A bid of 5 tricks with 6 tricks taken, results in a score of 51 points.

====Bonuses or penalties====
To this contract score, players add bonuses earned and subtract penalties assessed based on whether the player successfully did or failed to do any of the more specific things they said they would in the bidding phase. Many variants exist that award or penalize according to certain behaviors. They are covered below. For the basic nil and blind bids, points are awarded as follows:
Though some variant bonuses or penalties are based on the contract score, normally a bonus or penalty does not affect and is not affected by any other bonus or penalty, or the contract score. As a result, a partnership can have a net positive score even if they failed to make their contract. For instance, if one player successfully made a nil bid, but their partner bid 5 tricks and only took 4 tricks, the partnership still gets the bonus which is represented as −50 points + 100 points = 50 points. 

Conversely, a partnership can have a net negative score in much the same way. If a player failed a nil bid but the partnership bid and took 5 tricks, the net score is −50 points.

If a nil bid is set, most tournament rules dictate that the overtricks make the nil invalid.

====Sandbags and bagging out====
A common scoring variant is designed to penalize players for underestimating the number of tricks they will take, while at the same time not removing the possible strategy of intentionally taking overtricks, or &quot;bags&quot;, in order to &quot;set&quot; the other team. This is accomplished by keeping track of bags in the ones place on the scorecard, and assessing a 100-point penalty when 10 bags are accumulated and the ones place rolls over. In shorter variants of the game, where players play to 250 points, instead of the standard 500 points, sandbag penalties can be assessed earlier. In these variants, a 50-point penalty would be assessed when 5 bags are accumulated.

For example, if a team&#x27;s bid is 5 tricks and they take 8 tricks, the score for the hand is 53 points. If the team&#x27;s total score before this hand had a digit in the ones place of 7 or more, for instance 108, the team has &quot;bagged out&quot; or been &quot;sandbagged&quot;. The hand&#x27;s score is added to the total and then 100 points are deducted. In the example, the score would be 61 points after the penalty.

The 10 bags could be considered to make the penalty 90 points. The penalty can instead be 110 points to offset this, or the ones&#x27; place can simply not be carried when adding. Anything over 10 sandbags is retained in the first digit and count towards future overtricks. A player or team can bag out multiple times in a game. Sandbags do not count as points.

====Keeping score====
One of the players is the scorer and writes the bids down, so that during the play and for the scoring afterward, this information will be available to all the players. When a hand is over, the scores should be recorded next to the bids. Alternatively, the scorer can turn the bid into the contract score by writing in the number of bags (zero if there were none) behind the bid, and a minus sign before it if the team was set, then add bonuses and subtract penalties beneath. A running score should be kept so that players can readily see each other&#x27;s total points.

===Winning===
The most common condition is the first to reach 500 points, or forcing the opposing team to drop to −200 points. Alternatively, the game could be played for a fixed number of hands or a fixed time limit. With four players, eight hands can generally be played in about an hour. If there is a tie, then all players participate in one more round of play until a winner is decided.

==Game variations==
As with any widely played game of such a flexible nature, spades has many variations, ranging from significant changes in play to small tweaks that suit individual or household preference.

===Deal variations===
;Deficient hand
: Sometimes a misdeal is also called if a player is dealt a &quot;deficient&quot; hand, such as one that contains one or no spades or no face cards (players should agree beforehand on what constitutes a &quot;deficient hand&quot;). A player wishing to declare a misdeal due to a deficient hand must throw down their hand face-up, so other players may verify, and must declare &quot;misdeal&quot; before any member of their team has bid. Declaring a misdeal on a deficient hand is optional; a player may try to bid &quot;nil&quot; if dealt such a hand.

;Deuce starts
: Regardless of which player has dealt, the player with the leads it to begin the game, similar to hearts.

;Face-up deal
: In this variant, the dealer can lay out up to four cards per player face up as long as the same number is revealed for each player. Revealing the cards can also set up the psychological warfare of bidding and later playing, referred to as &quot;power checks&quot;, but face-up deals are sometimes done by dealers who set the deck to determine if the cut has disrupted their preparations. When a face-up deal is made, Blind Nil can still be bid if the player has not viewed any face-down cards.

;Kitty
: In games with players where the cards cannot be dealt evenly, there is a variation in which no cards are removed from the deck, but instead a &quot;kitty&quot; composed of the leftover cards (or one trick&#x27;s worth of cards plus the leftovers) is placed at center. Whoever is dealt the , or alternatively, the player with the highest bid (tie-breaker being first to make that bid), picks up the kitty before bidding begins, integrates it into their hand and then discards the same number of cards. If a round of cards in addition to the leftovers is placed in the kitty, the discard by the player who picked up the kitty counts as a trick. This introduces more uncertainty in bids because usually the person with the kitty tries to void one suit and trump earlier in the game.

===Bidding variations===
;Sum of bids: One variant, borrowed from the related game &quot;oh hell&quot;, is that the sum of all bids must not equal the number of tricks to be played. This ensures that at least one player or team will be set or &quot;bagged&quot; (forced to take an overtrick). Another game variation allows each player to optionally increase their bid by one point after all players have bid but before game play starts. A reduction in bid, once bids are made, is never allowed.

;Nil: A player that has already looked at their cards can bid nil. The object of the bidder is to take no tricks during the hand. The player&#x27;s partner may make a normal bid and then help them by attempting to take tricks the Nil bidder would otherwise take. In solo/cutthroat spades, successful Nil bids are rare since there is no partner to help by taking the bidder&#x27;s higher cards. If the Nil bidder takes no tricks, that player receive the Nil bonus; if unsuccessful, the player or team subtracts that bonus. More than one player (opponents or teammates in partners) may bid Nil on a deal.

;Double nil: Both players in a partnership bid nil and if successful, the team&#x27;s nil bonuses are doubled. If either player or both players fail(s) to make theirs nil bid, there is no penalty.

;Blind bidding: Virtually all games include a variant that may happen during bidding; one or more players, having not yet looked at their cards, may choose to bid on the number of tricks they will take. When bidding &quot;blind&quot;, the player&#x27;s bid, if made exactly by that player, is rewarded with bonus points, while failing to make the bid results in the bonus being subtracted from the player&#x27;s or team&#x27;s score. Blind bidding is capped at a bid of seven. Thus, bidding a blind 8 or higher is contrary to standard game play, and is not allowed. Quite commonly, blind bids are allowed only if the bidding team is at least 100 points behind, and in many cases, whether a minimum point spread is required, these risky bids are typically made by a team with a large deficit as a last-ditch effort; blind bids made in this situation are typically called &quot;trailing blind bids&quot;.

;Blind nil: The most common blind bid, the player bids that they will not take a single trick during play of the hand. Bidding nil offers an additional bonus on top of the blind bid. A failed nil bid, similar to a failed blind, results in the bonus being deducted from the score.

;Double blind nil: It is possible for both players of a partnership to bid blind nil. If this is done successfully, the team wins the game outright or takes double the combined bonus. If either or both players take tricks, however, there is no penalty.

;Passing: Passing, or the exchanging of cards between players, is optional and rare in spades. However, one more common exception relates to nil bids, which are generally considered difficult to make, especially when the bid was blindly made. To offset this difficulty slightly, a partnership in which one player has bid nil or blind nil can choose to pass two cards between players; the most common arrangement is one card for regular nil and two cards for blind nil. When passing, the partners agree on a number of cards to pass, then select that number of cards and place them face down in front of their partner. Neither partner should look at the cards passed to them before they have passed their own cards. In passing this way, the idea is for the partner who bid nil to offload their highest trumps or other face cards in return for low cards from their partner, which both decreases the likelihood that the nil bidder can be forced to take a trick, and increases the likelihood that their partner will be able to &quot;cover&quot;, or overplay high cards the nil bidder still holds that would otherwise take a trick. The number of cards passed should be determined before the game begins so that each team can use this as they bid.

:Passing does not have to be limited to this one case; players may agree that a certain number of cards may, or must, be passed either between partners or to the opponent on each player&#x27;s left or right, before or after making a bid. Passing between opponents is borrowed from hearts and generally allows players to attempt to &quot;shorten&quot; or &quot;void&quot; a suit, or get rid of &quot;dangerous&quot; cards such as upper pip cards or low face cards, which may win a trick the player didn&#x27;t bid to take. Passing between partners in situations other than nil bids is rare, as the players would have little or no information about cards their partner would want or that opponents wouldn&#x27;t.

;Board: Each team is required to make a minimum required bid of four tricks. When bidding nil, the player&#x27;s teammates must bid a minimum of four tricks or bid double nil or triple nil with three teammates. When playing solo, one can bid nil or board. You can never bid anything between nil or board. A variation to this play involves setting the minimum bid to whatever number the players agree on.

;Partnership bidding: This variant allows partners to &quot;talk&quot; during the bidding round and bid as a partnership rather than individuals. The partnership that did not deal makes their bid first, and the opposing partnership may use this information to craft their bid, although the total number of tricks bid by both teams does not need to equal 13. The minimum bid is &quot;Board&quot; or 4 tricks, and there is no nil bidding. Players are allowed to discuss how many tricks they think they can take with each other, but any discussion that identifies specific cards or strength of a particular suit constitutes &quot;cross-boarding&quot; and results in a misdeal, for which the penalty can range from the deal passing to the left to adding a predetermined number of &quot;bags&quot; to the offending partnership to a score penalty of up to 100 points.

:The only exception to this rule is the &quot;ace check&quot; rule. If a player holds three or more aces in their hand, that player may use the phrase &quot;ace check&quot; during the bidding round. The partner then discloses whether or not they have an Ace. If the initiating partner can now determine that all four aces are held within the partnership, they may pass a card face down to their partner. Doing so creates a special contract where if the partnership retains all 4 aces after all cards are played for the hand, they receive a 100-point bonus. If not, they receive a 100-point penalty. The &quot;ace check&quot; variant is optional to partnership bidding, and is generally only used in combination with &quot;deuces high&quot; or similar trump variants where the ace of spades is more difficult to retain since other cards in the deck are assigned a higher rank.

;Auction spades: This variant is a combination of spades with the auction-based bidding of Contract Bridge. Each player must bid a minimum of 1 trick; by making the bid, they are committing their partnership to take the minimum 6 tricks plus the number bid. Subsequent bidders must raise the bid or pass; once they pass, they cannot bid further. Once all other players have passed, the winning partnership (declarers) must take a number of tricks equal to the winning bid plus 6 (so a winning bid of 2 commits the declarers to winning 8 tricks), while the defenders attempt to set them. If the declarers make contract, they get 10 points per bid trick; if they are set they get nothing. The defenders get 10 points per overtrick made by, or undertrick missed by, the declarers (if the declarers bid 2 and only make 6 tricks, the declarers get nothing and defenders get 20 points; if the declarers make 10 tricks, the declarers get 80 points but the defenders get 20 for the 2 unbid overtricks). Thus, the defenders have a choice of tactics; they can either set the declarers so they get no points, or may &quot;bag&quot; the declarers by forcing them to take overtricks so both sides get points.

;No-trump bids: This variant&#x27;s name is misleading as it is not the same as the equivalent bid in contract bridge; spades are still trumps, but a player who bids some number of tricks with &quot;no trump&quot; promises not to win any tricks with spades, except when spades are led. A player may only bid &quot;no trump&quot; if that player holds at least one spade in their hand, and their partner agrees to let them bid NT. A player who successfully makes a no trump bid counts each trick taken by that player as double (normally 20 points).

;10-for-200: Also known as bidding a flight or wheels. Bidding 10-for-200 commits a side to win at least 10 tricks; if successful, the team scores 200 points. If the side wins fewer than 10 tricks, they lose 200 points. Some play a lost bid only loses 100, not 200. In some variations, to make a 10-for-200 bid, the side must win exactly 10 tricks. If a team pulls more than 10 the extra tricks are still bags or &quot;ob&#x27;s&quot; Some play that any bid of 10 is automatically a 10-for-200 bid. In some places the 10-for-200 bid is called 10-for-2, which is written on the score sheet as 10-4-2. Another way of writing the 200 score is with the two zeros linked together at the top; this is called wheels, as the zeroes are supposed to look like train wheels. Making this bid is also significant in that the other team is automatically set if Nils are not allowed, since they would not even make board, thus the winning team will be ahead by at least 240 points (200 for the score + 40 point penalty of the other team).

; Eight &amp; ten rule: Variation of bonus where bonuses are split into two between 4 players (8 + 3 and 10 + 3). This variation is played widely in India and England.

;Big &amp; Little Moe: A series of bids where the partnership states their intention to take, respectively, eight or six tricks &quot;consecutively&quot;. Any capture of a trick by opponents &quot;resets&quot; the count. A partnership bidding Big Moe and capturing eight tricks in a row gains 300 points; one bidding Little Moe and capturing six tricks in a row gains 150 points. Bags or overtricks, if applicable, are not counted.

;Bemo: A specialization of Big &amp; Little Moe bidding, bidding Little Bemo commits the team to win all of the first six tricks. It is additional to the normal bid; the team scores an extra bonus of 60 if successful and loses 60 if not. Big Bemo similarly commits the team that bids it to win the first nine tricks; they score a 90-point bonus if successful and lose 90 if not.

;Blind 6: This must be declared by a side before either partner looks at their cards. It scores 120 points if the side takes exactly six tricks. If they take some other number of tricks they lose 120. It is also commonly played that the side must win at least six tricks and overtricks are not counted, or that failing to make six tricks only loses 60.

;Trailing blind bids: Only a player or partnership that is 100 points behind the leader may make blind bids of any kind, and they are scored at 20 points per bid trick, with no overtricks scored. Failing a blind contract is penalized at the normal 10 points per trick bid. Played with or without jokers.

;No nines, no blinds: A variation of partnership bidding – neither blind bids nor a cumulative bid of 9 is allowed. This can make the game more competitive since a partnership with a strong hand has to either bid an 8 or 10-for-200, risking &quot;overbidding&quot; their hand and teams cannot catch up through trailing blind bids.

;Boston: Also known as shooting the moon or slamming. Related to but opposite of a double nil bid. If a team bids to take all the tricks in a hand and does so, that team wins the game outright regardless of the score before the hand. A team cannot bid to shoot the moon if the other team bids double nil, and vice versa.

;Blind moon: This is a blind bid to take all tricks in a hand, made before either partner has looked at their cards. Again, the first team to bid either double blind nil or blind moon has precedence.

;Lexington: Similar to Boston but 12 tricks are made. Variations include automatically scoring 240 points regardless the bid.

;Half tricks: In this variation, the first partner of a team to bid may optionally bid tricks in increment of one-half instead of one, i.e. &quot;I bid three-and-one-half&quot;. Their partner is then required to bid such that the team bid rounds out to a whole number, i.e. &quot;I&#x27;ll bid two-and-one-half&quot; for a team bid of six tricks. This gives some information between partners; a player is bidding that they will take three tricks and might take a fourth. Their partner can then use this in determining the other half of the partnership&#x27;s bid.

;Suicide: Played by four players, playing as partners. Each player must bid either nil or at least four tricks. The second player to bid in each partnership may either bid the opposite, i.e., Nil if partner bid four or more, or may bid what their partner bid, thus forcing their partner to take the opposite bid.

:Another version of suicide is played by four players, playing as partners. The bidding is the same as normal, except that one person in each team is forced to bid nil, so if the leading partner does not bid nil they must do so. This limits the hands which the first and second person want to bid a non-nil amount, as if they do not have the ace of spades, they cannot place it and therefore risk having it in their partner&#x27;s hand.

;Whiz: In this variant, each player must bid the exact number of spades in their hand or go nil. There is no minimum amount for teams to bid. Blind bidding is not allowed, however bags are counted as usual.

;Mirrors: Related to whiz, each player must bid the number of spades in their hand. Players do not have the option to go nil unless they have no spades and &quot;must&quot; bid nil if this is the case. Bags are counted as normal.

;Fredieu: In this variant, each player must bid a minimum four tricks unless going nil, blind nil or wheels (10 for 200). The objective is to force as many bags as possible on the opposing players to give them the most sandbags. Sandbags are counted as usual.

===Trump variations===
;Breaking Spades: Borrowed from hearts, a player may not lead a spade until a spade has been played as a trump card (when a non-Spade was led), unless they have only Spades.

;Deuces high: All 2s count as the highest spades. The order becomes, highest to lowest: , , , , then all the rest of the spades, Ace through 3. There is another variation, when playing with the Jokers, that the and the are high trumps, then Ace, King, etc. When the deck being used does not contain Jokers, or contains Jokers of the same size, the becomes the &quot;big joker&quot; and the becomes the &quot;little joker&quot;. There is a variation where the Aces can be called high (value of 14) or low (value of 1). In this scenario highest to lowest spades with all cards in deck is: big joker, little joker, , , , , ace, king – 3 of spades.

;Joke trumps: Jokers have no value or rank by themselves, but transform all teammates&#x27; cards (whether played before or after the Joker) to &quot;joke trumps&quot; status. For example, a Joker played on A transforms that card into A, which trumps all cards except a natural A. Similarly, a Joker followed by a transforms the latter into a , beatable by either a natural or higher, or a joke or higher. There is no added benefit to playing multiple Jokers. If two teams play Jokers, resulting in tied joke trumps, the tie is broken either by the higher Joker, the first Joker played, or the suit rank ( first, then , then ), depending on variation.

;Jokers high aka easy spades: Both jokers are positioned as the highest spades. So instead of just 13 spades, there are now 15 spades. This in effect takes the queens out of question, meaning one need not bother to question whether the queen will win a trick, it will most likely not. With more spades and removing the question from the queens makes this variation an easier game to play. If both jokers are played in one trick, the &quot;big joker&quot; (full color, red, or larger graphic) beats the &quot;little joker&quot; (black-and-white, or the &quot;guarantee&quot; card with smaller art). A related variation is Joker-Joker-Deuce-Ace in which the ranking is &quot;big joker&quot;, &quot;little joker&quot;, and A. With 3 players, the Jokers are added and no cards are removed; with 4 players, the and either or are taken out, or, similar to their use in Euchre, can replace the J and J.

;Jokers high alternate: Similar to jokers high above, if the &quot;big joker&quot; is led, opponents must play their highest spade in that trick. If the &quot;big joker&quot; is played during a hand, opponents are not forced to play their highest spade. This variation makes bidding more complex, as one cannot count on their highest spade as winning a trick, &quot;big joker&quot; excepted. This variation is commonly played with all 54 cards, using the &quot;Kitty&quot; dealing variation above.

;Jokers high first played wins: Both jokers are used and count as the highest spade. If both jokers are played in one trick, the one played first takes the trick.

;Bauer trumps: Adapted from 500 and Euchre, highest trump is the J, known as the right bauer. Second highest trump is J, being the same color and known as the &quot;Left Bauer&quot;. The rest of the cards follow normal order. Alternatively, and similar to the above, both Jacks can be replaced with two Jokers, making them more distinctive.

;Differentiated trump values: Suits are given special trump value, with Spades being the highest trump. General order is , , , and . When played this way, there is no off-suit; the suit is either more or less valuable than the led suit, and if more valuable it trumps any card played in that suit.

;Show 7 trump: If a player holds seven cards (or more) of a non trump suit, (Seven , seven , or seven ) The player may show their seven cards to the other players before bidding to change the trump suit from spades to the new suit. Thereby spades would cease to trump the other cards &amp; the new suit would beat all other cards. In the case that seven cards (or more) of a suit are held by one player &quot;and&quot; seven (or more) are held by another player, The player holding the seven may optionally show their spades &amp; make trump again. Bidding then begins as normal.

=== Variations===
;Aces high/low: During the play, aces can be called high or low. These are especially valuable cards in 3B-spades scoring version where there is an immediate penalty for taking extra tricks.

;Big Mo, Little Mo
: During bidding, a team may declare either Big Mo or Little Mo, meaning they intend to take the first several tricks. This is the only time that cross-talk during the bidding is allowed. A player considering a Mo may ask their teammate &quot;How many do you have on the Mo?&quot; or some similar question to determine how many tricks the teammate can contribute to the Mo without revealing any details as to which tricks they&#x27;ll take. The only detail that can be discussed is which teammate will be leading the first trick but not how they will be leading. If a team declares Little Mo, they must take the first 7 tricks of the hand. Accomplishing the Little Mo earns the team 150 points. If a team declares Big Mo, they must take the first 10 tricks of the hand. Accomplishing the Big Mo earns the team 250 points. Taking more consecutive tricks than needed does not earn the team more points. For instance, taking the first 10 tricks when a Little Mo had been declared still only earns the team 150 points. The team that declares either Mo is immune to bags for that hand and will lead the first trick, regardless of whose turn it was to lead. Failure to accomplish the declared Mo (the opposing team took a trick before the goal was met) will cause the team to lose the points they would have earned had they been successful. This is true regardless of how many tricks they took before or after the opposing team took a trick. The other team bids and must match their bid, as usual. It&#x27;s not unusual for a team that could do a Big Mo to declare a Little Mo to play it safe and then take the extra tricks to try to set their opponents.

;Cancellation spades
: 3 teams of 2 players play with 2 decks minus both . The 2 is the highest spade followed by the and ace. They must follow the spades suit rules. If identical cards are played in a round, they cancel and cannot take the trick. Tricks won by no one are &quot;dead&quot; and discarded. Successful nil bids score 50. Double nil scores 200. No blind bid bonuses. Missed bids cost 10 points for each trick short—getting 3 of 5 means −20 points. Tricks taken by a nil do not count towards a non-nil bid and are penalized 10 points each. Extra tricks get 1 point—no penalties for sandbags. Game is six hands with each player dealing once. Optionally, 8 players can share two full decks with nils worth 30 and double nils worth 100.

;Passing cards
: Each team passes one card with their partner each hand. This rule is normally applied only to Nil bids and it is most frequently used to allow players to exchange two cards if a Blind Nil bid is made.

;First trick clubs
: This rule is borrowed from a common variation of hearts rules. Whoever possesses the lowest club, usually , (if deuces are high), must open the play. Other players can play any card except spades on the first trick, unless the player has nothing but spades (rare, as the player would have to have been dealt every spade in the deck).

;First trick lowest club
: This rule is an elaboration of the preceding first trick clubs rule. Whoever possesses the lowest club, usually , (if a three-hand game), must open the play. Each player must then play their lowest club to the first trick. Play proceeds normally from the second trick.

;Speed-spades a.k.a. Philadelphia a.k.a. Quakers
: The players agree to play each trick within a certain time frame, with each player required to make a play on a one- or two- second count. This is a game of pressure designed to induce mistakes, to increase the pace of a slow game, or both. Often the players will shout &quot;speed spades!&quot; as the start of each trick.

;Play to beat a.k.a. must trump
: A pinochle-based variant, if a player cannot follow suit, but can beat a spade already played as trump (when a spade was not led), they must play the &quot;overtrump&quot;. Sometimes this rule extends this to even having to beat a player&#x27;s partner, but this generally only applies to beating the other team&#x27;s trump. If a player is caught breaking this rule, all points won by the team that broke the rule during the round are awarded to the opposing team. An alternate variant, from tarot games, is that if a player cannot follow suit, they must trump if they are able (meaning they cannot play off-suit if they have a spade even if there are no other spades played), and additionally they must beat any Spade already played if they can (including when spades are led).

;End winning streak
: If one player wins last three tricks of the round, it is worth either 3 points or 30. Some varieties include awarding points for winning the last four or five tricks with same point gauge. If this rule is enforced, and an opposing team ends a possible streak by taking the last trick, the points may be awarded to that team instead of the team who had the streak.

;Dix
: If the wins a trick, it is worth 1 point. If the 9 wins a trick with at least one other spade in play, worth 5 points. If the 9 wins a spade-led trick, it is worth 10 points. This is borrowed from Pinochle where in the melding phase, a 9 of trumps is worth 10 points.

;Last trick ace victory
: Bonus points (1 or 10) are awarded for winning the last round with any ace. 20 points for winning with the ace of spades.

;Last trick ace on nil
: Bonus points, usually one-fifth of agreed nil value, are awarded for making a nil bid and playing an ace on the last trick.

;Last trick deuce victory
: Bonus points (30) are awarded for winning the last round with a non-trump two.

;Last trick high spade victory
: A player who takes the very last trick with a high spade ( or above), and with that trick exactly makes their bid, receives a 10-point bonus. There is no bonus if the player bags or is short.

;Nil
: A team that declares nil is intending to lose every trick. If successful, the team earns 100 points. If the team takes a single trick, they will lose 100 points. A team that declares nil is immune to bags for that hand.

;Blind nil
: A team may declare blind nil as long as neither teammate has looked at any of their cards. After bidding has been set, all players can look at their cards like normal. Like nil, the team intends to lose every trick. If successful, the team earns 150 points. If the team takes a single trick, they will lose 150 points. A team that declares blind nil is immune to bags for that hand.

;Nil in the dark
: A player who bids nil in the dark shuffles their cards and puts them face down in front of them in a stack. When it is their play, they take the top card and throw it into the pile. The scoring counts the same as blind nil. A player may also go &quot;blind nil in the dark&quot; where they never even look at their cards. This is scored the same as a Big Mo. Nil in the dark is usually only bid if they have no trump cards.

;The rest are mine (TRAM)
: Some players allow a player who realizes that they cannot help but win all remaining tricks to simply lay down their hand and declare &quot;the rest are mine&quot;; such declaration is sometimes called &quot;tramming&quot;. This can help speed the play of the game. An obvious situation in which a player could &quot;TRAM&quot; is if, with three tricks left to play, the leading player holds the . No matter which card they play, no other player will be able to beat that card (as the player holds the only cards that can), and the same will be true for the next two tricks. Usually, situations in which TRAMming is appropriate are less clearcut, and involve keeping track of the cards that have been played to determine whether any player could beat a particular card.
:The practice is sometimes prohibited explicitly by the rules.
:A player who mistakenly TRAMs (i.e., when it is possible for another player to win at least one trick) may face a penalty. This may be the same penalty as that imposed for any other illegal showing of cards, such as being required to leave the exposed cards face up on the table, to be played at the earliest legal opportunity to do so. Other penalties are also possible; e.g., forfeiting all remaining tricks at the discretion of the player who would otherwise take the trick (to prevent intentional false TRAMming that would give the player an advantage), or forfeiting of a player&#x27;s bid and scoring the hand as if that player had failed to make their bid, regardless of the number of tricks they have taken.

===Scoring variations===
;3B-spades
: In 3B-spades there is an immediate bag penalty. In this variation you are penalized minus 10 for each extra trick. In this case the player receives 10 points for each trick that was bid and minus 10 points for each extra trick. This makes the ideal strategy to make your own bid exactly while giving extra tricks to some players and trying to set others. A person going zero/nil also gets minus 10 for each &quot;extra&quot; trick and those points go into the &quot;zero pot&quot;. Players that did not make their bid only get 1 point per trick made.

;No overs
: One game variation does not count overtricks. In this case the player or team receives only 10 points for each trick that was bid and no points for overtricks. This changes the bidding strategy; it is only possible to lose points by being &quot;set&quot; on a bid, as there is no penalty for &quot;bagging out&quot;, so players will attempt to &quot;set&quot; the leading player or team in order to gain ground. Similarly, players or teams will bid lower to avoid being set as there is no penalty for taking too many overtricks.

;Double over, double back
: Instead of, or perhaps in addition to, penalizing players who &quot;bag out&quot;, a common variant is for players or teams who take at least double the number of bid tricks will be penalized by subtracting double the value of their contract. A team who bids 2 tricks and takes 4 tricks or more will lose 40 points. This is often combined with the &quot;no overs&quot; scoring style to discourage small bids.

;Oh hell variation
: Like oh hell, partnerships must take exactly the number of tricks bid. If they have overtricks, the team is penalized and the contract is broken. Some play where if the team bids 5 tricks and wins exactly 5 tricks, the contract is honored no matter which player made how many tricks, while others force each player to exactly meet their contract.

;Quicksand
: A variation of penalizing overtricks, a team who exactly makes their contract gets full value. Overtricks subtract 10 points each from that value, and teams who do not make their contract subtract 10 points for each missed trick. For instance, consider a bid of 7 tricks. If the team made exactly 7 tricks, they would earn the full 70 points. If they only took 5 tricks, they would lose 20 points. If the team made 9 tricks, they would earn the 70 points, −20 points for the two overtricks, resulting in a score of 50 points.

;Broken contract gives points to opposing team
: This is an additional variant taken from bridge and used with an auction-style bidding. If the declarer (the player or partner with the winning bid) fails to meet the contract, the defending pair receives 10 points for each &quot;undertrick&quot; (the number of tricks by which declarer fell short of the goal). Instead of the declaring team losing points, they should receive zero.

;Books made
: If the combine bids of both teams equals 10 books (i.e. 6 books to 4 books, 5 books to 5 books) then books made is called. The hand is not played out. Both team are awarded their bids. There are no over books. the deal moves to the next player.

;Deficient ends the game
: If one team&#x27;s cumulative score is less than the negative of the winning score, that team has lost. For example, if before the game, the winning score is set at 500 points, then either team that manages to net a score of −500 points or below automatically loses.

;Highlander scoring
: The points awarded function slightly differently than in conventional spades. Highlander scoring merges partnership playing with individual team effort. Sandbagging does not apply with this type of game play, although sandbagging could be included. Each partner makes a bid of the tricks they think they can win. Each partner must win the total they individually bid; if not, that player&#x27;s bid value is deducted from the team&#x27;s score even if their partner took enough trick to make up the difference.
:For example, if Tom bids 5 tricks and wins 4 tricks, and Harry (his partner) bids 3 tricks and wins 4 tricks, 80 points is deducted from the partnership&#x27;s total score even though the team won their promised 8 tricks, because Tom did not make his bid. However, Harry is awarded five points per overtrick, so they are −75 points instead of −80 points. If the contract is broken and no overtricks were taken, the team is down the full amount of the bid. If both made their contract and have won overtricks, they are awarded five extra points per overtrick. Team that wins seven or more tricks per round is given 10 points the first time, 20 points the second, and each time thereafter the points increase by 10. This encourages race-style play where players set out to take as many tricks as they can as long as they do not steal tricks their partner needs.

;Individual team players
: If both teammates get their exact individual bid, they are given a bonus equal to half the total bid (rounded down to the nearest 10 to avoid interference with bags). For example, Tom bids 3 tricks, Harry bids 4 tricks. If Tom wins 3 tricks and Harry wins 4 tricks, 30 bonus points are awarded to that team (added to the 70 points for contract for a total of 100 points on the hand).

;Sandbags 0-till-10
: Some players use the last digit of the score to count sandbags, but do not regard that digit as being part of the score. For example, as score of 54 points translates to 50 recordable points with 4 sandbags. In this manner, sandbags are in effect worth nothing until a player accumulates 10 of them, at which point they trigger a 100-point deduction. Bags are thus kept separate from the score and cannot be used as a tiebreaker.

;Sandbag cancellation
: Some people play that there is a special card which cancels one bag on that hand for the side that takes it in their tricks. If the side which wins the special card makes no overtricks, or loses their bid, the special card has no effect. The special card may be either a fixed card or may be determined afresh by cutting a card before each deal.

;Sandbags negative value
: Tricks in excess of the contract (overtricks or sandbags) may be worth −1 point each rather than +1 point. In this case the penalty for accumulating 10 overtricks generally does not apply.

;Seven tricks or higher
: For successful bids of seven or more, players get an extra 10 points for each trick bid above six. So, if 7 tricks are bid by a player and that contract is made exactly, 80 bonus points are awarded. 8 tricks award 100 points, 9 tricks award 120 points, etc. This method of scoring rewards players who are more daring.

;Seven tricks or higher part deux
: Team that bids and then wins 7 tricks per round is given 10 points the first time, 20 points the second, and each time thereafter the points increase by 10 points. Overtricks do not count.

;Win the last trick
: Taken from bela and pinochle, the winner of last trick wins 10 bonus points. Generally this variation is not recommended if one is playing with bonus tricks.

;Leading with the ace of spades
: Depending on the region in which the game is played this is permitted.

;No point deductions
:In some variations of spades, no points are lost when bids are not meet. In these scenarios, the team receives a score of 0 points for the round. This scoring is less drastic than normal scoring and is recommended for beginner players. Nil is the exception to this rule. If a player bids nil and takes a trick, then 100 points are deducted from the team&#x27;s score. This is independent of your partner&#x27;s bid. For example, if a player bids nil and their team member does not meet their bid, the team still gains a net of 100 points. If a player bids nil and receives a trick, then 100 points are deduced and their partner&#x27;s hand is scored normally.

===The number of players===
Traditionally spades is played with four players in two partnerships. However, there are variations that allow for greater or fewer players. Partnerships are optional even with four players. All other rules should be agreed upon beforehand by the players.

;Solo spades: Solo spades is like regular spades, just without the partnership. This is also known as &quot;cutthroat spades&quot;.

;Two players: In this variation, the cards are not dealt at the beginning of the game. Instead, the deck is placed face down and the players take turns drawing two cards with each turn. Once drawn, players must choose one card of the pair to discard and one to keep. This continues until the deck is exhausted after which, each player will possess 13 cards. The game then proceeds normally. :A variation of this deal is to decide whether or not to keep the first card drawn. If the player decides to keep the first card, the second card may be looked at, but must be discarded. If the player decides to discard the first card, the second card must be kept. This variation introduces a greater degree of chance into the game. To add an even greater degree of chance, forbid viewing of the second card if the first card is kept. This gives both players less certainty as to which cards their opponent is holding.

;Three players: There are no partnerships; players play for themselves. A standard 52 card deck is used, and each player is dealt 17 cards with a predetermined card thrown out (usually the ) or the last undealt card thrown out. Some play with the Big and little joker included as the highest trumps, with each person getting 18 cards.

;Five players: There are no partnerships; players play for themselves. and are removed from the deck and each player is dealt 10 cards. Alternatively, if three Jokers are available, they may be added as either highest trump or as junk cards, thus dealing each player 11 cards each.

;Six players: This can be played either solo, three partnerships, or two teams of three. Two standard 52 card decks are combined, with both discarded (102 cards, 17 each), two cards discarded (or kept as a &quot;kitty&quot;), or all four Jokers added (108 cards, 18 each). Prior to the beginning of play, players agree on the protocol when identical cards are played. Some play that the first such played card wins the trick while others play that the last played card wins the trick. Alternatively, 6-handed play can be done with a 48 card deck, having removed all the 2s. It can also be done with a 52 card deck plus two Jokers, similar to three-handed but with half the cards per player.

;Seven or more players: Beyond six players, the game becomes either very complex, or hard to maintain with multiple decks. An additional side effect of an increased number of players is a short game, as the number of cards held by each player is reduced and high trump is more and more likely to take the trick. Seven players should normally be split into groups of four and three, eight players into two groups of four players, nine players into either groups of four and five players, or three groups of three players.

===Partners versus cutthroat/solo===

The differences partners spades and cutthroat bidding and play are substantial. In partners, a player would bid a trick for every ace, king, and queen in a side suit (i.e.: non-Spade). In cutthroat, a player would rarely bid on a king in a long side suit (5+ cards) nor a queen in any length side suit because of the risk of their being trumped. This risk is reduced in partners by the possibility that partner may be out of the long suit and able to discard or to overtrump an opponent.

In partners, nil bids are easier to make because the nil bidder&#x27;s partner can overtake or trump the nil bidder&#x27;s high cards. In cutthroat, this safety valve is not available.

Partners allows a mix of weak and strong players by pairing a weak player with a strong one, resulting in a more satisfying game (provided that the division of talent is about even) than in Cutthroat where individual weak players would stand little or no chance against strong players.

Conversely, against a computer program where the object is for a human to beat the computer software, being saddled with a weak computer partner does &quot;not&quot; provide a satisfying game. Thus, Cutthroat makes more sense for a computer game than Partners.

==Terminology==
* Bag – An &quot;overtrick&quot;. A trick taken by a player or partnership when their contract has already been met. The importance of bags or overtricks varies depending on house rules. Generally, taking too many overtricks incurs a penalty, but the taking of some overtricks can be good strategy.
* Bid – The number of tricks each player will take during a hand, announced by each player in term before a hand begins. The bid is the sum of each team members single bid, and is used to determine the total &quot;team bid.&quot; The bid equals the total number of tricks the team must win, or risk being set (falling short of the bid) or taking sandbags, or bags (taking more tricks than were bid).
* Book – In spades, this is synonymous with &quot;trick&quot;. Other trick-taking games have a different definition.
*Boston – When a team, usually by one player of the team or both, wins all 13 books in a hand. 
* Contract – The result of a player&#x27;s or partnership&#x27;s bids for the hand. They are required to take at least that number of tricks during play of the hand.
*Cut or cutting – In spades, when a suit being played gets cut by a spade and thus takes the book, unless the following player trumps theirs with a higher spade. Also, when a partner trumps the other partners winning card, for example the first partner threw out a king of diamonds and their partner then trumped it with the ace of diamonds. There are times when this can be a strategic move, though not often. 
* Extras – After adding up all the contracts the unclaimed tricks are &quot;the extras&quot;. In 4 handed there are 13 tricks per hand. A typical hand has just one extra.
* Hand – A series of tricks in which all cards dealt to each player are played.
* Honor cards – Refers to the top four or five cards in each suit, A, K, Q, J and 10.
* Nil – A Bid to win no tricks at all in any hand. A special bid for which there is usually a bonus if the nil is achieved and a penalty if it is defeated by forcing the one who bid Nil to take a trick in any given hand.
* Partnership – A pair of players when playing with an even number. Their bids and taken tricks are summed.
* Renege – When a player can follow suit but does not, it is considered cheating.
* Set – To be unable to take the number of tricks required by a contract, usually because the opposing players have taken enough tricks that there are fewer remaining tricks than are needed.
* Slough (sluff) – also known as &quot;throwing off&quot;, to play a card that is not a trump card but of different suit than the first suit played, therefore discarding that card. Sloughing is normally used to get rid of a card that may otherwise take a trick the player does not wish to take. It can also be used to void other suits allowing play of trump cards in tricks where that suit is led.
* Team – Largely synonymous with &quot;partnership&quot;, but when playing with six or more a team can comprise more than two players.
* Three amigos – The ace, king, and queen of spades. When a person has all three it usually mentioned when they are being led out in order. Also, with the jack, &quot;the three amigos and their little brother&quot;.
* (To) follow suit – To play a card of the same suit as the first card played to a trick. As in many trick-taking games, Spades players are required to follow suit if they are able.
* Trick – Also known as a book. A unit of play in which each player lays one card from their hand, and is &quot;taken&quot; or won usually by the player who laid down the highest value card.
* Trump – A suit or other subset of cards in the deck that is of higher value than all others. Most games in the Whist family use a trump suit. In Spades, it is always the Spade suit. The term also refers to the playing of a trump card, also known as a &quot;ruff&quot; or &quot;ruffing&quot;.
* Undertrick – A trick that a partnership needed in order to make contract, but didn&#x27;t take. The term is used more in scoring than in play. A pair who bid 6 but only took five has an undertrick, while a specific trick in play that the partners need to take from a tactical standpoint is simply a &quot;must-have&quot; or &quot;must-win&quot;.
* Void – To not have any card in a particular suit or suits, or to intentionally exhaust them from one&#x27;s hand. A player must be void in at least one suit in order to play Spades as trump, and therefore will try to void their hand of a suit in which they hold few cards.
* Zero – See &quot;nil&quot;.

==See also==
* Bid whist
* Contract bridge
* Tarneeb
* Vint
* Whist

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2121032" start="0" end="6" title="Spades (card game)" label="Spades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191150" start="12" end="34" title="Trick-taking game" label="trick-taking card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q767979" start="273" end="278" title="whist" label="whist"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="289" end="298" title="card game" label="card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="321" end="327" title="contract bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q867799" start="329" end="335" title="Hearts (card game)" label="hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q973596" start="341" end="348" title="oh hell" label="oh hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q27905" start="493" end="497" title="suit (cards)" label="suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538028" start="631" end="644" title="George Coffin" label="George Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="679" end="689" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="772" end="778" title="Bridge (game)" label="Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898942" start="780" end="788" title="Pinochle" label="Pinochle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059474" start="793" end="799" title="Euchre" label="Euchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059474" start="1246" end="1252" title="Euchre" label="Euchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q80131" start="1310" end="1315" title="Poker" label="Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484269" start="1450" end="1457" title="GI Bill" label="GI Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="2254" end="2260" title="contract bridge" label="Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q320553" start="2958" end="2961" title="Cut (cards)" label="cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q867799" start="5933" end="5939" title="Hearts (card game)" label="Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7002" end="7009" title="Spades (card game)#Reneging" label="reneged"/>
<link wikidata="Q867799" start="13666" end="13672" title="Hearts (card game)" label="hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q973596" start="15065" end="15072" title="oh hell" label="oh hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q867799" start="19236" end="19242" title="Hearts (card game)" label="hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="21903" end="21918" title="Contract Bridge" label="Contract Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q867799" start="29277" end="29283" title="Hearts (card game)" label="hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059474" start="31582" end="31588" title="Euchre" label="Euchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639730" start="32307" end="32310" title="500 (card game)" label="500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059474" start="32315" end="32321" title="Euchre" label="Euchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q867799" start="36416" end="36422" title="Hearts (card game)" label="hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898942" start="37411" end="37419" title="pinochle" label="pinochle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898942" start="38781" end="38789" title="Pinochle" label="Pinochle"/>
<link wikidata="Q973596" start="43705" end="43712" title="Oh hell" label="Oh hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898942" start="49062" end="49070" title="pinochle" label="pinochle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191150" start="57710" end="57727" title="trick-taking game" label="trick-taking game"/>
<link wikidata="Q727407" start="57984" end="57989" title="Trump (card games)" label="Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q767979" start="58095" end="58100" title="Whist" label="Whist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903975" start="58945" end="58954" title="Bid whist" label="Bid whist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="58957" end="58972" title="Contract bridge" label="Contract bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120081" start="58975" end="58982" title="Tarneeb" label="Tarneeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932804" start="58985" end="58989" title="Vint" label="Vint"/>
<link wikidata="Q767979" start="58992" end="58997" title="Whist" label="Whist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="220524" wikidata="Q1788166" url="?curid=220524" title="Clubs (suit)">
<text>Clubs () () is one of the four playing card suits in the standard French-suited playing cards. The symbol was derived from that of the suit of Acorns in a German deck when French suits were invented, around 1480.

In Skat and Doppelkopf, Clubs are the highest-ranked suit (whereas Diamonds and Bells are the trump suit in Doppelkopf). In Bridge, Clubs are the lowest suit.

==Name==
Its original French name is which means &quot;clover&quot; and the card symbol depicts a three-leafed clover leaf. The Italian name is (&quot;flower&quot;). However, the English name &quot;Clubs&quot; is a translation of &quot;basto&quot;, the Spanish name for the suit of batons, suggesting that Spanish-suited cards were used in England before French suits were invented.

In Germany, this suit is known as (&quot;cross&quot;), especially in the International Skat Regulations. In Austria, by contrast, it is almost exclusively called in reference to the French name, especially in the game of Bridge, where French names generally predominate. For example, is used instead of .

== Characteristics ==
The symbol for the suit of Clubs depicts a very stylised three-leaf clover with its stalk oriented downwards.

Generally, the suit of Clubs is black in colour so they can be used in some games as a pair with Spades (suit), like Klondike (solitaire). However, the suit may also be green, for example as sometimes used in Bridge (where it is one of the two minor suits, along with Diamonds).

The gallery below shows a suit of Clubs from a French-suited playing cards of 52 cards. Not shown is the Knight of Clubs used in tarot card games:
== Four-colour packs ==

Four-colour packs are sometimes used in tournaments or online. In four-colour packs, clubs may be:
* green in American Bridge and Poker, English Poker, French and Swiss four-colour decks,
* black in German Skat packs,
* blue in English Bridge and some American packs or
* pink in some other four-colour packs.

== Coding ==
The symbol ♣ is already in the CP437 and thus also part of Windows WGL4. In Unicode a black ♣ and a white ♧ Club symbol are defined:

== References ==
== Literature ==
* Allan, Elkan and Hannah Mackay. &quot;The Poker Encyclopedia&quot;. London: Portico 
* Dummett, Michael (1980). &quot;The Game of Tarot&quot;. Duckworth, London. 
* Parlett, David (2008). &quot;The Penguin Book of Card Games&quot; London: Penguin </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1788166" start="0" end="5" title="Clubs (suit)" label="Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q27905" start="31" end="48" title="playing card suit" label="playing card suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177840" start="66" end="93" title="French-suited playing cards" label="French-suited playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301333" start="143" end="149" title="Acorns (suit)" label="Acorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424652" start="155" end="166" title="German-suited playing cards" label="German deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q504577" start="217" end="221" title="Skat (card game)" label="Skat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243075" start="226" end="236" title="Doppelkopf" label="Doppelkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q513847" start="281" end="289" title="Diamonds (suit)" label="Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233012" start="294" end="299" title="Bells (suit)" label="Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243075" start="322" end="332" title="Doppelkopf" label="Doppelkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="338" end="344" title="Contract bridge" label="Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="396" end="402" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="429" end="435" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="502" end="509" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="553" end="560" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639276" start="656" end="662" title="batons (suit)" label="batons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535048" start="680" end="700" title="Spanish-suited cards" label="Spanish-suited cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177840" start="729" end="741" title="French suits" label="French suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="761" end="768" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q504577" start="845" end="849" title="Skat (card game)" label="Skat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="866" end="873" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="979" end="985" title="Contract bridge" label="Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23445" start="1229" end="1234" title="black" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094951" start="1294" end="1307" title="Spades (suit)" label="Spades (suit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191033" start="1314" end="1334" title="Klondike (solitaire)" label="Klondike (solitaire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="1406" end="1412" title="Contract bridge" label="Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975847" start="1441" end="1451" title="minor suit" label="minor suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q513847" start="1465" end="1473" title="Diamonds (suit)" label="Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177840" start="1524" end="1551" title="French-suited playing cards" label="French-suited playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943226" start="1582" end="1597" title="Knight of Clubs" label="Knight of Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q510406" start="1606" end="1622" title="tarot card games" label="tarot card games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523602" start="1649" end="1665" title="Four-colour pack" label="Four-colour pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105757" start="2004" end="2009" title="Code page 437" label="CP437"/>
<link wikidata="Q153184" start="2040" end="2044" title="Windows Glyph List 4" label="WGL4"/>
<link wikidata="Q180699" start="2049" end="2056" title="Miscellaneous Symbols" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q342646" start="2230" end="2246" title="Dummett, Michael" label="Dummett, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176049" start="2308" end="2322" title="Parlett, David" label="Parlett, David"/>
</links>
</doc>
