<doc id="1228060" wikidata="Q175975" url="?curid=1228060" title="Internet privacy">
<text>Internet privacy involves the right or mandate of personal privacy concerning the storage, re-purposing, provision to third parties, and display of information pertaining to oneself via the Internet. Internet privacy is a subset of data privacy. Privacy concerns have been articulated from the beginnings of large-scale computer sharing and especially relate to mass surveillance.

Privacy can entail either personally identifiable information (PII) or non-PII information such as a site visitor&#x27;s behavior on a website. PII refers to any information that can be used to identify an individual. For example, age and physical address alone could identify who an individual is without explicitly disclosing their name, as these two parameters are unique enough to identify a specific person typically. Other forms of PII may include GPS tracking data used by apps, as the daily commute and routine information can be enough to identify an individual.

It has been suggested that the &quot;appeal of online services is to broadcast personal information on purpose.&quot; On the other hand, in security expert Bruce Schneier&#x27;s essay entitled, &quot;The Value of Privacy&quot;, he says, &quot;Privacy protects us from abuses by those in power, even if we&#x27;re doing nothing wrong at the time of surveillance.&quot;

==Levels of privacy==

Internet and digital privacy are viewed differently from traditional expectations of privacy. Internet privacy is primarily concerned with protecting user information. Law Professor Jerry Kang explains that the term privacy expresses space, decision, and information. In terms of space, individuals have an expectation that their physical spaces (e.g. homes, cars) not be intruded. Information privacy is in regard to the collection of user information from a variety of sources.

In the United States, the 1997 Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF) created under President Clinton defined information privacy as &quot;an individual&#x27;s claim to control the terms under which personal information — information identifiable to the individual — is acquired, disclosed, and used.&quot; At the end of the 1990s, with the rise of the Internet, it became clear that governments, companies, and other organizations would need to abide by new rules to protect individuals&#x27; privacy. With the rise of the Internet and mobile networks, Internet privacy is a daily concern for users.

People with only a casual concern for Internet privacy do not need to achieve total anonymity. Internet users may protect their privacy through controlled disclosure of personal information. The revelation of IP addresses, non-personally-identifiable profiling, and similar information might become acceptable trade-offs for the convenience that users could otherwise lose using the workarounds needed to suppress such details rigorously. On the other hand, some people desire much stronger privacy. In that case, they may try to achieve &quot;Internet anonymity&quot; to ensure privacy — use of the Internet without giving any third parties the ability to link Internet activities to personally-identifiable information of the Internet user. In order to keep their information private, people need to be careful with what they submit and look at online. When filling out forms and buying merchandise, information is tracked and because it is not private, some companies send Internet users spam and advertising on similar products.

There are also several governmental organizations that protect an individual&#x27;s privacy and anonymity on the Internet, to a point. In an article presented by the FTC, in October 2011, a number of pointers were brought to attention that help an individual Internet user avoid possible identity theft and other cyber-attacks. Preventing or limiting the usage of Social Security numbers online, being wary and respectful of emails including spam messages, being mindful of personal financial details, creating and managing strong passwords, and intelligent web-browsing behaviours are recommended, among others.

Posting things on the Internet can be harmful or expose people to malicious attacks. Some information posted on the Internet persists for decades, depending on the terms of service, and privacy policies of particular services offered online. This can include comments written on blogs, pictures, and websites, such as Facebook and X (formerly Twitter). Once it is posted, anyone can potentially find it and access it. Some employers may research potential employees by searching online for the details of their online behaviors, possibly affecting the outcome of the success of the candidate.

==Risks to Internet privacy==
Since personalised advertisements are more efficient, and thus more profitable, than non-personalised ones, online advertising providers often collect (or facilitate the collection of) user data such as browsing and search history, shopping patterns and social media behaviour. This data can then be automatically processed to display ads more likely to be successful with the particular user they are being displayed to, as well as to personalise content displayed to the user on social media sites. In 1998, the Federal Trade Commission considered the lack of privacy for children on the Internet and created the Children&#x27;s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), limiting options obtaining personal information of children and stipulating requirement for privacy policies.

Apart from corporate data collection, on-line privacy threats also include criminal and fraudulent activity. This category includes shortened links on many social media platforms leading to potentially harmful websites, scam e-mails and e-mail attachments that persuade users to install malware or disclose personal information. On online piracy sites, threats include malicious software being presented as legitimate content. When using a smartphone, geolocation data may be compromised.

In late 2007, Facebook launched the Beacon program in which user commercial activity was released to the public for friends to see. Beacon created considerable controversy soon after it was launched due to privacy concerns, and the &quot;Lane v. Facebook, Inc.&quot; case ensued.

===Internet protocol (IP) addresses===
The architecture of the Internet Protocol necessitates that a website receives IP addresses of its visitors, which can be tracked through time. Companies match data over time to associate the name, address, and other information to the IP address. There are opposing views in different jurisdiction on whether an IP address is personal information. The Court of Justice of the European Union has ruled they need to be treated as personally identifiable information if the website tracking them, or a third party like a service provider knows the name or street address of the IP address holder, which would be true for static IP addresses, not for dynamic addresses.

California regulations say IP addresses need to be treated as personal information if the business itself, not a third party, can link them to a name and street address.

An Alberta court ruled that police can obtain the IP addresses and the names and addresses associated with them without a search warrant; the Calgary, Alberta police found IP addresses that initiated online crimes. The service provider gave police the names and addresses associated with those IP addresses.

===HTTP cookies===

An HTTP cookie is data stored on a user&#x27;s computer that assists in automated access to websites or web features, or other state information required in complex websites. It may also be used for user-tracking by storing special usage history data in a cookie, and such cookies — for example, those used by Google Analytics — are called &quot;tracking cookies&quot;. Cookies are a common concern in the field of Internet privacy. Although website developers most commonly use cookies for legitimate technical purposes, cases of abuse occur. In 2009, two researchers noted that social networking profiles could be connected to cookies, allowing the social networking profile to be connected to browsing habits.

In the past, websites have not generally made the user explicitly aware of the storing of cookies, however, tracking cookies and especially &quot;third-party tracking cookies&quot; are commonly used as ways to compile long-term records of individuals&#x27; browsing histories — a privacy concern that prompted European and US lawmakers to take action in 2011. Cookies can also have implications for computer forensics. In past years, most computer users were not completely aware of cookies, but users have become conscious of the possible detrimental effects of Internet cookies: a recent study has shown that 58% of users have deleted cookies from their computer at least once, and that 39% of users delete cookies from their computer every month. Since cookies are advertisers&#x27; main way of targeting potential customers, and some customers are deleting cookies, some advertisers started to use persistent Flash cookies and zombie cookies, but modern browsers and anti-malware software can now block or detect and remove such cookies.

The original developers of cookies intended that only the website that originally distributed cookies to users could retrieve them, therefore returning only data already possessed by the website. However, in practice, programmers can circumvent this restriction. Possible consequences include:
* the placing of a personally identifiable tag in a browser to facilitate web profiling , or
* use of cross-site scripting or other techniques to steal information from a user&#x27;s cookies.

Cookies do have benefits. One is that for websites that one frequently visits that require a password, cookies may allow a user to not have to sign in every time. A cookie can also track one&#x27;s preferences to show them websites that might interest them. Cookies make more websites free to use without any type of payment. Some of these benefits are also seen as negative. For example, one of the most common ways of theft is hackers taking one&#x27;s username and password that a cookie saves. While many sites are free, they sell their space to advertisers. These ads, which are personalized to one&#x27;s likes, can sometimes freeze one&#x27;s computer or cause annoyance. Cookies are mostly harmless except for third-party cookies. These cookies are not made by the website itself but by web banner advertising companies. These third-party cookies are dangerous because they take the same information that regular cookies do, such as browsing habits and frequently visited websites, but then they share this information with other companies.

Cookies are often associated with pop-up windows because these windows are often, but not always, tailored to a person&#x27;s preferences. These windows are an irritation because the close button may be strategically hidden in an unlikely part of the screen. In the worst cases, these pop-up ads can take over the screen and while one tries to close them, they can take one to another unwanted website.

Cookies are seen so negatively because they are not understood and go unnoticed while someone is simply surfing the Internet. The idea that every move one makes while on the Internet is being watched, would frighten most users.

Some users choose to disable cookies in their web browsers. Such an action can reduce some privacy risks but may severely limit or prevent the functionality of many websites. All significant web browsers have this disabling ability built-in, with no external program required. As an alternative, users may frequently delete any stored cookies. Some browsers (such as Mozilla Firefox and Opera) offer the option to clear cookies automatically whenever the user closes the browser. A third option involves allowing cookies in general but preventing their abuse. There is also a host of wrapper applications that will redirect cookies and cache data to some other location. Concerns exist that the privacy benefits of deleting cookies have been over-stated.

The process of &quot;profiling&quot; (also known as &quot;tracking&quot;) assembles and analyzes several events, each attributable to a single originating entity, in order to gain information (especially patterns of activity) relating to the originating entity. Some organizations engage in the profiling of people&#x27;s web browsing, collecting the URLs of sites visited. The resulting profiles can potentially link with information that personally identifies the individual who did the browsing.

Some web-oriented marketing-research organizations may use this practice legitimately, for example: in order to construct profiles of &quot;typical Internet users&quot;. Such profiles, which describe average trends of large groups of Internet users rather than of actual individuals, can then prove useful for market analysis. Although the aggregate data does not constitute a privacy violation, some people believe that the initial profiling does.

Profiling becomes a more contentious privacy issue when data-matching associates the profile of an individual with personally-identifiable information of the individual. This is why Google, the dominant ad platform, that uses cookies to allow marketers to track people has announced plans to &quot;kill the cookie.&quot;

Governments and organizations may set up honeypot websites – featuring controversial topics – to attract and track unwary people. This constitutes a potential danger for individuals.

===Flash cookies===

When some users choose to disable HTTP cookies to reduce privacy risks as noted, new types of client-side storage were invented: since cookies are advertisers&#x27; main way of targeting potential customers, and some customers were deleting cookies, some advertisers started to use persistent Flash cookies and zombie cookies. In a 2009 study, Flash cookies were found to be a popular mechanism for storing data on the top 100 most visited sites. Another 2011 study of social media found that, &quot;Of the top 100 web sites, 31 had at least one overlap between HTTP and Flash cookies.&quot; However, modern browsers and anti-malware software can now block or detect and remove such cookies.

Flash cookies, also known as local shared objects, work the same way as normal cookies and are used by the Adobe Flash Player to store information on the user&#x27;s computer. They exhibit a similar privacy risk as normal cookies, but are not as easily blocked, meaning that the option in most browsers to not accept cookies does not affect Flash cookies. One way to view and control them is with browser extensions or add-ons.

Flash cookies are unlike HTTP cookies in the sense that they are not transferred from the client back to the server. Web browsers read and write these cookies and can track any data by web usage.

Although browsers such as Internet Explorer 8 and Firefox 3 have added a &quot;Privacy Browsing&quot; setting, they still allow Flash cookies to track the user and operate fully. However, the Flash player browser plugin can be disabled or uninstalled, and Flash cookies can be disabled on a per-site or global basis. Adobe&#x27;s Flash and (PDF) Reader are not the only browser plugins whose past security defects have allowed spyware or malware to be installed: there have also been problems with Oracle&#x27;s Java.

===Evercookies===

Evercookie, created by Samy Kamkar, is a JavaScript-based application which produces cookies in a web browser that actively &quot;resist&quot; deletion by redundantly copying themselves in different forms on the user&#x27;s machine (e.g., Flash Local Shared Objects, various HTML5 storage mechanisms, window.name caching, etc.), and resurrecting copies that are missing or expired. Evercookie accomplishes this by storing the cookie data in several types of storage mechanisms that are available on the local browser. It has the ability to store cookies in over ten types of storage mechanisms so that once they are on one&#x27;s computer they will never be gone. Additionally, if Evercookie has found the user has removed any of the types of cookies in question, it recreates them using each mechanism available. Evercookies are a type of zombie cookie. However, modern browsers and anti-malware software can now block or detect and remove such cookies.

====Anti-fraud uses====
Some anti-fraud companies have realized the potential of Evercookies to protect against and catch cyber criminals. These companies already hide small files in several places on the perpetrator&#x27;s computer but hackers can usually easily get rid of these. The advantage to Evercookies is that they resist deletion and can rebuild themselves.

====Advertising uses====
There is controversy over where the line should be drawn on the use of this technology. Cookies store unique identifiers on a person&#x27;s computer that are used to predict what one wants. Many advertisement companies want to use this technology to track what their customers are looking at online. This is known as online behavioural advertising which allows advertisers to keep track of the consumer&#x27;s website visits to personalize and target advertisements. Ever-cookies enable advertisers to continue to track a customer regardless of whether their cookies are deleted or not. Some companies are already using this technology but the ethics are still being widely debated.

====Criticism====
Anonymizer &quot;nevercookies&quot; are part of a free Firefox plugin that protects against Evercookies. This plugin extends Firefox&#x27;s private browsing mode so that users will be completely protected from ever-cookies. Never-cookies eliminate the entire manual deletion process while keeping the cookies users want like browsing history and saved account information.

===Other Web tracking risks===
===Device fingerprinting===

A &quot;device fingerprint&quot; is information collected about the software and hardware of a remote computing device to identify individual devices even when persistent cookies (and also zombie cookies) cannot be read or stored in the browser, the client IP address is hidden, and even if one switches to another browser on the same device.
This may allow a service provider to detect and prevent identity theft and credit card fraud, but also to compile long-term records of individuals&#x27; browsing histories even when they&#x27;re attempting to avoid tracking, raising a major concern for Internet privacy advocates.

=== Third-Party Requests ===
Third-Party Requests are HTTP data connections from client devices to addresses on the web which are different from the website the user is currently surfing. Many alternative tracking technologies to cookies are based on third-party requests. Their importance has increased during the last few years and even accelerated after Mozilla (2019), Apple (2020), and Google (2022) have announced to block third-party cookies by default. Third requests may be used for embedding external content (e.g. advertisements) or for loading external resources and functions (e.g. images, icons, fonts, captchas, JQuery resources and many others). Depending on the type of resource loaded, such requests may enable third parties to execute a device fingerprint or place any other kind of marketing tag. Irrespective of the intention, such requests do often disclose information that may be sensitive, and they can be used for tracking either directly or in combination with other personally identifiable information . Most of the requests disclose referrer details that reveal the full URL of the actually visited website. In addition to the referrer URL, further information may be transmitted by the use of other request methods such as HTTP POST. Since 2018 Mozilla partially mitigates the risk of third-party requests by cutting the referrer information when using the private browsing mode. However, personal information may still be revealed to the requested address in other areas of the HTTP-header.

===Photographs on the Internet===

Today, many people have digital cameras and post their photographs online. For example, street photography practitioners do so for artistic purposes and social documentary photography practitioners do so to document people in everyday life. The people depicted in these photos might not want them to appear on the Internet. Police arrest photos, considered public record in many jurisdictions, are often posted on the Internet by online mug shot publishing sites.

Some organizations attempt to respond to this privacy-related concern. For example, the 2005 Wikimania conference required that photographers have the prior permission of the people in their pictures, albeit this made it impossible for photographers to practice candid photography, and doing the same in a public place would violate the photographers&#x27; free speech rights. Some people wore a &quot;no photos&quot; tag to indicate they would prefer not to have their photo taken .

The &quot;Harvard Law Review&quot; published a short piece called &quot;In The Face of Danger: Facial Recognition and Privacy Law&quot;, much of it explaining how &quot;privacy law, in its current form, is of no help to those unwillingly tagged.&quot; Any individual can be unwillingly tagged in a photo and displayed in a manner that might violate them personally in some way, and by the time Facebook gets to taking down the photo, many people will have already had the chance to view, share, or distribute it. Furthermore, traditional tort law does not protect people who are captured by a photograph in public because this is not counted as an invasion of privacy. The extensive Facebook privacy policy covers these concerns and much more. For example, the policy states that they reserve the right to disclose member information or share photos with companies, lawyers, courts, government entities, etc. if they feel it is absolutely necessary. The policy also informs users that profile pictures are mainly to help friends connect to each other. However, these, as well as other pictures, can allow other people to invade a person&#x27;s privacy by finding out information that can be used to track and locate a certain individual. In an article featured in ABC News, it was stated that two teams of scientists found out that Hollywood stars could be giving up information about their private whereabouts very easily through pictures uploaded to the Internet. Moreover, it was found that pictures taken by some phones and tablets, including iPhones, automatically attach the latitude and longitude of the picture taken through metadata unless this function is manually disabled.

Face recognition technology can be used to gain access to a person&#x27;s private data, according to a new study. Researchers at Carnegie Mellon University combined image scanning, cloud computing and public profiles from social networking sites to identify individuals in the offline world. Data captured even included a user&#x27;s social security number. Experts have warned of the privacy risks faced by the increased merging of online and offline identities. The researchers have also developed an &#x27;augmented reality&#x27; mobile app that can display personal data over a person&#x27;s image captured on a smartphone screen. Since these technologies are widely available, users&#x27; future identities may become exposed to anyone with a smartphone and an Internet connection. Researchers believe this could force a reconsideration of future attitudes to privacy.

====Google Street View====
Google Street View, released in the U.S. in 2007, is currently the subject of an ongoing debate about possible infringement on individual privacy. Researchers have argued that Google Street View &quot;facilitate[s] identification and disclosure with more immediacy and less abstraction.&quot; The medium through which Street View disseminates information, the photograph, is very immediate in the sense that it can potentially provide direct information and evidence about a person&#x27;s whereabouts, activities, and private property. Moreover, the technology&#x27;s disclosure of information about a person is less abstract in the sense that, if photographed, a person is represented on Street View in a virtual replication of his or her own real-life appearance. In other words, the technology removes abstractions of a person&#x27;s appearance or that of his or her personal belongings – there is an immediate disclosure of the person and object, as they visually exist in real life. Although Street View began to blur license plates and people&#x27;s faces in 2008, the technology is faulty and does not entirely ensure against accidental disclosure of identity and private property.

The researchers note that &quot;many of the concerns leveled at Street View stem from situations where its photograph-like images were treated as definitive evidence of an individual&#x27;s involvement in particular activities.&quot; In one instance, a Swiss politician, barely avoided public scandal when he was photographed in 2009 on Google Street View walking with a woman who was not his wife – the woman was actually his secretary. Similar situations occur when Street View provides high-resolution photographs – and photographs hypothetically offer compelling objective evidence. But as the case of the Swiss politician illustrates, even supposedly compelling photographic evidence is sometimes subject to gross misinterpretation. This example further suggests that Google Street View may provide opportunities for privacy infringement and harassment through public dissemination of the photographs. Google Street View does, however, blur or remove photographs of individuals and private property from image frames if the individuals request further blurring and/or removal of the images. This request can be submitted for review through the &quot;report a problem&quot; button that is located on the bottom left-hand side of every image window on Google Street View; however, Google has made attempts to report a problem difficult by disabling the &quot;Why are you reporting the street view&quot; icon.

===Search engines===

Search engines have the ability to track a user&#x27;s searches. Personal information can be revealed through searches by the user&#x27;s computer, account, or IP address being linked to the search terms used. Search engines have claimed a necessity to retain such information in order to provide better services, protect against security pressure, and protect against fraud. A search engine takes all of its users and assigns each one a specific ID number. Search engines often keep records of users&#x27; Internet activity and sites visited. AOL&#x27;s system is one example. AOL has a database of 21 million members, each with their own specific ID number. The way that AOL&#x27;s search engine is set up, however, allows for AOL to keep records of all the websites visited by any given member. Even though the true identity of the user is not known, a full profile of a member can be made just by using the information stored by from search history. By keeping records of what people query through AOL Search, the company is able to learn a great deal about them without knowing their names.

Search engines also are able to retain user information, such as location and time spent using the search engine, for up to ninety days. Most search engine operators use the data to get a sense of which needs must be met in certain areas of their field. People working in the legal field are also allowed to use information collected from these search engine websites. The Google search engine is given as an example of a search engine that retains the information entered for a period of three-fourths of a year before it becomes obsolete for public usage. Yahoo! follows in the footsteps of Google in the sense that it also deletes user information after a period of ninety days. Other search engines such as Ask! search engine have promoted a tool of &quot;AskEraser&quot; which essentially takes away personal information when requested. Some changes made to Internet search engines included that of Google&#x27;s search engine. Beginning in 2009, Google began to run a new system where the Google search became personalized. The item that is searched and the results that are shown remember previous information that pertains to the individual. Google search engine not only seeks what is searched but also strives to allow the user to feel like the search engine recognizes their interests. This is achieved by using online advertising. A system that Google uses to filter advertisements and search results that might interest the user is by having a ranking system that tests relevancy that includes observation of the behavior users exude while searching on Google. Another function of search engines is the predictability of location. Search engines are able to predict where one&#x27;s location is currently by locating IP Addresses and geographical locations.

Google had publicly stated on January 24, 2012, that its privacy policy would once again be altered. This new policy would change the following for its users: (1) the privacy policy would become shorter and easier to comprehend and (2) the information that users provide would be used in more ways than it is presently being used. The goal of Google is to make users&#x27; experiences better than they currently are.

This new privacy policy came into effect on March 1, 2012. Peter Fleischer, the Global Privacy Counselor for Google, has explained that if a person is logged into his/her Google account, and only if he/she is logged in, information will be gathered from multiple Google services in which he/she has used in order to be more accommodating. Google&#x27;s new privacy policy will combine all data used on Google&#x27;s search engines (i.e., YouTube and Gmail) in order to work along the lines of a person&#x27;s interests. A person, in effect, will be able to find what he/she wants at a more efficient rate because all searched information during times of login will help to narrow down new search results.

Google&#x27;s privacy policy explains what information they collect and why they collect it, how they use the information, and how to access and update information. Google will collect information to better service its users such as their language, which ads they find useful, or people that are important to them online. Google announces they will use this information to provide, maintain and protect Google and its users. The information Google uses will give users more relevant search results and advertisements. The new privacy policy explains that Google can use shared information on one service in other Google services from people who have a Google account and are logged in. Google will treat a user as a single user across all of their products. Google claims the new privacy policy will benefit its users by being simpler. Google will, for example, be able to correct the spelling of a user&#x27;s friend&#x27;s name in a Google search or notify a user they are late based on their calendar and current location. Even though Google updated its privacy policy, its core privacy guidelines did not change. For example, Google still does not sell personal information or share it externally.

Users and public officials have raised many concerns regarding Google&#x27;s new privacy policy. The main concern/issue involves the sharing of data from multiple sources. Because this policy gathers all information and data searched from multiple engines when logged into Google, and uses it to help assist users, privacy becomes an important element. Public officials and Google account users are worried about online safety because of all this information being gathered from multiple sources.

Some users do not like the overlapping privacy policy, wishing to keep the service of Google separate. The update to Google&#x27;s privacy policy has alarmed both public and private sectors. The European Union has asked Google to delay the onset of the new privacy policy in order to ensure that it does not violate E.U. law. This move is in accordance with objections to decreasing online privacy raised in other foreign nations where surveillance is more heavily scrutinized. Canada and Germany have both held investigations into the legality of both Facebook, against respective privacy acts, in 2010. The new privacy policy only heightens unresolved concerns regarding user privacy.

An additional feature of concern to the new Google privacy policy is the nature of the policy. One must accept the policy or delete existing Google accounts. Customizing the privacy settings of a social network is a key tactic that many feel is necessary for social networking sites. Additionally, some fear the sharing of data amongst Google services could lead to revelations of identities. Many using pseudonyms are concerned about this possibility, and defend the role of pseudonyms in literature and history.

Some solutions to being able to protect user privacy on the Internet can include programs such as &quot;Rapleaf&quot; which is a website that has a search engine that allows users to make all of one&#x27;s search information and personal information private. Other websites that also give this option to their users are Facebook and Amazon.

====Privacy-focused search engines/browsers====

Search engines such as Startpage.com, Disconnect.me and Scroogle (defunct since 2012) anonymize Google searches. The following are some of the more notable privacy-focused search engines:

;Brave: A free software that reports to be a privacy-first website browsing service, blocking online trackers and ads, and not tracking users&#x27; browsing data.
;DuckDuckGo: A meta-search engine that combines the search results from various search engines (excluding Google) and provides some unique services like using search boxes on various websites and providing instant answers out of the box.
;Qwant: An EU-based web-search engine that is focusing on privacy. It has its own index and has servers hosted in the European Union.
;Searx: A free and open-source privacy-oriented meta-search engine which is based on a number of decentralized instances. There are a number of existing public instances, but any user can create their own if they desire.
;Fireball: Germany&#x27;s first search engine that obtains web results from various sources (mainly Bing). Fireball is not collecting any user information. All servers are stationed in Germany, a plus considering the German legislation tends to respect privacy rights better than many other European countries.
;MetaGer: A meta-search engine (obtains results from various sources) and in Germany by far the most popular safe search engine. MetaGer uses similar safety features as Fireball.
;Ixquick: A Dutch-based meta-search engine (obtains results from various sources). It commits also to the protection of the privacy of its users. Ixquick uses similar safety features as Fireball.
;Yacy: A decentralized search engine developed on the basis of a community project, which started in 2005. The search engine follows a slightly different approach to the two previous ones, using a peer-to-peer principle that does not require any stationary and centralized servers. This has its disadvantages but also the simple advantage of greater privacy when surfing due to basically no possibility of hacking.
;Search Encrypt: An Internet search engine that prioritizes maintaining user privacy and avoiding the filter bubble of personalized search results. It differentiates itself from other search engines by using local encryption on searches and delayed history expiration.
;Tor Browser: A free software that provides access to an anonymized network that enables anonymous communication. It directs the Internet traffic through multiple relays. This encryption method prevents others from tracking a certain user, thus allowing the user&#x27;s IP address and other personal information to be concealed.

===Privacy issues of social networking sites===

The advent of the Web 2.0 has caused social profiling and is a growing concern for Internet privacy. Web 2.0 is the system that facilitates participatory information sharing and collaboration on the Internet, in social networking media websites like Facebook, Instagram, X (formerly Twitter), and MySpace. These social networking sites have seen a boom in their popularity starting from the late 2000s. Through these websites, many people are giving their personal information out on the Internet.

Accountability for the collection and distribution of personal information has been a subject of ongoing discussion. Social networks have been held responsible for storing the information and data, while users who provide their information on these sites are also seen as liable by some. This relates to the ever-present issue of how society regards social media sites. An increasing number of individuals are becoming aware of the potential risks associated with sharing personal information online and placing trust in websites to maintain privacy. In a 2012 study, researchers found that young people are taking measures to keep their posted information on Facebook private to some degree. Examples of such actions include managing their privacy settings so that certain content can be visible to &quot;Only Friends&quot; and ignoring Facebook friend requests from strangers.

In 2013 a class action lawsuit was filed against Facebook alleging the company scanned user messages for web links, translating them to “likes” on the user&#x27;s Facebook profile. Data lifted from the private messages was then used for targeted advertising, the plaintiffs claimed. &quot;Facebook&#x27;s practice of scanning the content of these messages violates the federal Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA also referred to as the Wiretap Act), as well as California&#x27;s Invasion of Privacy Act (CIPA), and section 17200 of California&#x27;s Business and Professions Code,&quot; the plaintiffs said. This shows that once information is online it is no longer completely private. It is an increasing risk because younger people have easier Internet access than ever before, therefore they put themselves in a position where it is all too easy for them to upload information, but they may not have the caution to consider how difficult it can be to take that information down once it has been out in the open. This is becoming a bigger issue now that so much of society interacts online which was not the case fifteen years ago. In addition, because of the quickly evolving digital media arena, people&#x27;s interpretation of privacy is evolving as well, and it is important to consider that when interacting online. New forms of social networking and digital media such as Instagram and Snapchat may call for new guidelines regarding privacy. What makes this difficult is the wide range of opinions surrounding the topic, so it is left mainly up to individual judgment to respect other people&#x27;s online privacy in some circumstances.

=== Privacy issues of medical applications ===
With the rise of technology-focused applications, there has been a rise of medical apps available to users on smart devices. In a survey of 29 migraine-management-specific applications, researcher Mia T. Minen (et al.) discovered 76% had clear privacy policies, with 55% of the apps stated using the user data from these giving data to third parties for the use of advertising. The concerns raised discusses the applications without accessible privacy policies, and even more so - applications that are not properly adhering to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) are in need of proper regulation, as these apps store medical data with identifiable information on a user.

===Internet service providers===
Internet users obtain Internet access through an Internet service provider (ISP). All data transmitted to and from users must pass through the ISP. Thus, an ISP has the potential to observe users&#x27; activities on the Internet. ISPs can breach personal information such as transaction history, search history, and social media profiles of users. Hackers could use this opportunity to hack ISPs and obtain sensitive information of victims. However, ISPs are usually prohibited from participating in such activities due to legal, ethical, business, or technical reasons.

Normally ISPs do collect at least &quot;some&quot; information about the consumers using their services. From a privacy standpoint, ISPs would ideally collect only as much information as they require in order to provide Internet connectivity (IP address, billing information if applicable, etc.).

Which information an ISP collects, what it does with that information, and whether it informs its consumers, pose significant privacy issues. Beyond the usage of collected information typical of third parties, ISPs sometimes state that they will make their information available to government authorities upon request. In the US and other countries, such a request does not necessarily require a warrant.

An ISP cannot know the contents of properly encrypted data passing between its consumers and the Internet. For encrypting web traffic, https has become the most popular and best-supported standard. Even if users encrypt the data, the ISP still knows the IP addresses of the sender and the recipient. (However, see the IP addresses section for workarounds.)

An anonymizer such as I2P – The Anonymous Network or Tor can be used for accessing web services without them knowing one&#x27;s IP address and without one&#x27;s ISP knowing what the services are that one accesses. Additional software has been developed that may provide more secure and anonymous alternatives to other applications. For example, Bitmessage can be used as an alternative for email and Cryptocat as an alternative for online chat. On the other hand, in addition to End-to-End encryption software, there are web services such as Qlink which provide privacy through a novel security protocol which does not require installing any software.

While signing up for Internet services, each computer contains a unique IP and Internet Protocol address. This particular address will not give away private or personal information, however, a weak link could potentially reveal information from one&#x27;s ISP.

General concerns regarding Internet user privacy have become enough of a concern for a UN agency to issue a report on the dangers of identity fraud. In 2007, the Council of Europe held its first annual Data Protection Day on January 28, which has since evolved into the annual Data Privacy Day.

T-Mobile USA does not store any information on web browsing. Verizon Wireless keeps a record of the websites a subscriber visits for up to a year. Virgin Mobile keeps text messages for three months. Verizon keeps text messages for three to five days. None of the other carriers keep specific messages at all, but they keep a record of who texted who for over a year. AT&amp;T Mobility keeps for five to seven years a record of who texts who and the date and time, but not the content of the messages. Virgin Mobile keeps that data for two to three months.

===HTML5===
HTML5 is the latest version of Hypertext Markup Language specification. HTML defines how user agents, such as web browsers, are to present websites based on their underlying code. This new web standard changes the way that users are affected by the Internet and their privacy on the Internet. HTML5 expands the number of methods given to a website to store information locally on a client as well as the amount of data that can be stored. As such, privacy risks are increased. For instance, merely erasing cookies may not be enough to remove potential tracking methods since data could be mirrored in web storage, another means of keeping information in a user&#x27;s web browser. There are so many sources of data storage that it is challenging for web browsers to present sensible privacy settings. As the power of web standards increases, so do potential misuses.

HTML5 also expands access to user media, potentially granting access to a computer&#x27;s microphone or webcam, a capability previously only possible through the use of plug-ins like Flash. It is also possible to find a user&#x27;s geographical location using the geolocation API. With this expanded access comes increased potential for abuse as well as more vectors for attackers. If a malicious site was able to gain access to a user&#x27;s media, it could potentially use recordings to uncover sensitive information thought to be unexposed. However, the World Wide Web Consortium, responsible for many web standards, feels that the increased capabilities of the web platform outweigh potential privacy concerns. They state that by documenting new capabilities in an open standardization process, rather than through closed source plug-ins made by companies, it is easier to spot flaws in specifications and cultivate expert advice.

Besides elevating privacy concerns, HTML5 also adds a few tools to enhance user privacy. A mechanism is defined whereby user agents can share blacklists of domains that should not be allowed to access web storage. Content Security Policy is a proposed standard whereby sites may assign privileges to different domains, enforcing harsh limitations on JavaScript use to mitigate cross-site scripting attacks. HTML5 also adds HTML templating and a standard HTML parser which replaces the various parsers of web browser vendors. These new features formalize previously inconsistent implementations, reducing the number of vulnerabilities though not eliminating them entirely.

===Uploaded file metadata===
Embedded metadata in files uploaded to the internet can divulge privacy compromising data. For example, most digital cameras and smartphones automatically embed image metadata, such as Exif, which includes the geographical location where the photo has been taken. If the photo has been taken at the photographer&#x27;s house, his address and identity could be revealed.

This problem can be mitigated by removing metadata from files before uploading them to the internet using a metadata removal tool.

===Big data===
Big data is generally defined as the rapid accumulation and compiling of massive amounts of information that is being exchanged over digital communication systems. The volume of data is large (often exceeding exabytes), cannot be handled by conventional computer processors, and is instead stored on large server-system databases. This information is assessed by analytic scientists using software programs, which paraphrase this information into multi-layered user trends and demographics. This information is collected from all around the Internet, such as by popular services like Facebook, Google, Apple, Spotify or GPS systems.

Big data provides companies with the ability to:
*Infer detailed psycho-demographic profiles of Internet users, even if they were not directly expressed or indicated by users.
*Inspect product availability and optimize prices for maximum profit while clearing inventory.
*Swiftly reconfigure risk portfolios in minutes and understand future opportunities to mitigate risk.
*Mine customer data for insight and create advertising strategies for customer acquisition and retention.
*Identify customers who matter the most.
*Create retail coupons based on a proportional scale to how much the customer has spent, to ensure a higher redemption rate.
*Send tailored recommendations to mobile devices at just the right time, while customers are in the right location to take advantage of offers.
*Analyze data from social media to detect new market trends and changes in demand.
*Use clickstream analysis and data mining to detect fraudulent behavior.
*Determine root causes of failures, issues and defects by investigating user sessions, network logs and machine sensors.

===Other potential Internet privacy risks===
* Cross-device tracking identifies users&#x27; activity across multiple devices.
* Massive personal data extraction through mobile device apps that receive carte-blanche-permissions for data access upon installation.
* Malware is a term short for &quot;malicious software&quot; and is used to describe software that is used to cause damage to a single computer, server, or computer network whether that is through the use of a virus, trojan horse, spyware, etc.
* Spyware is a piece of software that obtains information from a user&#x27;s computer without that user&#x27;s consent.
* A web bug is an object embedded into a web page or email and is usually invisible to the user of the website or reader of the email. It allows checking to see if a person has looked at a particular website or read a specific email message.
* Phishing is a criminally fraudulent process of trying to obtain sensitive information such as usernames, passwords, or credit card and bank information. Phishing is an Internet crime in which someone masquerades as a trustworthy entity in some form of electronic communication.
* Pharming is a hacker&#x27;s attempt to redirect traffic from a legitimate website to a completely different Internet address. Pharming can be conducted by changing the hosts file on a victim&#x27;s computer or by exploiting a vulnerability on the DNS server.
* Social engineering is where people are manipulated or tricked into performing actions or divulging confidential information.
* Malicious proxy server (or other &quot;anonymity&quot; services).
* Use of weak passwords that are short, consist of all numbers, all lowercase or all uppercase letters, or that can be easily guessed such as single words, common phrases, a person&#x27;s name, a pet&#x27;s name, the name of a place, an address, a phone number, a social security number, or a birth date.
*Use of recycled passwords or the same password across multiple platforms which have become exposed from a data breach.
* Using the same login name and/or password for multiple accounts where one compromised account leads to other accounts being compromised.
* Allowing unused or little-used accounts, where unauthorized use is likely to go unnoticed, to remain active.
* Using out-of-date software that may contain vulnerabilities that have been fixed in newer, more up-to-date versions.
* WebRTC is a protocol which suffers from a serious security flaw that compromises the privacy of VPN tunnels, by allowing the true IP address of the user to be read. It is enabled by default in major browsers such as Firefox and Google Chrome.

===Reduction of risks to Internet privacy===
Journalists have reported that the Internet&#x27;s biggest corporations have hoarded Internet users&#x27; personal data to use it and sell it for large financial profits at the users&#x27; expense. Academics have called this practice informational exploitation.

====Private mobile messaging====
The magazine reports on a band of startup companies that are demanding privacy and aiming to overhaul the social media business. Popular privacy-focused mobile messaging apps include Wickr, Wire, and Signal, which provide peer-to-peer encryption and give the user the capacity to control what message information is retained on the other end.

====Web tracking prevention====
====Protection through information overflow====
According to Nicklas Lundblad, another perspective on privacy protection is the assumption that the quickly growing amount of information produced will be beneficial. The reasons for this are that the costs for the surveillance will rise and that there is more noise, noise being understood as anything that interferes with the process of a receiver trying to extract private data from a sender.

In this noise society, the collective expectation of privacy will increase, but the individual expectation of privacy will decrease. In other words, not everyone can be analyzed in detail, but one individual can be. Also, in order to stay unobserved, it can hence be better to blend in with the others than trying to use for example encryption technologies and similar methods. Technologies for this can be called Jante-technologies after the Law of Jante, which states that you are nobody special. This view offers new challenges and perspectives for the privacy discussion.

==Public views==
While Internet privacy is widely acknowledged as the top consideration in any online interaction, as evidenced by the public outcry over SOPA/CISPA, public understanding of online privacy policies is actually being negatively affected by the current trends regarding online privacy statements. Users have a tendency to skim Internet privacy policies for information regarding the distribution of personal information only, and the more legalistic the policies appear, the less likely users are to even read the information. Coupling this with the increasingly exhaustive license agreements companies require consumers agree with before using their product, consumers are reading less about their rights.

Furthermore, if the user has already done business with a company, or is previously familiar with a product, they tend to not read the privacy policies that the company has posted. As Internet companies become more established, their policies may change, but their clients will be less likely to inform themselves of the change. This tendency is interesting because as consumers become more acquainted with the Internet they are also more likely to be interested in online privacy. Finally, consumers have been found to avoid reading the privacy policies if the policies are not in a simple format, and even perceive these policies to be irrelevant. The less readily available terms and conditions are, the less likely the public is to inform themselves of their rights regarding the service they are using.

===Concerns of Internet privacy and real-life implications===
While dealing with the issue of Internet privacy, one must first be concerned with not only the technological implications such as damaged property, corrupted files, and the like, but also with the potential for implications on their real lives. One such implication, which is rather commonly viewed as being one of the most daunting fears and risks of the Internet, is the potential for identity theft. Although it is a typical belief that larger companies and enterprises are the usual focus of identity thefts, rather than individuals, recent reports seem to show a trend opposing this belief. Specifically, it was found in a 2007 &quot;Internet Security Threat Report&quot; that roughly ninety-three percent of &quot;gateway&quot; attacks were targeted at unprepared home users. The term &quot;gateway attack&quot; was used to refer to an attack which aimed not at stealing data immediately, but rather at gaining access for future attacks.

According to Symantec&#x27;s &quot;Internet Security Threat Report&quot;, this continues despite the increasing emphasis on Internet security due to the expanding &quot;underground economy&quot;. With more than fifty percent of the supporting servers located in the United States, this underground economy has become a haven for Internet thieves, who use the system in order to sell stolen information. These pieces of information can range from generic things such as a user account or email to something as personal as a bank account number and PIN.

While the processes these Internet thieves use are abundant and unique, one popular trap people fall into is that of online purchasing. In a 2001 article titled &quot;Consumer Watch&quot;, the popular online site PC World went called secure e-shopping a myth. Though unlike the gateway attacks mentioned above, these incidents of information being stolen through online purchases generally are more prevalent in medium to large e-commerce sites, rather than smaller individualized sites. This is assumed to be a result of the larger consumer population and purchases, which allow for more potential leeway with information.

Ultimately, however, the potential for a violation of one&#x27;s privacy is typically out of their hands after purchasing from an online retailer or store. One of the most common forms in which hackers receive private information from online retailers actually comes from an attack placed upon the site&#x27;s servers responsible for maintaining information about previous transactions. As experts explain, these retailers are not doing nearly enough to maintain or improve their security measures. Even those sites that clearly present a privacy or security policy can be subject to hackers&#x27; havoc as most policies only rely upon encryption technology which only applies to the actual transfer of a customer&#x27;s data. However, with this being said, most retailers have been making improvements, going as far as covering some of the credit card fees if the information&#x27;s abuse can be traced back to the site&#x27;s servers.

As one of the largest growing concerns American adults have of current Internet privacy policies, identity and credit theft remain a constant figure in the debate surrounding privacy online. A 1997 study by the Boston Consulting Group showed that participants of the study were most concerned about their privacy on the Internet compared to any other media. However, it is important to recall that these issues are not the only prevalent concerns society has. Another prevalent issue remains members of society sending disconcerting emails to one another. It is for this reason in 2001 that for one of the first times the public expressed approval of government intervention in their private lives.

With the overall public anxiety regarding the constantly expanding trend of online crimes, in 2001 roughly fifty-four percent of Americans polled showed a general approval for the FBI monitoring those emails deemed suspicious. Thus, it was born the idea for the FBI program: &quot;Carnivore&quot;, which was going to be used as a searching method, allowing the FBI to hopefully home in on potential criminals. Unlike the overall approval of the FBI&#x27;s intervention, Carnivore was not met with as much of a majority&#x27;s approval. Rather, the public seemed to be divided with forty-five percent siding in its favor, forty-five percent opposed to the idea for its ability to potentially interfere with ordinary citizen&#x27;s messages, and ten percent claiming indifference. While this may seem slightly tangent to the topic of Internet privacy, it is important to consider that at the time of this poll, the general population&#x27;s approval of government actions was declining, reaching thirty-one percent versus the forty-one percent it held a decade prior. This figure in collaboration with the majority&#x27;s approval of FBI intervention demonstrates an emerging emphasis on the issue of Internet privacy in society and more importantly, the potential implications it may hold on citizens&#x27; lives.

Online users must seek to protect the information they share with online websites, specifically social media. In today&#x27;s Web 2.0 individuals have become the public producers of personal information. Users create their own &quot;digital trails&quot; that hackers and companies alike capture and utilize for a variety of marketing and advertisement targeting. A recent paper from the Rand Corporation claims &quot;privacy is not the opposite of sharing – rather, it is control over sharing.&quot; Internet privacy concerns arise from the surrender of personal information to engage in a variety of acts, from transactions to commenting in online forums. Protection against invasions of online privacy will require individuals to make an effort to inform and protect themselves via existing software solutions, to pay premiums for such protections or require individuals to place greater pressure on governing institutions to enforce privacy laws and regulations regarding consumer and personal information.

=== Impact of Internet surveillance tools on marginalized communities ===
Internet privacy issues also affect existing class distinctions in the United States, often disproportionately impacting historically marginalized groups typically classified by race and class. Individuals with access to private digital connections that have protective services are able to more easily prevent data privacy risks of personal information and surveillance issues. Members of historically marginalized communities face greater risks of surveillance through the process of data profiling, which increases the likelihood of being stereotyped, targeted, and exploited, thus exacerbating pre-existing inequities that foster uneven playing fields. There are severe, and often unintentional, implications for big data which results in data profiling. For example, automated systems of employment verification run by the federal government such as E-verify tend to misidentify people with names that do not adhere to standardized Caucasian-sounding names as ineligible to work in the United States, thus widening unemployment gaps and preventing social mobility. This case exemplifies how some programs have bias embedded within their codes.

Tools using algorithms and artificial intelligence have also been used to target marginalized communities with policing measures, such as using facial recognition software and predictive policing technologies that use data to predict where a crime will most likely occur, and who will engage in the criminal activity. Studies have shown that these tools exacerbate the existing issue of over-policing in areas that are predominantly home to marginalized groups. These tools and other means of data collection can also prohibit historically marginalized and low-income groups from financial services regulated by the state, such as securing loans for house mortgages. Black applicants are rejected by mortgage and mortgage refinancing services at a much higher rate than white people, exacerbating existing racial divisions. Members of minority groups have lower incomes and lower credit scores than white people, and often live in areas with lower home values. Another example of technologies being used for surveilling practices is seen in immigration. Border control systems often use artificial intelligence in facial recognition systems, fingerprint scans, ground sensors, aerial video surveillance machines, and decision-making in asylum determination processes. This has led to large-scale data storage and physical tracking of refugees and migrants.

While broadband was implemented as a means to transform the relationship between historically marginalized communities and technology to ultimately narrow the digital inequalities, inadequate privacy protections compromise user rights, profile users, and spur skepticism towards technology among users. Some automated systems, like the United Kingdom government&#x27;s Universal Credit system in 2013, have failed to take into account that people, often minorities, may already lack Internet access or digital literacy skills and therefore be deemed ineligible for online identity verification requirements, such as forms for job applications or to receive social security benefits, for example. Marginalized communities using broadband services may also not be aware of how digital information flows and is shared with powerful media conglomerates, reflecting a broader sense of distrust and fear these communities have with the state. Marginalized communities may therefore end up feeling dissatisfied or targeted by broadband services, whether from nonprofit community service providers or state providers.

==Laws and regulations==
===Global privacy policies===
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is the toughest privacy and security law in the world. Though it was drafted and passed by the European Union (EU), it imposes obligations onto organizations anywhere, so long as they target or collect data related to people in the EU. There are no globally unified laws and regulations.

===European General Data protection regulation===
In 2009 the European Union had for the first time created awareness for tracking practices when the ePrivacy-Directive (2009/136/EC) was put in force.&lt;ref name=&quot;Directive 2009/136/EC&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In order to comply with this directive, websites had to actively inform the visitor about the use of cookies. This disclosure has been typically implemented by showing small information banners. Nine years later, by 25 May 2018 the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) came into force, which aims to regulate and restrict the usage of personal data in general, irrespective of how the information is being processed. The regulation primarily applies to so-called “controllers”, which are (a) all organizations that process personal information within the European Union, and (b) all organizations which process personal information of EU-based persons outside the European Union. Article 4 (1) defines personal information as anything that may be used for identifying a “data subject” (e.g. natural person) either directly or in combination with other personal information. In theory, this even takes common Internet identifiers such as cookies or IP Addresses in the scope of this regulation. Processing such personal information is restricted unless a &quot;lawful reason&quot; according to Article 6 (1) applies. The most important lawful reason for data processing on the Internet is the explicit consent given by the data subject. More strict requirements apply for sensitive personal information (Art 9), which may be used for revealing information about ethnic origin, political opinion, religion, trade union membership, biometrics, health or sexual orientation. However, explicit user content still is sufficient to process such sensitive personal information (Art 9 (2) lit a). “Explicit consent” requires an affirmative act (Art 4 (11)), which is given if the individual person is able to freely choose and does consequently actively opt-in.

As of June 2020, typical cookie implementations are not compliant with this regulation, and other practices such as device fingerprinting, cross-website-logins or 3rd-party requests are typically not disclosed, even though many opinions consider such methods in the scope of the GDPR. The reason for this controversy is the ePrivacy-Directive 2009/136/EC which is still unchanged in force. An updated version of this directive, formulated as ePrivacy Regulation, shall enlarge the scope from cookies only to any type of tracking method. It shall furthermore cover any kind of electronic communication channels such as Skype or WhatsApp. The new ePrivacy-Regulation was planned to come into force alongside the GDPR, but as of July 2020, it was still under review. Some people assume that lobbying is the reason for this massive delay.

Irrespective of the pending ePrivacy-Regulation, the European High Court decided in October 2019 (case C-673/17) that the current law is not fulfilled if the disclosed information in the cookie disclaimer is imprecise, or if the consent checkbox is pre-checked. Consequently, many cookie disclaimers that were in use at that time were confirmed to be incompliant with the current data protection laws. However, even this high court judgment only refers to cookies and not to other tracking methods.

===Internet privacy in China===
One of the most popular topics of discussion regarding Internet privacy is China. Although China is known for its remarkable reputation for maintaining Internet privacy among many online users, it could potentially be a major jeopardy to the lives of many online users who have their information exchanged on the web regularly. For instance, in China, there is a new software that will enable the concept of surveillance among the majority of online users and present a risk to their privacy. The main concern with privacy of Internet users in China is the lack thereof. China has a well-known policy of censorship when it comes to the spread of information through public media channels. Censorship has been prominent in Mainland China since the communist party gained power in China over 60 years ago. With the development of the Internet, however, privacy became more of a problem for the government. The Chinese Government has been accused of actively limiting and editing the information that flows into the country via various media. The Internet poses a particular set of issues for this type of censorship, especially when search engines are involved. Yahoo! for example, encountered a problem after entering China in the mid-2000s. A Chinese journalist, who was also a Yahoo! user, sent private emails using the Yahoo! server regarding the Chinese government. Yahoo! provided information to the Chinese government officials to track down journalist Shi Tao. Shi Tao allegedly posted state secrets to a New York-based website. Yahoo provided incriminating records of the journalist&#x27;s account logins to the Chinese government and Shi Tao was sentenced to ten years in prison. These types of occurrences have been reported numerous times and have been criticized by foreign entities such as the creators of the Tor network, which was designed to circumvent network surveillance in multiple countries.

There have been reports that personal information has been sold. For example, students preparing for exams would receive calls from unknown numbers selling school supplies.

The 2021 Data Security Law classifies data into different categories and establishes corresponding levels of protection. It imposes significant data localization requirements, in a response to the extraterritorial reach of the United States CLOUD Act or similar foreign laws.

The 2021 Personal Information Protection Law is China&#x27;s first comprehensive law on personal data rights and is modeled after the European Union&#x27;s General Data Protection Regulation.

===Internet privacy in Sweden===
On 11 May 1973 Sweden enacted the Data Act − the world&#x27;s first national data protection law. In 2012, Sweden received a Web Index Score of 100, a score that measures how the Internet significantly influences political, social, and economic impact, placing them first among 61 other nations. Sweden received this score while exceeding new mandatory implementations from the European Union. Sweden placed more restrictive guidelines on the directive on intellectual property rights enforcement (IPRED) and passed the Forsvarets Radio Anstalt (FRA) law in 2009 under the National Defense Radio Establishment. The law allowed for the legal sanctioning of surveillance of Internet traffic by state authorities and allowed authorities to monitor all cross-border communication without a warrant

The FRA has a history of intercepting radio signals and has stood as the main intelligence agency in Sweden since 1942. Sweden has a mixture of the government&#x27;s strong push towards implementing policy and citizens&#x27; continued perception of a free and neutral Internet. Both of the previously mentioned additions created controversy among critics but they did not change the public perception despite the new FRA law being litigated in front of the European Court of Human Rights for human rights violations.

Sweden&#x27;s recent emergence into Internet dominance may be explained by its recent climb in users. Only 2% of all Swedes were connected to the Internet in 1995 but at last count in 2012, 89% had broadband access. This was due in large part once again to the active Swedish government introducing regulatory provisions to promote competition among Internet service providers. These regulations helped grow web infrastructure and forced prices below the European average.

Sweden was the birthplace of the Pirate Bay, an infamous file-sharing website. File sharing has been illegal in Sweden since it was developed, however, there was never any real fear of being persecuted for the crime until 2009 when the Swedish Parliament was the first in the European Union to pass the intellectual property rights directive. This directive persuaded Internet service providers to announce the identity of suspected violators.

Sweden also uses an infamous centralized block list. The list is generated by authorities and was originally crafted to eliminate sites hosting child pornography. However, there is no legal way to appeal a site that ends up on the list and as a result, many non-child pornography sites have been blacklisted. Sweden&#x27;s government enjoys a high level of trust from its citizens. Without this trust, many of these regulations would not be possible and thus many of these regulations may only be feasible in the Swedish context.

===Internet privacy in the United States===

Andrew Grove, co-founder and former CEO of Intel Corporation, offered his thoughts on Internet privacy in an interview published in May 2000:

More than two decades later, Susan Ariel Aaronson, director of the Digital Trade and Data Governance Hub at George Washington University observed that, &quot;The American public simply isn&#x27;t demanding a privacy law... They want free more than they want privacy.&quot;

With the Republicans in control of all three branches of the U.S. government, lobbyists for Internet service providers (ISPs) and tech firms persuaded lawmakers to dismantle regulations to protect privacy which had been made during the Obama administration. These FCC rules had required ISPs to get &quot;explicit consent&quot; before gathering and selling their private Internet information, such as the consumers&#x27; browsing histories, locations of businesses visited and applications used. Trade groups wanted to be able to sell this information for profit. Lobbyists persuaded Republican senator Jeff Flake and Republican representative Marsha Blackburn to sponsor legislation to dismantle Internet privacy rules; Flake received $22,700 in donations and Blackburn received $20,500 in donations from these trade groups. On March 23, 2017, abolition of these privacy protections passed on a narrow party-line vote. In June 2018, California passed the law restricting companies from sharing user data without permission. Also, users would be informed to whom the data is being sold and why. On refusal to sell the data, companies are allowed to charge a little higher to these consumers.

==Legal threats==
Used by government agencies are array of technologies designed to track and gather Internet users&#x27; information are the topic of much debate between privacy advocates, civil liberties advocates and those who believe such measures are necessary for law enforcement to keep pace with rapidly changing communications technology.

Specific examples:
* Following a decision by the European Union&#x27;s council of ministers in Brussels, in January 2009, the UK&#x27;s Home Office adopted a plan to allow police to access the contents of individuals&#x27; computers without a warrant. The process, called &quot;remote searching&quot;, allows one party, at a remote location, to examine another&#x27;s hard drive and Internet traffic, including email, browsing history and websites visited. Police across the EU are now permitted to request that the British police conduct a remote search on their behalf. The search can be granted, and the material turned over and used as evidence, on the basis of a senior officer believing it necessary to prevent a serious crime. Opposition MPs and civil liberties advocates are concerned about this move toward widening surveillance and its possible impact on personal privacy. Shami Chakrabarti, director of the human rights group Liberty, said &quot;The public will want this to be controlled by new legislation and judicial authorization. Without those safeguards it&#x27;s a devastating blow to any notion of personal privacy.&quot;
* The FBI&#x27;s Magic Lantern software program was the topic of much debate when it was publicized in November 2001. Magic Lantern is a Trojan Horse program that logs users&#x27; keystrokes, rendering encryption useless to those infected.

== Children and Internet privacy ==
Internet privacy is a growing concern with children and the content they are able to view. Aside from that, many concerns for the privacy of email, the vulnerability of internet users to have their internet usage tracked, and the collection of personal information also exist. These concerns have begun to bring the issues of Internet privacy before the courts and judges. In recent years, there is a growing concern for children&#x27;s privacy and the commercial use of their data. In addition, the use of their personal data to persuade and influence their behavior has also come under scrutiny.

==See also==

* Anonymous blogging
* Anonymous post
* Anonymous P2P
* Anonymous remailer
* Anonymous web browsing
* Canadian privacy law
* Computer and network surveillance
* Digital footprint
* European Union Data Protection Directive
* Internet censorship
* Location-based service#Privacy issues
* Mass surveillance
* PRISM surveillance program
* Privacy-enhancing technologies
* Privacy in Australian law
* Privacy in English law
* Privacy laws in Russia
* Privacy laws of the United States
* Privacy software
* Privacy concerns with social networking services
* Right to be forgotten
* Search engine privacy
* Spatial cloaking
* Wire data
==References==
==Further reading==
* Lohr, Steve, &quot;How Privacy Can Vanish Online, a Bit at a Time&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Wednesday, March 17, 2010
* Gazaleh, Mark (2008) &quot;Online trust and perceived utility for consumers of web privacy statements – Overview&quot; WBS, 35pp.
* Federal Trade Commission, &quot;Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change: A Proposed Framework for Businesses and Policymakers&quot;, December 2010
* Topolsky, J. (2012, February 16). &quot;Tempted by cool apps, users should see Apple&#x27;s privacy issues as a wake-up call&quot;. &quot;Washington Post&quot;, p. A15.
* &quot;PRISM-Proof Security Considerations&quot;, Internet-Draft, Phillip Hallam-Baker, Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), October 27, 2014.

==External links==
* Electronic Frontier Foundation - an organization devoted to privacy and intellectual freedom advocacy
* Ponemon Institute - independent research center dedicated to privacy, data protection and information security policy
* Pew Research Center - Online Privacy and Safety - nonpartisan fact tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the world
* Expectation of privacy for company email not deemed objectively reasonable – &quot;Bourke v. Nissan&quot;
* Internet Privacy: The Views of the FTC, the FCC, and NTIA: Joint Hearing before the Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade and the Subcommittee on Communications and Technology of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, House of Representatives, One Hundred Twelfth Congress, First Session, July 14, 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q175975" start="0" end="16" title="Internet privacy" label="Internet privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="59" end="66" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="190" end="198" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q456632" start="232" end="244" title="data privacy" label="data privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="362" end="379" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="408" end="443" title="personally identifiable information" label="personally identifiable information"/>
<link wikidata="Q844824" start="621" end="637" title="physical address" label="physical address"/>
<link wikidata="Q253677" start="836" end="848" title="GPS tracking" label="GPS tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="1095" end="1103" title="Computer security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q368328" start="1111" end="1125" title="Bruce Schneier" label="Bruce Schneier"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="1303" end="1315" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052099" start="1360" end="1375" title="digital privacy" label="digital privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183853" start="1529" end="1539" title="Jerry Kang" label="Jerry Kang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1835" end="1848" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="1918" end="1935" title="President Clinton" label="President Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="2520" end="2529" title="anonymity" label="anonymity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="2645" end="2655" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248282" start="2687" end="2696" title="profiling (information science)" label="profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="3636" end="3639" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="FTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q471880" start="3758" end="3772" title="identity theft" label="identity theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847111" start="3912" end="3925" title="spam messages" label="spam messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999831" start="4270" end="4286" title="privacy policies" label="privacy policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="4402" end="4410" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="4415" end="4435" title="X (formerly Twitter)" label="X (formerly Twitter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012236" start="5144" end="5155" title="Algorithmic curation" label="personalise"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="5222" end="5246" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q511618" start="5323" end="5368" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Online Privacy Protection Act" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Online Privacy Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999831" start="5470" end="5486" title="privacy policies" label="privacy policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="5564" end="5596" title="Cybercrime" label="criminal and fraudulent activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251652" start="5709" end="5721" title="Email fraud" label="scam e-mails"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546711" start="5821" end="5834" title="online piracy" label="online piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638949" start="5941" end="5952" title="geolocation" label="geolocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234817" start="6015" end="6021" title="Facebook Beacon" label="Beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485469" start="6217" end="6239" title="Lane v. Facebook, Inc." label="Lane v. Facebook, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="6652" end="6690" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q178995" start="7470" end="7481" title="HTTP cookie" label="HTTP cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="7594" end="7599" title="State (computer science)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q220577" start="7777" end="7793" title="Google Analytics" label="Google Analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q878553" start="8580" end="8598" title="computer forensics" label="computer forensics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9094" end="9107" title="#Flash cookies" label="Flash cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073776" start="9112" end="9126" title="zombie cookies" label="zombie cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248282" start="9592" end="9605" title="web profiling" label="web profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q371199" start="9620" end="9640" title="cross-site scripting" label="cross-site scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="11761" end="11776" title="Mozilla Firefox" label="Mozilla Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q41242" start="11781" end="11786" title="Opera (web browser)" label="Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q991293" start="12030" end="12035" title="browser cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="12501" end="12504" title="URL" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901028" start="12960" end="12975" title="market analysis" label="market analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q911932" start="13463" end="13471" title="Honeypot (computing)" label="honeypot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13938" end="13952" title="#Evercookies" label="zombie cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312725" start="14349" end="14368" title="local shared object" label="local shared object"/>
<link wikidata="Q857177" start="14427" end="14445" title="Adobe Flash Player" label="Adobe Flash Player"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15202" end="15261" title="Adobe Flash Player#Privacy" label="Flash cookies can be disabled on a per-site or global basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070427" start="15343" end="15351" title="Internet security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="15373" end="15380" title="spyware" label="spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="15384" end="15391" title="malware" label="malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416930" start="15484" end="15494" title="Evercookie" label="Evercookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413165" start="15507" end="15518" title="Samy Kamkar" label="Samy Kamkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628411" start="17158" end="17181" title="behavioural advertising" label="behavioural advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890907" start="17676" end="17692" title="private browsing" label="private browsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178995" start="18130" end="18147" title="persistent cookie" label="persistent cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073776" start="18159" end="18172" title="zombie cookie" label="zombie cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="18227" end="18237" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q471880" start="18369" end="18383" title="identity theft" label="identity theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873" start="18388" end="18405" title="credit card fraud" label="credit card fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890907" start="18522" end="18536" title="Private browsing" label="avoid tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595085" start="19397" end="19410" title="Tag management system" label="marketing tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="19589" end="19624" title="personally identifiable information" label="personally identifiable information"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="19824" end="19838" title="request method" label="request method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764521" start="19848" end="19857" title="HTTP POST" label="HTTP POST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428315" start="20104" end="20115" title="List of HTTP header fields" label="HTTP-header"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="20177" end="20192" title="digital cameras" label="digital cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851397" start="20241" end="20259" title="street photography" label="street photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q210121" start="20306" end="20336" title="social documentary photography" label="social documentary photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070100" start="20583" end="20615" title="Mug shot publishing industry" label="online mug shot publishing sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281249" start="20880" end="20898" title="candid photography" label="candid photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="20975" end="20986" title="free speech" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365125" start="21113" end="21131" title="Harvard Law Review" label="Harvard Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="22650" end="22656" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="22684" end="22692" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="22697" end="22706" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="22736" end="22744" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="22789" end="22805" title="Face recognition" label="Face recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q213602" start="23691" end="23709" title="Google Street View" label="Google Street View"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583888" start="23769" end="23786" title="Google Street View privacy concerns" label="an ongoing debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213602" start="24009" end="24020" title="Street View" label="Street View"/>
<link wikidata="Q693305" start="25132" end="25150" title="Ruedi Noser" label="a Swiss politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935155" start="26569" end="26592" title="Data retention" label="retain such information"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="32205" end="32219" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333295" start="33627" end="33640" title="Startpage.com" label="Startpage.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351955" start="33642" end="33655" title="Disconnect Mobile" label="Disconnect.me"/>
<link wikidata="Q376536" start="33660" end="33668" title="Scroogle" label="Scroogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906900" start="33794" end="33799" title="Brave (web browser)" label="Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805" start="33957" end="33967" title="DuckDuckGo" label="DuckDuckGo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657870" start="34195" end="34200" title="Qwant" label="Qwant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17639196" start="34329" end="34334" title="Searx" label="Searx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418850" start="34550" end="34558" title="Fireball (search engine)" label="Fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q182496" start="34649" end="34653" title="Bing (search engine)" label="Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924645" start="34861" end="34868" title="MetaGer" label="MetaGer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333295" start="35040" end="35047" title="Ixquick" label="Ixquick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759675" start="35236" end="35240" title="Yacy" label="Yacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="35679" end="35692" title="search engine" label="search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415581" start="35752" end="35765" title="filter bubble" label="filter bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="35864" end="35874" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q202044" start="35920" end="35931" title="Tor Browser" label="Tor Browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q131164" start="36316" end="36323" title="Web 2.0" label="Web 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="36510" end="36527" title="social networking" label="social networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="36548" end="36556" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="36558" end="36567" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="36569" end="36589" title="X (formerly Twitter)" label="X (formerly Twitter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40629" start="36595" end="36602" title="MySpace" label="MySpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="36973" end="36993" title="Personal information" label="information and data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628411" start="37914" end="37934" title="targeted advertising" label="targeted advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="39067" end="39076" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q333618" start="39081" end="39089" title="Snapchat" label="Snapchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q606563" start="39912" end="39971" title="Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act" label="Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="40163" end="40188" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="41512" end="41515" title="World Wide Web" label="web"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="41525" end="41530" title="https" label="https"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41708" end="41720" title="#IP addresses" label="IP addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q567624" start="41751" end="41761" title="anonymizer" label="anonymizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q565283" start="41770" end="41797" title="I2P" label="I2P – The Anonymous Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q202044" start="41801" end="41804" title="Tor (network)" label="Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903041" start="42094" end="42104" title="Bitmessage" label="Bitmessage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005864" start="42149" end="42158" title="Cryptocat" label="Cryptocat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="42826" end="42843" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377676" start="42941" end="42957" title="Data Privacy Day" label="Data Privacy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511885" start="42960" end="42972" title="T-Mobile USA" label="T-Mobile USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978592" start="43007" end="43019" title="web browsing" label="web browsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q919641" start="43021" end="43037" title="Verizon Wireless" label="Verizon Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325951" start="43107" end="43120" title="Virgin Mobile" label="Virgin Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="43127" end="43140" title="text messages" label="text messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q298594" start="43327" end="43344" title="AT&amp;amp;T Mobility" label="AT&amp;amp;T Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="43529" end="43534" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="43560" end="43585" title="Hypertext Markup Language" label="Hypertext Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q48869" start="44130" end="44141" title="web storage" label="web storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500685" start="44459" end="44497" title="HTML audio" label="access to a computer&amp;#x27;s microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q857177" start="44580" end="44585" title="Adobe Flash Player" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585009" start="44661" end="44676" title="geolocation API" label="geolocation API"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="44954" end="44979" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="World Wide Web Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128636" start="45547" end="45570" title="Content Security Policy" label="Content Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q371199" start="45710" end="45730" title="cross-site scripting" label="cross-site scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="46044" end="46052" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q196465" start="46220" end="46224" title="Exif" label="Exif"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822481" start="46514" end="46535" title="metadata removal tool" label="metadata removal tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q858810" start="46553" end="46561" title="Big data" label="Big data"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="46762" end="46770" title="exabytes" label="exabytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="47147" end="47153" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="47155" end="47160" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="47162" end="47169" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="47173" end="47176" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="47561" end="47565" title="Data mining" label="Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339860" start="48301" end="48322" title="Cross-device tracking" label="Cross-device tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="48518" end="48525" title="Malware" label="Malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="48763" end="48770" title="Spyware" label="Spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q247213" start="48885" end="48892" title="web bug" label="web bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="49125" end="49133" title="Phishing" label="Phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q513675" start="49405" end="49413" title="Pharming" label="Pharming"/>
<link wikidata="Q376934" start="49666" end="49684" title="Social engineering (computer security)" label="Social engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="49793" end="49815" title="Proxy server" label="Malicious proxy server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990841" start="49868" end="49882" title="Password strength" label="weak passwords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089715" start="50655" end="50661" title="WebRTC" label="WebRTC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50705" end="50718" title="WebRTC#Concerns" label="security flaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="50751" end="50762" title="Virtual private network" label="VPN tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="50785" end="50795" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="50871" end="50878" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="50883" end="50896" title="Google Chrome" label="Google Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q72320400" start="51423" end="51428" title="Wickr" label="Wickr"/>
<link wikidata="Q26934461" start="51430" end="51434" title="Wire (software)" label="Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19718090" start="51440" end="51446" title="Signal (messaging app)" label="Signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q823464" start="52504" end="52516" title="Law of Jante" label="Law of Jante"/>
<link wikidata="Q171322" start="52792" end="52796" title="SOPA" label="SOPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385745" start="52797" end="52802" title="CISPA" label="CISPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="55724" end="55727" title="Personal identification number" label="PIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q135635" start="57504" end="57527" title="Boston Consulting Group" label="Boston Consulting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q594062" start="58274" end="58283" title="Carnivore (software)" label="Carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q131164" start="59433" end="59440" title="Web 2.0" label="Web 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="59694" end="59710" title="Rand Corporation" label="Rand Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321473" start="61247" end="61255" title="E-verify" label="E-verify"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893931" start="63269" end="63292" title="Universal Credit" label="Universal Credit system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172506" start="64070" end="64104" title="General Data Protection Regulation" label="General Data Protection Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="64463" end="64477" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267022" start="66548" end="66566" title="device fingerprint" label="device fingerprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q41651339" start="66874" end="66893" title="ePrivacy Regulation" label="ePrivacy Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="67050" end="67055" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="67059" end="67067" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385874" start="68489" end="68499" title="Censorship in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="68522" end="68536" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="68547" end="68562" title="Communist Party of China" label="communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q981524" start="69258" end="69265" title="Shi Tao (journalist)" label="Shi Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q202044" start="69622" end="69633" title="Tor network" label="Tor network"/>
<link wikidata="Q107187732" start="69896" end="69913" title="Data Security Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Data Security Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q50978284" start="70128" end="70137" title="CLOUD Act" label="CLOUD Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q108178403" start="70173" end="70208" title="Personal Information Protection Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Personal Information Protection Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172506" start="70320" end="70354" title="General Data Protection Regulation" label="General Data Protection Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314861" start="70424" end="70432" title="Data Act (Sweden)" label="Data Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480245" start="70963" end="70999" title="National Defence Radio Establishment" label="National Defense Radio Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="71642" end="71672" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q432929" start="73198" end="73210" title="Andrew Grove" label="Andrew Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="73241" end="73258" title="Intel Corporation" label="Intel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21675804" start="73370" end="73390" title="Susan Ariel Aaronson" label="Susan Ariel Aaronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="73449" end="73477" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="73624" end="73635" title="Republican party of the United States" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663608" start="73693" end="73702" title="Lobbying in the United States" label="lobbyists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="73851" end="73871" title="Obama administration" label="Obama administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q929581" start="74218" end="74228" title="Jeff Flake" label="Jeff Flake"/>
<link wikidata="Q458971" start="74259" end="74275" title="Marsha Blackburn" label="Marsha Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="74610" end="74619" title="user data" label="user data"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="74998" end="75013" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="75206" end="75248" title="Council of the European Union" label="European Union&amp;#x27;s council of ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="75293" end="75304" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="75902" end="75905" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487533" start="76040" end="76057" title="Shami Chakrabarti" label="Shami Chakrabarti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189606" start="76094" end="76101" title="Liberty (advocacy group)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q163751" start="76316" end="76329" title="Magic Lantern (spyware)" label="Magic Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q14639" start="76436" end="76448" title="Trojan horse (computing)" label="Trojan Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="76717" end="76722" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770037" start="77191" end="77209" title="Anonymous blogging" label="Anonymous blogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770042" start="77212" end="77226" title="Anonymous post" label="Anonymous post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544432" start="77229" end="77242" title="Anonymous P2P" label="Anonymous P2P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757877" start="77245" end="77263" title="Anonymous remailer" label="Anonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q202044" start="77266" end="77288" title="Tor (network)" label="Anonymous web browsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030860" start="77291" end="77311" title="Canadian privacy law" label="Canadian privacy law"/>
<link wikidata="Q651476" start="77314" end="77347" title="Computer and network surveillance" label="Computer and network surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q845916" start="77350" end="77367" title="Digital footprint" label="Digital footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q911488" start="77370" end="77410" title="Data Protection Directive" label="European Union Data Protection Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="77413" end="77432" title="Internet censorship" label="Internet censorship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77435" end="77472" title="Location-based service#Privacy issues" label="Location-based service#Privacy issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="77475" end="77492" title="Mass surveillance" label="Mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420597" start="77495" end="77521" title="PRISM surveillance program" label="PRISM surveillance program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246002" start="77524" end="77554" title="Privacy-enhancing technologies" label="Privacy-enhancing technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023326" start="77557" end="77582" title="Privacy in Australian law" label="Privacy in Australian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246024" start="77585" end="77607" title="Privacy in English law" label="Privacy in English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227335" start="77610" end="77632" title="Data protection (privacy) laws in Russia" label="Privacy laws in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q839447" start="77635" end="77668" title="Privacy laws of the United States" label="Privacy laws of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246032" start="77671" end="77687" title="Privacy software" label="Privacy software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246027" start="77690" end="77738" title="Privacy concerns with social networking services" label="Privacy concerns with social networking services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961237" start="77741" end="77762" title="Right to be forgotten" label="Right to be forgotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788670" start="77765" end="77786" title="Search engine privacy" label="Search engine privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065113" start="77789" end="77805" title="Spatial cloaking" label="Spatial cloaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145883" start="77808" end="77817" title="Wire data" label="Wire data"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228067" wikidata="Q1382474" url="?curid=1228067" title="Ferdinand Bordewijk">
<text>Ferdinand Bordewijk (10 October 1884 – 28 April 1965) was a Dutch author. His style, which is terse and symbolic, is considered to belong to New Objectivity and magic realism. He was awarded the P. C. Hooft Award in 1953 and the Constantijn Huygens Prize in 1957. He wrote novels and short stories; of his novels, his 1938 &quot;Character&quot; is canonical in the Netherlands, and was the basis for &quot;a 1997 film of the same name&quot;.

==Biography==
Ferdinand Bordewijk was born in Amsterdam, and moved with his family to The Hague when he was ten. He studied law at Leiden University. After graduation, he worked first at a Rotterdam law firm and became an independent lawyer in Schiedam in 1919, remaining an inhabitant of The Hague all of his life. He was married to the composer Johanna Bordewijk-Roepman. He wrote the libretto for her opera &quot;Rotonde&quot; (1941).

==Works==
His first published work was a volume of poetry titled &quot;&quot; (&quot;Mushrooms&quot;) under the pseudonym Ton Ven. It was not particularly well received.

His breakthrough came with the short novels &#x27; (&quot;Blocks&quot;, 1931), &#x27; (&quot;Growling Animals&quot;, 1933) and &quot;Bint&quot; (1934), later frequently published together as a set of three, followed by the longer works &#x27; (&quot;Red Palace&quot;, 1936) and &#x27; (1938, translated into English as &quot;Character&quot; in 1966). &quot;&quot; was a dystopian work which was perceived as a criticism of communism. It is comparable to Aldous Huxley&#x27;s &quot;Brave New World&quot;, which appeared one year later and which Bordewijk deemed to be junk (&quot;).

==Bibliography==

*1916 – &quot; (under the pseudonym Ton Ven)
*1918 – &quot; (A king of the phrase) in: Groot Nederland
*1919 – (Fantastic tales), short stories
*1923 – (Fantastic tales II), short stories
*1924 – (Fantastic tales III), short stories
*1931 – &quot; (Cubes), novel
*1933 – (novel)
*1934 – (novel)
*1935 – (The last honor, eulogy)
*1935 – 
*1936 – (Red palace, downfall of the century)
*1936 – 
*1937 – (short stories)
*1938 – (novel); English translation: &quot;Character&quot;, from Dutch by E. M. Prince; London, Peter Owen, 1966, etc. Filmed as 1997 Dutch/Belgian film, directed by Mike van Diem.
*1940 – 
*1940 – (Three plays)
*1941 – &quot;Apollyon&quot;
*1946 – (Oaks of Dodona)
*1946 – 
*1947 – (By gaslight)
*1947 – (Five fantastic tales)
*1948 – 
*1948 – (Plato&#x27;s death, symphonic poem)
*1948 – (opera)
*1949 – &quot;, Bint&quot; (Cubes, grunting animals, Bint), compilation
*1949 – 
*1949 – 
*1949 – 
*1950 – (Tales from the other side)
*1951 – 
*1951 – 
*1952 – 
*1954 – 
*1954 – (Misses and mister Richebois; twenty short stories)
*1955 – (compendium)
*1955 – 
*1955 – 
*1956 – 
*1956 – (play)
*1956 – (Ten stories)
*1957 – (Idem; ten parodies)
*1958 – 
*1959 – (The gypsies; twelve short stories and a sketch)
*1960 – (Centre of silence; five stories)
*1961 – (Faraway tidings)
*1961 – (under the pseudonym Ton Ven)
*1964 – (Spring, seven stories)
*1964 – (under the pseudonym Ton Ven)
*1965 – 
*1981 – 
*1982 – (Seven fantastic tales)
*1982–1991 – (Complete works, thirteen parts)
*1983 – (Five little stories)

==See also==
*Ferdinand Bordewijk Prize

==References==

* Augustinus P. Dierick: &quot;Aspects of Myth in Ferdinand Bordewijk&#x27;s Karakter. In: The Low Countries: Multidisciplinary Studies (ed. Margriet Bruijn Lacy). Lanham, New York, London: University Press of America, 1990, 147-155.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1382474" start="0" end="19" title="Ferdinand Bordewijk" label="Ferdinand Bordewijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="141" end="156" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q147516" start="161" end="174" title="magic realism" label="magic realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379623" start="195" end="212" title="P.C. Hooft Award" label="P. C. Hooft Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q593216" start="229" end="254" title="Constantijn Huygens Prize" label="Constantijn Huygens Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880113" start="329" end="338" title="Character (novel)" label="Character"/>
<link wikidata="Q928545" start="406" end="434" title="Character (1997 film)" label="a 1997 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="489" end="498" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="529" end="538" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="574" end="591" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="632" end="641" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q204709" start="687" end="695" title="Schiedam" label="Schiedam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359402" start="790" end="815" title="Johanna Bordewijk-Roepman" label="Johanna Bordewijk-Roepman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="830" end="838" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880113" start="1378" end="1387" title="Character (novel)" label="Character"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="1423" end="1431" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1476" end="1485" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="1507" end="1520" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="1534" end="1549" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q928545" start="2200" end="2223" title="Character (1997 film)" label="1997 Dutch/Belgian film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049287" start="3197" end="3222" title="Ferdinand Bordewijk Prize" label="Ferdinand Bordewijk Prize"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228069" wikidata="Q7108095" url="?curid=1228069" title="Oswald Reid">
<text>Oswald Austin Reid VC (2 November 1893 – 27 October 1920) was a South African recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.

==Early life==
Reid was born at Johannesburg, the son of Harry Austin Reid and his wife Alice Gertrude, pioneering founders of the city. He attended the Diocesan College in Cape Town and St John&#x27;s College in Johannesburg before moving on to Radley College in England in April 1910. The Headmaster sent a glowing reference praising his fine athleticism and role as senior prefect. Aged 16, he entered the Cricket XI as wicket-keeper in his first term. The next year he was in the Football XI and played as forward in the Rugby XV. . Reid was a Heavyweight boxing champion in the college and a member of the Debating Society. Then he became a full back in the football XI and was elected to the Literary Society in November 1911.

Joining the College OTC he gained an A Certificate in March 1912. In freezing conditions he played in the Rugby 1st XV in January 1912, injured himself in a skating accident. He recovered, switched to the wing in Rugby and proved fast. He proved a great hurdler, and then returned as 1st XI wicket-keeper. But working on bowling and batting, his averages improved in all aspects of the game.

Reid became Senior Prefect in Michaelmas 1912, began writing poetry and, dominated the school&#x27;s sports. He was there for three years became Senior Prefect and Captain of the Football and Cricket teams. He was also captain of Swimming and elected President of the Debating Society, and Colour Sergeant of the OTC. He picked up another Football injury in 1913, and had to be excluded for the second year running. Without Reid, with two weak knees, Rugby XV was without pace in the backs. In summer 1913 he was an excellent Cricket XI captain scoring 101 with the bat against Bradfield in one match. He represented the Public Schools XI at Lord&#x27;s. He continued playing cricket after school and in the army.

That summer he left for Holland to learn Dutch with a view to working in the Transvaal, when the war broke out. He continued a lifelong correspondence with his old headmaster in Johannesburg: in one of his letter hinting he would enter Holy Orders. On 14 August 1914 he was commissioned into 4th battalion King&#x27;s Liverpool Regiment.

== Military career ==
In 1915 he took part in the Battle of Neuve Chapelle. He fought alongside soldiers from India. The casualty rate of officers was very high, attrition rates of over 100. Two of his friends were killed. The shelling was terrific, and the Germans had very accurate snipers. Reid was wounded in the head at the Second Battle of Ypres in April 1915. In his copious correspondence to his Headmaster in St John&#x27;s College, Johannesburg he explained his motives and experiences. Of the regiment&#x27;s complement of 30 officers and 1000 men, only 7 officers and 300 men remained after only two months in the theatre of operations. At Ypres they were gassed; and he praised the men who &quot;carry an enormous weight on their packs...their marvellous imperturbability and cheerfulness...They face death as if it was a common occurrence.&quot; He took strength from their courage. Having been sent home wounded, he returned to France in September 1915. He was a lieutenant with the 1st battalion, having been promoted to that rank in March, until promoted to captain in December in &quot;one of the finest and oldest of the British Regiments.&quot; The British now had trench mortars. But he was wrong to think the war would be won by summer 1916. He had already been wounded a second time at 1st Battle of Arras in April 1915, spending all the months to July 1916 in England. He did not serve in the Somme, but was sent to India on the North-West Frontier with 2nd battalion. In December he arrived in Mesopotamia, promoted to captain and transferred into the Loyal North Lancashire Regiment, attached to the 6th Battalion. He was perhaps naive in his assessment of the Turk as &quot;much more of a sportsman than the Germans...&quot;

==For Valour==
On 7 March 1917 at the Battle of Diyalah River, Mesopotamia, the men of the King&#x27;s Own Lancaster Regiment tried to cross the river, but even before the first platoon had crossed were under Turkish cross-fire. The Royal Engineers building the pontoon were killed from 50 yards away across the river by machine-guns and artillery. A second pontoon was attacked by mustard gas killing or wounding all the engineers. In all five attempts were made to cross the river but the positions were dominated by enfilade fire. Dead and wounded bodies were seen floating down the river.

The next night a surprise assault was made, but other pontoons behind were held up as Turkish sentries awoke to the noise. As a result, 100 Lancashire soldiers were left stranded on the north bank of the river, cut off without reinforcements. A much stronger Turkish force attacked all day and all night. With great skill they managed to throw back the grenades thrown into their positions by the Turks. Sometimes at the point of a bayonet they fought back the Turks, time and time again constantly for 30 hours. The one piece of good fortune was the redoubt thrown up by the bend in the river, that offered some shelter. Finally on the morning of 10 March, a rescue was effected. They found 30 exhausted survivors; bodies piled up around the defensive parapets.

Reid&#x27;s bravery in defending the position, and isolated bridgehead was vital, and crucial, allowing enough time for reinforcements to cross the river. The manoeuvre allowed General Sir Stanley Maude to outflank the Turks and to effect entry into Baghdad on 11 March 1917. Captain Reid was granted leave that summer 1917 returned to Johannesburg. The town&#x27;s first winner of the Victoria Cross was given a rapturous welcome, reported a local newspaper. &quot;Thank you all very much. It&#x27;s all a matter of luck&quot;, said Reid in all due modesty - soldierly and professional to the last. Reid left South Africa to return to the regiment on Monday 13 August 1917. He had already been made Acting Major on 10 May. On 31 August 1917 it was announced that the Italian government had awarded him the silver medal for Military Valour. In October 1917 he suffered a recurrence of the Rugby injury to a cartilage in the knee, and was invalided out. In December the General&#x27;s Report mentioned him in despatches. He returned home to recover from his injuries.

=== Medal citation ===
Captain Oswald Austin Reid
King&#x27;s Liverpool Regiment
attached Loyal North Lancashire Regiment

For most conspicuous bravery in the face
of desperate circumstances.

By his dauntless courage and gallant
leadership he was able to consolidate a
small post with the advanced troops, on
the opposite side of a river to the main
body, after the lines of communication had
been cut by the sinking of pontoons.

he maintained his position for 30 hours
against constant attacks by bombs
machine guns and shell fire, with the full
knowledge that repeated attempts at relief
had failed, and that his ammunition was
all but exhausted.

It was greatly due to his tenacity that the
passage of the river was effected on the
following night.

His Victoria Cross is displayed at the National Museum of Military History in Johannesburg.

== Later life ==
On the fourth anniversary of the start of the war, 4 August 1918, at a commemoration in Johannesburg, Reid received a ceremonial sword on his son&#x27;s behalf, who was still serving in Mesopotamia. On All Saints Day 1919, Oswald Reid attended a reunion at Radley where he was very welcome indeed. The boys were granted a half-holiday at Reid&#x27;s request. The editor of the Radleian of the day recorded the event. A great reception was held with a dinner and speeches. He met Reid personally, and little had changed despite his military hardships. He had fallen in love with a sister of an old school chum, but she had married another man. He was feeling quite depressed about it. But Reid was a tall good looking robust, strong young man, well-liked and popular. He had a ready smile and good humour, never complained about his wounds and bore his infirmities manfully. He hid his VC in a tree trunk ashamed by his embarrassment. When he left Radley Reid returned to his base. On 6 February 1920 he was demobilized and travelled home to South Africa. On 1 April, he resigned his army commission, taking up a new commission in the Transvaal Scottish Regiment with the rank of captain. He was he first secretary of the Comrades of the Great War League (later the British Empire Service League and now called the South African Legion) he entered the political sphere winning a seat at Troyeville in March 1920.

On Monday 25 October he fell ill going to the office, but insisted on working. Two days later he died from gastro enteritis due to complication from the wounds he received during the war. His funeral took place on Sunday 31 October 1920, at St Mary&#x27;s Cathedral, Johannesburg. Crowds thronged the streets to see off their hero. The procession cortege passed along the street to the cemetery. Acting-Major Reid is buried in Braamfontein Cemetery in Johannesburg.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*The Star (Johannesburg)
*Official History of the Great War: The Campaign in Mesopotamia 1914-1918
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7108095" start="0" end="18" title="Oswald Reid" label="Oswald Austin Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="19" end="21" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="95" end="109" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="212" end="219" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="224" end="236" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417076" start="492" end="506" title="Radley College" label="Radley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="2324" end="2335" title="Holy Orders" label="Holy Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331555" start="2477" end="2501" title="Battle of Neuve Chapelle" label="Battle of Neuve Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="2756" end="2778" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3736" end="3755" title="1st Battle of Arras" label="1st Battle of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694443" start="4004" end="4035" title="Loyal North Lancashire Regiment" label="Loyal North Lancashire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4218" end="4241" title="Battle of Diyalah River" label="Battle of Diyalah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="4243" end="4254" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565751" start="7400" end="7435" title="National Museum of Military History (South Africa)" label="National Museum of Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="7439" end="7451" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8692" end="8724" title="Comrades of the Great War League" label="Comrades of the Great War League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374050" start="8736" end="8765" title="British Empire Service League" label="British Empire Service League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8785" end="8805" title="South African Legion" label="South African Legion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228073" wikidata="Q2916488" url="?curid=1228073" title="Napoleon and the Jews">
<text>The first laws to emancipate Jews in France were enacted during the French Revolution, establishing them as citizens equal to other Frenchmen. In countries that Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s ensuing Consulate and French Empire conquered during the Napoleonic Wars, he emancipated the Jews and introduced other ideas of liberty. He overrode old laws restricting Jews to reside in ghettos, removed the forced identification of Jews by their wearing the Star of David. In Malta, he ended the enslavement of Jews and permitted the construction of a synagogue there. He also lifted laws that limited Jews&#x27; rights to property, worship, and certain occupations. In anticipation of a victory in the Holy Land that failed to come about, he wrote a proclamation published in April 1799 for a Jewish homeland there.

In an effort to promote Jewish integration into French society, however, Napoleon also implemented several policies that eroded Jewish separateness. He restricted the practice of Jews lending money, in the Decree on Jews and Usury (1806), restricted the regions to which Jews were allowed to migrate, and required Jews to adopt formal names. He also implemented a series of consistories, which served as an effective channel utilised by the French government to regulate Jewish religious life.

Historians have disagreed about Napoleon&#x27;s intentions in these actions, as well as his personal and political feelings about the Jewish community. Some have said he had political reasons but did not have sympathy for the Jews. His actions were generally opposed by the leaders of monarchies in other countries. After his defeat by the Coalition against France, a counter-revolution swept many of these countries and restored discriminatory measures against the Jews.

==Napoleon&#x27;s laws and the Jews==
The French Revolution abolished religious persecution that had existed under the monarchy. The 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen guaranteed freedom of religion and free exercise of worship, provided that it did not contradict public order. At that time, most other European countries implemented measures of religious persecution towards religious minorities. Many Catholic countries were intolerant and had established religious Inquisitions, sanctioning Jews and Protestants. In the tolerant Protestant-ruled Dutch Republic, Jews and Catholics did not have equal rights until it came under French dominance.

In the early 19th century, through his conquests in Europe, Napoleon spread the modernist liberal ideas of revolutionary France: equality before the law and the rule of law. Napoleon&#x27;s attitudes towards the Jews have been interpreted in various ways by historians. He made statements both in support of and in opposition to Jews as a group and had that changed. In 1990, Orthodox Rabbi Berel Wein claimed that Napoleon was interested primarily in seeing the Jews assimilate, rather than prosper as a distinct community: &quot;Napoleon&#x27;s outward tolerance and fairness toward Jews was actually based upon his grand plan to have them disappear entirely by means of total assimilation, intermarriage, and conversion.&quot;

Napoleon was concerned about the role of Jews as moneylenders, wanting to end that. The treatment of the Alsace Jews and their debtors was raised in the Imperial Council on 30 April 1806. His liberation of the Jewish communities in Italy (notably in Ancona in the Papal States) and his insistence on the integration of Jews as equals in French and Italian societies demonstrates that he distinguished between usurers (whether Jewish or not), whom he compared to locusts, and those Jews who accepted non-Jews as their equals.

In a letter to Jean-Baptiste Nompère de Champagny, Minister of the Interior on 29 November 1806, Napoleon wrote:
:[It is necessary to] reduce, if not destroy, the tendency of Jewish people to practice a very great number of activities that are harmful to civilisation and to public order in society in all the countries of the world. It is necessary to stop the harm by preventing it; to prevent it, it is necessary to change the Jews. [...] Once part of their youth will take its place in our armies, they will cease to have Jewish interests and sentiments; their interests and sentiments will be French.

While insisting on the primacy of civil law over the military, Napoleon retained a deep respect and affection for the military as a profession. He often hired former soldiers in civilian occupations. Some French Jews served in the military.

Through his policies overall, Napoleon greatly improved the condition of the Jews in France and Europe. Starting in 1806, Napoleon passed a number of measures enhancing the position of the Jews in the French Empire. He accepted a representative group elected by the Jewish community, the Grand Sanhedrin&quot;,&quot; as their representatives to the French government.

In conquered countries, he abolished laws restricting Jews to living in ghettos. In 1807, he designated Judaism as one of the official religions of France, along with Roman Catholicism (long the established state religion), Lutheran and Calvinist Protestantism (Huguenots, followers of the latter, had been severely persecuted by the monarchy in the late 17th and 18th centuries).

In 1808 Napoleon rolled back a number of reforms (under the so-called &quot;décret infâme&quot;, or Infamous Decree, of 17 March 1808), declaring all debts with Jews to be annulled, reduced or postponed. The Infamous Decree imposed a ten-year ban on any kind of Jewish money-lending activity. Similarly, Jews who were in subservient positions—such as a Jewish servant, military officer, or wife—were unable to engage in any kind of money-lending activity without the explicit consent of their superiors. Napoleon&#x27;s goal in implementing the Infamous Decree of 1808 was to integrate Jewish culture and customs into those of France. By restricting money-lending activity, Jews would be forced to engage in other practices for a living. Likewise, in order to even engage in money-lending activity, the decree required Jews to apply for an annual license, granted only with the recommendation of the Jews&#x27; local consistory and with the surety of the Jews&#x27; honesty. This caused so much financial loss that the Jewish community nearly collapsed.

On a different note, the Infamous Decree also placed heavy restrictions on the Jews&#x27; ability to migrate. The decree prevented the Jews from relocating to the regions of Alsace and required that Jews wishing to move to other regions of France to own or purchase land to farm. It also required them to refrain from engaging in any kind of money-lending activity (the law eventually placed these restrictions only on the Jews of the northeast). Likewise, the decree required Jews to serve in the French military, without any opportunity to provide a replacement.

The last component of the Infamous Decree – established in July 1808 – required Jews to adopt formal names with which they would be addressed (before, Jews were often referred to as &quot;Joseph son of Benjamin&quot;). They were also prevented from selecting names of cities or names in the Hebrew Bible. Napoleon sought to integrate the Jewish people more fully into French society by establishing the guidelines they were required to follow in adopting names. Napoleon ended these restrictions by 1811.

Historian Ben Weider argued that Napoleon had to be extremely careful in defending oppressed minorities such as Jews, because of keeping balance with other political interests, but says that the leader clearly saw the political benefit to his Empire in the long term in supporting them. Napoleon hoped to use equality as a way of gaining advantage from discriminated groups, like Jews or Protestants.

Both aspects of his thinking can be seen in an 1818 response to physician Barry O&#x27;Meara, his physician during his exile on St. Helena, asking why he pressed for the emancipation of the Jews:

:I wanted to make them leave off usury, and become like other men... by putting them upon an equality, with Catholics, Protestants, and others, I hoped to make them become good citizens, and conduct themselves like others of the community... as their rabbins explained to them, that they ought not to practise usury to their own tribes, but were allowed to do so with Christians and others, that, therefore, as I had restored them to all their privileges... they were not permitted to practise usury with me or them, but to treat us as if we were of the tribe of Judah. Besides, I should have drawn great wealth to France as the Jews are very numerous, and would have flocked to a country where they enjoyed such superior privities. Moreover, I wanted to establish an universal liberty of conscience.

However, in a private letter to his brother Jérôme, dated 6 March 1808, Napoleon wrote the following:

:I have undertaken to reform the Jews, but I have not endeavoured to draw more of them into my realm. Far from that, I have avoided doing anything which could show any esteem for the most despicable of mankind.

===Napoleon&#x27;s proclamation to the Jews of Africa and Asia===

During Napoleon&#x27;s siege of Acre in 1799, &quot;Gazette Nationale,&quot; the main French newspaper during the French Revolution, published on 3 Prairial, (French Republican Calendar Year 7, equivalent to 22 May 1799) a short statement that: 
&quot;Bonaparte has published a proclamation in which he invites all the Jews of Asia and Africa to gather under his flag in order to re-establish the ancient Jerusalem. He has already given arms to a great number, and their battalions threaten Aleppo.&quot;

The French campaign in Egypt and Syria was eventually defeated by a combined Anglo-Ottoman force and he never carried out his alleged plan. Historian Nathan Schur in &quot;Napoleon and the Holy Land&quot; (2006) believes that Napoleon intended the proclamation for propaganda and to build support for his campaign among the Jews in those regions. Ronald Schechter believes that the newspaper was reporting a rumour, as there is no documentation that Napoleon contemplated such a policy. The proclamation might have been intended to gain support from Haim Farhi, the Jewish advisor to Ahmed al Jazzar, the Muslim ruler of Acre, and to bring him over to Napoleon&#x27;s side. Farhi commanded the defence of Acre on the field.

The idea itself may have originated from Thomas Corbet (1773–1804), an Anglo-Irish Protestant emigree who, as a member of the Society of United Irishmen, was an ally of the Republican regime, engaged in revolutionary activities against the Dublin Castle administration and served in the French Army. His brother, William Corbet also served as a general in the French Army. In February 1799, he authored a letter to the French Directory, then under the leadership of Napoleon&#x27;s patron Paul Barras. In the letter he stated &quot;I recommend you, Napoleon, to call on the Jewish people to join your conquest in the East, to your mission to conquer the land of Israel&quot; saying, &quot;Their riches do not console them for their hardships. They await with impatience the epoch of their re-establishment as a nation.&quot; Dr. Milka Levy-Rubin, a curator at the National Library of Israel, has attributed Corbert&#x27;s motivation to a Protestant Zionism based on premillennialist themes. It is not known what Napoleon&#x27;s direct response was to the letter, but he made his own proclamation three months later.

In 1940, historian Franz Kobler claimed to have found a detailed version of the proclamation from a German translation. Kobler&#x27;s claim was published in &quot;The New Judaea,&quot; the official periodical of the World Zionist Organization. The Kobler version suggests that Napoleon was inviting Jews across the Mideast and North Africa to create a Jewish homeland. It includes phrases such as &quot;Rightful heirs of Palestine!&quot; and &quot;your political existence as a nation among the nations.&quot; These concepts have been more commonly associated with the Zionist movement, which developed in the late 19th century.

Historians such as Henry Laurens, Ronald Schechter, and Jeremy Popkin believe that the German document, which has never been found, was a forgery, as Simon Schwarzfuchs asserted in his 1979 book.

Rabbi Aharon Ben-Levi of Jerusalem also added his voice to the proclamation, calling on the Jews to enlist in Napoleon&#x27;s army &quot;to return to Zion as in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah&quot; and rebuild the Temple. According to Mordechai Gichon, a military historian and archaeologist from Tel Aviv University, who summarised 40 years of research on the subject, Napoleon had an idea to establish a national home for the Jews in the Land of Israel, &quot;Napoleon believed the Jews would repay his favours by serving French interests in the region,&quot; Gichon claimed. &quot;After returning to France, all he was interested in when it came to the Jews was how to use them to reinforce the French nation,&quot; Gichon says. &quot;Therefore, he tried to conceal the Zionist chapter of his past.&quot; On the other hand, Ze&#x27;ev Sternhell believes the entire story is nothing more than an oddity. &quot;Napoleon&#x27;s big contribution came, in fact, in form of promoting the incorporation of the Jews into French society.&quot;

===Reactions by major European powers===

Russian Emperor Alexander I objected to Napoleon&#x27;s emancipation of the Jews and establishment of the Grand Sanhedrin. He vehemently denounced the liberties given to Jews and demanded that the Russian Orthodox Church protest against Napoleon&#x27;s tolerant religious policy. He referred to the emperor in a proclamation as &quot;the Anti-Christ&quot; and the &quot;Enemy of God&quot;. The Holy Synod of Moscow proclaimed: &quot;In order to destroy the foundations of the Churches of Christendom, the Emperor of the French has invited into his capital all the Judaic synagogues and he furthermore intends to found a new Hebrew Sanhedrin ― the same council that the Christian Bible states, condemned to death (by crucifixion) the revered figure, Jesus of Nazareth.&quot; Alexander persuaded Napoleon to sign a 17 March 1808 decree restricting the freedoms accorded to the Jews. Napoleon expected in exchange that the tsar would help persuade the British to seek peace with France. Absent that, three months later, Napoleon effectively cancelled the decree by allowing local authorities to implement his earlier reforms. More than half of the French departments restored citizens&#x27; guaranteed freedoms to the Jews.

In Austria, Chancellor Klemens von Metternich wrote, &quot;I fear that the Jews will believe (Napoleon) to be their promised Messiah&quot;.

In Prussia, leaders of the Lutheran Church were extremely hostile to Napoleon&#x27;s actions. Italian kingdoms were suspicious of his actions, although expressing less violent opposition. 

The British government, which was at war with Napoleon, rejected the principle and doctrine of the Sanhedrin. Lionel Rothschild was elected as a Member of Parliament three times before he could take his seat in Parliament in 1858.

==Napoleon&#x27;s legacy==
Napoleon had more influence on the Jews in Europe than detailed in his decrees. By breaking up the feudal castes of mid-Europe and introducing the equality of the French Revolution, he achieved more for Jewish emancipation than had been accomplished during the three preceding centuries. As part of recognising the Jewish community, he established a national Israelite Consistory in France. It was intended to serve as a centralising authority for Jewish religious and community life. Napoleon implemented several other regional consistories throughout the French Empire, as well, with the Israelite Consistory serving as the lead consistory; it had the responsibility of overseeing the various regional consistories. The regional consistories, in turn, oversaw the economic and religious aspects of Jewish life. The regional consistories consisted of a five-individual board, usually occupied by one (or in some cases two) rabbi, and the rest lay individuals who lived in the districts over which the consistory maintained jurisdiction. The Israelite Consistory in France consisted of three rabbis and two lay individuals. In charge of the Israelite Consistory (and the consistory system in general) was a 25-member board. The members of the board, all Jews, were appointed by the prefect, thus allowing the French government to regulate the system of consistories and, in turn, various aspects of Jewish life. Similarly he established the . This served as a model for other German states until after the fall of Napoleon. Napoleon permanently improved the condition of the Jews in the Prussian Rhine provinces by his rule of this area.

Heinrich Heine and Ludwig Börne both recorded their sense of obligation to Napoleon&#x27;s principles of action. German Jews in particular have historically regarded Napoleon as the major forerunner of Jewish emancipation in Germany. When the government required Jews to select surnames according to the mainstream model, some are said to have taken the name of &quot;Schöntheil,&quot; a translation of &quot;Bonaparte.&quot; In the Jewish ghettos, legends about Napoleon&#x27;s actions emerged. Twentieth-century Italian author Primo Levi wrote that Italian Jews often chose &quot;Napoleone&quot; and &quot;Bonaparte&quot; as their given name to recognise their historic liberator.

==See also==
* Grand Sanhedrin
* Jewish emancipation
* Jewish question

==References==
==Further reading==
* Berkovitz, Jay R. &quot;The Napoleonic Sanhedrin: Halachic Foundations and Rabbinical Legacy.&quot; CCAR JOURNAL 54.1 (2007): 11.
* Brenner, Michael, Vicki Caron, and Uri R. Kaufman, eds.&quot;Jewish Emancipation Reconsidered&quot; 2003.
* Cooper, Levi. &quot;Napoleonic freedom of worship in law and art.&quot; &quot;Journal of Law and Religion&quot; 34.1 (2019): 3-41.
* Darwish, Mahmoud Ahmed, and Huda Abdel Rahim Abdel Kadir. &quot;Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s Declaration for the Establishment for of the National Home for the Jews in Palestine&quot;. &quot;International Journal of Cultural Inheritance &amp; Social Sciences&quot; ISSN: 2632-7597 3.6 (2021): 1-30.
*Goodman, Mark. &quot;Napoleon, the Tzars, and the Emancipation of Jewry in Continental Europe&quot;. &quot;International Journal of Russian Studies&quot; 10.2 (2021).
* Kohn, Hans. &quot;Napoleon and the Age of Nationalism.&quot; &quot;The Journal of Modern History&quot; 22.1 (1950): 21-37.
* Newman, Aubrey. &quot;Napoleon and the Jews.&quot; &quot;European Judaism: A Journal for the New Europe&quot; 2.2 (1967): 25-32.
* Renard, Nils. &quot;Being a Jewish Soldier in the Grande Armée: The Memoirs of Jakob Meyer during the Napoleonic Wars (1808–1813).&quot; &quot;Zutot&quot; 19.1 (2022): 55-69.
* Schwarzfuchs, Simon. &quot;Napoleon, the Jews, and the Sanhedrin&quot;. Philadelphia 1979.
* Taieb, Julien. &quot;From Maimonides to Napoleon: The True and the Normative.&quot; Global Jurist 7.1 (2007).
* Tozzi, Christopher. &quot;Jews, soldiering, and citizenship in revolutionary and Napoleonic France.&quot; &quot;The Journal of Modern History&quot; 86.2 (2014): 233-257.
* Trigano, Shmuel. &quot;The French Revolution and the Jews.&quot; &quot;Modern Judaism&quot; (1990): 171-190.
* Weider, Ben. &quot;Napoleon and the Jews.&quot; &quot;The Journal of the International Napoleonic Society&quot; 1.2 (1998).
*Woolf, Stuart. &quot;French civilization and ethnicity in the Napoleonic Empire.&quot; &quot;Past &amp; Present&quot; 124 (1989): 96-120.

==External links==
* Napoleon and the Jews
* &quot;Labyrinthe. Atelier interdisciplinaire&quot; (a journal in French) published in 2007 a special issue dealing with the topic: &quot;Les Juifs contre l&#x27;émancipation. De Babylone à Benny Lévy&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1713635" start="18" end="33" title="Jewish emancipation" label="emancipate Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="37" end="43" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="68" end="85" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="161" end="179" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q877619" start="195" end="204" title="French Consulate" label="Consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="209" end="222" title="First French Empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="244" end="259" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917049" start="375" end="382" title="Jewish ghettos in Europe" label="ghettos"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="447" end="460" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="465" end="470" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="692" end="701" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910857" start="991" end="1004" title="Loans and interest in Judaism" label="lending money"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028788" start="1013" end="1037" title="Infamous Decree" label="Decree on Jews and Usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163232" start="1181" end="1193" title="Consistory (Judaism)" label="consistories"/>
<link wikidata="Q138107" start="1642" end="1651" title="War of the Sixth Coalition" label="Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="1670" end="1688" title="Counter-revolutionary" label="counter-revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="1913" end="1964" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="1976" end="1995" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="2266" end="2277" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="2347" end="2361" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="2537" end="2544" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316254" start="2576" end="2599" title="equality before the law" label="equality before the law"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="2608" end="2619" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896999" start="2838" end="2848" title="Berel Wein" label="Berel Wein"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294354" start="2906" end="2925" title="Jewish assimilation" label="the Jews assimilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16131170" start="3140" end="3153" title="Interfaith marriage in Judaism" label="intermarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415" start="3428" end="3434" title="Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="3442" end="3454" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q83931" start="3640" end="3646" title="locust" label="locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="3677" end="3685" title="Gentile" label="non-Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361368" start="3719" end="3753" title="Jean-Baptiste Nompère de Champagny, duc de Cadore" label="Jean-Baptiste Nompère de Champagny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518496" start="3755" end="3779" title="Minister of the Interior (France)" label="Minister of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738933" start="4841" end="4856" title="Grand Sanhedrin" label="Grand Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="5026" end="5033" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="5089" end="5106" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q331995" start="5146" end="5154" title="Lutheranism in France" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="5159" end="5168" title="Huguenots" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="5169" end="5182" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028788" start="5404" end="5419" title="Infamous Decree" label="Infamous Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342922" start="7019" end="7031" title="French name" label="formal names"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="7216" end="7228" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895603" start="7441" end="7451" title="Ben Weider" label="Ben Weider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885734" start="7907" end="7925" title="Barry O&amp;#x27;Meara" label="Barry O&amp;#x27;Meara"/>
<link wikidata="Q34497" start="7961" end="7971" title="Saint Helena" label="St. Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="8063" end="8068" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q151087" start="8876" end="8882" title="Jérôme Bonaparte" label="Jérôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q815109" start="9237" end="9250" title="Siege of Acre (1799)" label="siege of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410997" start="9266" end="9283" title="Le Moniteur Universel" label="Gazette Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q837145" start="9362" end="9370" title="Prairial" label="Prairial"/>
<link wikidata="Q181974" start="9373" end="9406" title="French Republican calendar" label="French Republican Calendar Year 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="9619" end="9628" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="9705" end="9711" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="9724" end="9758" title="French campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="French campaign in Egypt and Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909796" start="10270" end="10280" title="Haim Farhi" label="Haim Farhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453214" start="10304" end="10319" title="Jazzar Pasha" label="Ahmed al Jazzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="10341" end="10345" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169725" start="10486" end="10499" title="Corbet family" label="Thomas Corbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="10516" end="10527" title="Anglo-Irish people" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="10571" end="10597" title="Society of United Irishmen" label="Society of United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310838" start="10685" end="10713" title="Dublin Castle administration" label="Dublin Castle administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="10732" end="10743" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119765" start="10758" end="10772" title="William Corbet" label="William Corbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="10864" end="10880" title="French Directory" label="French Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q333843" start="10934" end="10945" title="Paul Barras" label="Paul Barras"/>
<link wikidata="Q188915" start="11309" end="11335" title="National Library of Israel" label="National Library of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084152" start="11383" end="11401" title="Christian Zionism" label="Protestant Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493080" start="11411" end="11427" title="Premillennialism" label="premillennialist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11581" end="11593" title="Franz Kobler" label="Franz Kobler"/>
<link wikidata="Q205386" start="11778" end="11804" title="World Zionist Organization" label="World Zionist Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220693" start="11914" end="11929" title="Homeland for the Jewish people" label="Jewish homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="11983" end="11992" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="12131" end="12138" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q205318" start="12539" end="12543" title="Zion" label="Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q191787" start="12562" end="12566" title="Ezra" label="Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025598" start="12571" end="12579" title="Nehemiah" label="Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415267" start="12590" end="12608" title="Third Temple" label="rebuild the Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534511" start="12623" end="12639" title="Mordechai Gichon" label="Mordechai Gichon"/>
<link wikidata="Q319239" start="12685" end="12704" title="Tel Aviv University" label="Tel Aviv University"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="12828" end="12842" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="13485" end="13496" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="13666" end="13689" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q208481" start="14100" end="14109" title="Sanhedrin" label="Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="14694" end="14701" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="14714" end="14736" title="Klemens Wenzel, Prince von Metternich" label="Klemens von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="14835" end="14842" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q333605" start="15132" end="15149" title="Lionel de Rothschild" label="Lionel Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="15167" end="15187" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="15233" end="15243" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163232" start="15640" end="15660" title="Consistory (Judaism)" label="Israelite Consistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q999042" start="16877" end="16892" title="Upper Rhenish Circle" label="Rhine provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="16920" end="16934" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213595" start="16939" end="16951" title="Ludwig Börne" label="Ludwig Börne"/>
<link wikidata="Q153670" start="17449" end="17459" title="Primo Levi" label="Primo Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="17553" end="17563" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738933" start="17619" end="17634" title="Grand Sanhedrin" label="Grand Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713635" start="17637" end="17656" title="Jewish emancipation" label="Jewish emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q708764" start="17659" end="17674" title="Jewish question" label="Jewish question"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228075" wikidata="Q16062316" url="?curid=1228075" title="Stewart McPherson (VC)">
<text>Stewart McPherson VC (1819 – 7 December 1892) was a Scottish soldier in India and a recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth military forces.

==Life==

Stewart McPherson was born in Culross in 1819, the son of Mungo McPherson and Mary Smith. He left Geddes Public School in the village at 15 and became an apprentice weaver in nearby Dunfermline, but he was soon lured by adventure and foreign travel. In December 1839, he walked to Stirling to join the British Army&#x27;s 78th Highlanders, which were later known as the Seaforth Highlanders Ross-shire Buffs, Duke of Albany&#x27;s.

He married a Culross girl, Elizabeth Haig, in 1848, and the couple went on to have six children - Stewart, Sarah, Eliza, Robina, Ferguson, and McGregor.

McPherson saw action in Persia, India and Ireland before arriving in Bengal, India. He was approximately 38 years old, and now a colour-sergeant. During his time here, his actions during the Siege of Lucknow in the Indian Mutiny earned him the Victoria Cross. His citation reads:
McPherson was presented with his award by Queen Victoria in December 1880, at Windsor Castle. Only three weeks after receiving his award, he discharged himself from the army and returned to Scotland, where he was appointed superintendent of the Glasgow Industrial Schools based in Bailieston.

A decade later, the family moved again to Culross where they bought a house in Low Valleyfield. As a reminder of his time in India, it was named Lucknow Villa and it was there that he died, aged 70, in 1892.

==Burial==

McPherson was laid to rest in his town near Dunfermline. He was buried in the Fife County Cemetery, in the shadow of Culross Abbey, but his grave became overgrown. About 143 years after being awarded the Victoria Cross a local woman, Janis Ellis, showed businessman Alan Johnson the war hero&#x27;s last resting place and he decided his valour should be recognized in his home village. The Fife Council awarded an £1800 grant from the common good fund to pay for a new Indian granite stone - quarried less than 60 miles from Lucknow. The grave lies to the north-west of the church entrance.

A plaque was also unveiled inside Culross Parish Church at a ceremony which was attended by two of his descendants, Mrs. Lylian Edge and Mr Stuart Lamberton, as well as senior Army personnel.

His Victoria Cross is displayed at the Regimental Museum of Queens Own Highlanders, Fort George, Inverness-shire, Scotland.

==References==

*Monuments to Courage (David Harvey, 1999)
*The Register of the Victoria Cross (This England, 1997)
*Scotland&#x27;s Forgotten Valour (Graham Ross, 1995)
* &quot;Scotsman&quot; Wed 27 September 2000

==External links==
*Location of grave and VC medal &quot;(Fife)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16062316" start="0" end="17" title="Stewart McPherson (VC)" label="Stewart McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="18" end="20" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="52" end="60" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="72" end="77" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="101" end="115" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="218" end="225" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="230" end="242" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424554" start="301" end="308" title="Culross" label="Culross"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="453" end="464" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="552" end="560" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="573" end="592" title="British Army" label="British Army&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643672" start="593" end="609" title="78th Highlanders" label="78th Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124484" start="641" end="661" title="Seaforth Highlanders" label="Seaforth Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="882" end="888" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="890" end="895" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="900" end="907" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149215" start="987" end="1002" title="colour-sergeant" label="colour-sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q815165" start="1049" end="1065" title="Siege of Lucknow" label="Siege of Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="1073" end="1086" title="Indian Mutiny" label="Indian Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="1180" end="1194" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="1216" end="1230" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="1383" end="1390" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1419" end="1429" title="Bailieston" label="Bailieston"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="1697" end="1708" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687459" start="1770" end="1783" title="Culross Abbey" label="Culross Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426707" start="2522" end="2533" title="Fort George, Scotland" label="Fort George"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264386" start="2580" end="2600" title="Monuments to Courage" label="Monuments to Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760066" start="2623" end="2657" title="The Register of the Victoria Cross" label="The Register of the Victoria Cross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228083" wikidata="Q5085854" url="?curid=1228083" title="Charlotte Bingham">
<text>The Hon. Charlotte Bingham (born 29 June 1942) is an English novelist who has written over 30 mainly historical romance novels and has also written for many television programmes including &quot;Upstairs, Downstairs&quot;; &quot;Play for Today&quot;; and &quot;Robin&#x27;s Nest&quot;. In her television work, she often worked with her husband, Terence Brady.

== Biography==

===Early life===
The Honourable Charlotte Mary Thérèse Bingham was born on 29 June 1942 in Haywards Heath, Sussex. Her father, John Bingham, 7th Baron Clanmorris, wrote detective stories and was a secret member of MI5. Her mother, Madeleine Bingham, née Madeleine Mary Ebel, was a playwright and biographer. Bingham first attended a school in London, but from the age of seven to 16, she went to the Priory of Our Lady&#x27;s Good Counsel school in Haywards Heath. After she left school, Bingham went to stay in Paris with some French aristocrats with the intention of learning French. She had written since she was 10 years old and her first piece of work was a thriller called &quot;Death&#x27;s Ticket&quot;. Bingham wrote her humorous autobiography, called &quot;Coronet Among the Weeds&quot;, when she was 19, and not long before her twentieth birthday a literary agent discovered her celebrating at the Ritz. He was a friend of her parents and he took off the finished manuscript of her autobiography. In 1963, this was published by Heinemann and was a best seller.

===TV work===
On April 29, 1963, while in New York City, Charlotte Bingham appeared on the American TV game show, To Tell the Truth, to promote &quot;Coronet Among the Weeds&quot;. In 1966, her first novel, &quot;Lucinda&quot;, was published. This was later adapted into a TV screenplay. &quot;Coronet Among the Grass&quot;, her second autobiography (1972), dealt with the first ten years of her marriage to fellow writer Terence Brady. The couple, who have two children, later adapted &quot;Coronet Among the Grass&quot; and &quot;Coronet Among the Weeds&quot;, into the TV sitcom &quot;No, Honestly&quot;. Bingham and her husband collaborated on the scripts for three early episodes of &quot;Upstairs, Downstairs&quot;, &quot;Board Wages&quot;, &quot;I Dies from Love&quot; and &quot;Out of the Everywhere&quot;. They later wrote an accompanying book called &quot;Rose&#x27;s Story&quot;. They also wrote the episodes of &quot;Take Three Girls&quot; featuring Victoria (Liza Goddard). In the 1970s, Brady and Bingham wrote episodes for the TV series &quot;Play for Today&quot;, &quot;Three Comedies of Marriage&quot;, &quot;Yes, Honestly&quot; and &quot;Robin&#x27;s Nest&quot;. During the 1980s and 1990s, they continued to write for the occasional TV series and adapted Jilly Cooper&#x27;s novel &quot;Riders&quot; for the television film &quot;Riders&quot; (1993).

===Later work===
Since the 1980s, Bingham has become a romantic novelist, writing novels including &quot;To Hear a Nightingale&quot;, &quot;The Business&quot; and &quot;In Sunshine or in Shadow&quot;. Most of her books are set in the 19th and 20th centuries. In 1996, she won the Romantic Novel of the Year Award from the Romantic Novelists&#x27; Association.

== Bibliography ==
===Non fiction===
* &quot;Coronet Among the Weeds&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Coronet Among the Grass&quot; (1972)
* &quot;MI5 And Me&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Spies and Stars: MI5, Showbusiness and Me&quot; (2019)

===Novels===
* &quot;Lucinda&quot; (1966)
* &quot;The Business&quot; (1989)
* &quot;In Sunshine or in Shadow&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Stardust&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Nanny&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Change of Heart&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Grand Affair&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Love Song&quot; (1998)
* &quot;The Kissing Garden&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Country Wedding&quot; (1999)
* &quot;The Blue Note&quot; (2000)
* &quot;The Love Knot&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Summertime&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Distant Music&quot; (2002)
* &quot;The Magic Hour&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Friday&#x27;s Girl&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Out of the Blue&quot; (2006)
* &quot;In Distant Fields&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The White Marriage&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Goodnight Sweetheart&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The Enchanted&quot; (2008)
* &quot;The Land of Summer&quot; (2008)
* &quot;The Daisy Club&quot; (2009)

===Love Quartet===
# &quot;Belgravia&quot; (1983)
# &quot;Country Life&quot; (1985)
# &quot;At Home&quot; (1986)
# &quot;By Invitation&quot; (1993)

===Nightingale Saga===
# &quot;To Hear a Nightingale&quot; (1988)
# &quot;The Nightingale Sings&quot; (1996)

===Debutantes Saga===
# &quot;Debutantes&quot; (1995)
# &quot;The Season&quot; (2001)

===The Bexham Trilogy===
# &quot;The Chestnut Tree&quot; (2002)
# &quot;The Wind Off the Sea&quot; (2003)
# &quot;The Moon at Midnight&quot; (2003)

===Eden Saga===
# &quot;Daughters of Eden&quot; (2004)
# &quot;The House of Flowers&quot; (2004)

===Mums on the Run Series===
# &quot;Mums on the Run&quot; (2010)
# &quot;A Dip Before Breakfast&quot; (2012)

===With Terence Brady===

====Victoria Series====
# &quot;Victoria&quot; (1972)
# &quot;Victoria and Company&quot; (1974)

====Honestly Series====
# &quot;No, Honestly&quot; (1974)
# &quot;Yes, Honestly&quot; (1977)

====Upstairs, Downstairs Series====
# &quot;Rose&#x27;s Story&quot; (1972)

==References and sources==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5085854" start="9" end="26" title="Charlotte Bingham" label="Charlotte Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="112" end="125" title="romance novel" label="romance novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168760" start="195" end="215" title="Upstairs, Downstairs (1971 TV series)" label="Upstairs, Downstairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562040" start="229" end="243" title="Play for Today" label="Play for Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794953" start="261" end="278" title="Robin&amp;#x27;s Nest (TV series)" label="Robin&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q27057457" start="345" end="358" title="Terence Brady (writer)" label="Terence Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q920646" start="468" end="482" title="Haywards Heath" label="Haywards Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221909" start="504" end="538" title="John Bingham, 7th Baron Clanmorris" label="John Bingham, 7th Baron Clanmorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="591" end="594" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q26433235" start="608" end="625" title="Madeleine Bingham" label="Madeleine Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="912" end="923" title="Aristocracy (class)" label="aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q182015" start="1040" end="1048" title="Thriller (genre)" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q656054" start="1286" end="1290" title="Hôtel Ritz Paris" label="Ritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273015" start="1416" end="1425" title="Heinemann (publisher)" label="Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1492" end="1505" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q872948" start="1564" end="1581" title="To Tell the Truth" label="To Tell the Truth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1663" end="1670" title="Lucinda (book)" label="Lucinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27057457" start="1872" end="1885" title="Terence Brady (writer)" label="Terence Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042737" start="2038" end="2050" title="No, Honestly" label="No, Honestly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168760" start="2144" end="2164" title="Upstairs, Downstairs (1971 TV series)" label="Upstairs, Downstairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880160" start="2178" end="2189" title="Board Wages" label="Board Wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744664" start="2203" end="2219" title="I Dies from Love" label="I Dies from Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q27877466" start="2236" end="2257" title="Out of the Everywhere (Upstairs, Downstairs)" label="Out of the Everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2316" end="2333" title="Upstairs, Downstairs (1971 TV series)#Novelisations" label="Rose&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677808" start="2379" end="2395" title="Take Three Girls" label="Take Three Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257313" start="2422" end="2434" title="Liza Goddard" label="Liza Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562040" start="2508" end="2522" title="Play for Today" label="Play for Today"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2536" end="2562" title="Three Comedies of Marriage" label="Three Comedies of Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052711" start="2576" end="2589" title="Yes, Honestly" label="Yes, Honestly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794953" start="2606" end="2623" title="Robin&amp;#x27;s Nest (TV series)" label="Robin&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689012" start="2724" end="2736" title="Jilly Cooper" label="Jilly Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151826" start="2756" end="2762" title="Riders (Cooper novel)" label="Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="2777" end="2792" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533013" start="2799" end="2805" title="Riders (1993 film)" label="Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362808" start="3101" end="3133" title="Romantic Novel of the Year Award" label="Romantic Novel of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940737" start="3143" end="3179" title="Romantic Novelists&amp;#x27; Association" label="Romantic Novelists&amp;#x27; Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228086" wikidata="Q3480384" url="?curid=1228086" title="South African Military Health Service">
<text>The South African Military Health Service is the branch of the South African National Defence Force responsible for medical facilities and the training and deployment of all medical personnel within the force. Though unusual, as most national militaries integrate their medical structures into their existing service branches, the SANDF regards this structure as being the most efficient method of providing care and support to the SANDF&#x27;s personnel.

It is a significant actor in the effort to control HIV/AIDS within the SANDF.

==History==
The predecessor of the SAMHS, the South African Medical Service, was established as a full service branch of the South African Defence Force (SADF) on 1 July 1979 in order to consolidate and strengthen the medical services of the South African Army, South African Navy and South African Air Force.

==Rationalisation==
Following the end of the Border War, in the early 1990s, it implemented several retrenchment measures. It consolidated all quartermaster stores in the Cape Town and Bloemfontein areas, relocated its training center from Potchefstroom to Pretoria, closed several medical supply depots, consolidated computer centers and systems, rationalized procedures for procuring medicine and medical equipment, discontinued survival training, and reduced or closed sickbays and military medical clinics that served other armed services affected by retrenchments.

The SAMS was incorporated into the South African National Defence Force on 27 April 1994, and was renamed the South African Military Health Service on 1 June 1998.

==Organisational structure==
The SAMHS includes active duty military personnel and civilian employees of the Department of Defence. In addition, the service employs roughly 400 medical doctors and private medical specialists are sometimes appointed to supplement the staff of the SAMHS.

The Surgeon General heads the SAMHS and has the rank of Lieutenant-General. The SAMHS operates three Military Hospitals; one in Pretoria, one in Cape Town and one in Bloemfontein. There are also four specialized institutes - the Institute for Aviation Medicine, the Institute for Maritime Medicine, the Military Veterinary Institute and the Military Psychological Institute. Together, these units provide comprehensive medical care for military personnel and their dependents, as well as the police and employees of other security-related government departments, and occasionally to neighboring countries. The SAMHS also provides extensive veterinary services for animals (mainly horses and dogs) used by the security and correctional services. The Institute for Aviation Medicine and the Institute for Maritime Medicine screen pilot candidates for the air force and for civilian aviation certification, as well as divers and submariners for the navy. The military&#x27;s medical services also include general medical and dental care, and specialized rehabilitation services.

The SAMHS is organized into regional medical commands, corresponding to the army&#x27;s regional commands, as well as a Medical Logistics Command and a Medical Training Command. The regional commands support military units, military base hospitals, and military unit sickbays in their region. The Medical Logistics Command is responsible for medical logistics only, as each service provides for its own logistics support. In addition, the Medical Training Command supervises the South African Medical Service College, the South African Military Health Service Nursing College, and the South African Military Health Service Training Centre, as well as the military hospitals&#x27; training programs. The nursing college, in Pretoria, grants a four-year nursing diploma in association with the University of South Africa. Specialized, in-service training courses for nurses and for nursing assistants are also available.

===Formations===

====Mobile Military Health Formation====

*1 Medical Battalion Group (Reserve)
*3 Medical Battalion Group (Reserve)
*6 Medical Battalion Group (Reserve)
*7 Medical Battalion Group
*8 Medical Battalion Group

====Tertiary Military Health Formation====

*1 Military Hospital (Pretoria)
*2 Military Hospital (Cape Town)
*3 Military Hospital (Bloemfontein)
*Institute for Aviation Medicine (Centurion)
*Institute for Maritime Medicine (Simon&#x27;s Town)
*Military Psychological Institute (Pretoria , Area Military Health Unit)
*Military Veterinary Institute (Potchefstroom)
*Military Cyber Medicine &amp; Cyber Surgery Institute (Pretoria)

====Area Military Health Formation====
*Area Military Health Unit Western Cape
*Area Military Health Unit Eastern Cape
*Area Military Health Unit Northern Cape
*Area Military Health Unit North-West
*Area Military Health Unit Free State
*Area Military Health Unit KwaZulu-Natal
*Area Military Health Unit Gauteng
*Area Military Health Unit Mpumalanga
*Area Military Health Unit Limpopo
*Regional Occupational Health and Safety Centres

====Military Health Training Formation====
*School for Military Health Training
*School for Military Training
*SAMHS Nursing College
*SAMHS Band
*Medical Command Post Combat Training Centre (Lohatla)
*Joint Physical Training, Sports &amp; Recreation Training Centre

====Military Health Support Formation====
*Military Health Base Depot
*Military Health Procurement Unit

===General Support Base===
*Thaba Tshwane

===Directorates &amp; Services===
*Director Medicine
*Chaplain Services
*Sport &amp; Recreation
*Corporate Communication

==Ranks and insignia==
;Officers
;Other
===Proficiency Insignia===
== Leadership ==



==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3480384" start="4" end="41" title="South African Military Health Service" label="South African Military Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q305314" start="63" end="99" title="South African National Defence Force" label="South African National Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="508" end="516" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054037" start="582" end="611" title="South African Medical Service" label="South African Medical Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779935" start="661" end="688" title="South African Defence Force" label="South African Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815399" start="778" end="796" title="South African Army" label="South African Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652708" start="798" end="816" title="South African Navy" label="South African Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519024" start="821" end="844" title="South African Air Force" label="South African Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="892" end="902" title="South African Border War" label="Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q975834" start="990" end="1003" title="quartermaster" label="quartermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="1018" end="1027" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="1032" end="1044" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q605167" start="1087" end="1100" title="Potchefstroom" label="Potchefstroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="1104" end="1112" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q305314" start="1453" end="1489" title="South African National Defence Force" label="South African National Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="1927" end="1945" title="Lieutenant-General" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="1981" end="1989" title="Hospital" label="Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="1999" end="2007" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="2016" end="2025" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="2037" end="2049" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916623" start="3290" end="3307" title="medical logistics" label="medical logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q677993" start="3740" end="3766" title="University of South Africa" label="University of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595993" start="3929" end="3954" title="1 Medical Battalion Group" label="1 Medical Battalion Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870371" start="3966" end="3991" title="3 Medical Battalion Group" label="3 Medical Battalion Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870470" start="4003" end="4028" title="6 Medical Battalion Group" label="6 Medical Battalion Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057722" start="4040" end="4065" title="7 Medical Battalion Group" label="7 Medical Battalion Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4067" end="4092" title="8 Medical Battalion Group" label="8 Medical Battalion Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4139" end="4158" title="1 Military Hospital" label="1 Military Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="4160" end="4168" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4171" end="4190" title="2 Military Hospital" label="2 Military Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="4192" end="4201" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4204" end="4223" title="3 Military Hospital" label="3 Military Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="4225" end="4237" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4240" end="4271" title="Institute for Aviation Medicine" label="Institute for Aviation Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4285" end="4316" title="Institute for Maritime Medicine" label="Institute for Maritime Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013370" start="4318" end="4335" title="Simon&amp;#x27;s Town" label="Simon&amp;#x27;s Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4338" end="4370" title="Military Psychological Institute" label="Military Psychological Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4372" end="4408" title="Pretoria , Area Military Health Unit" label="Pretoria , Area Military Health Unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4411" end="4440" title="Military Veterinary Institute" label="Military Veterinary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q605167" start="4442" end="4455" title="Potchefstroom" label="Potchefstroom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4458" end="4511" title="Military Cyber Medicine &amp;amp; Cyber Surgery Institute" label="Military Cyber Medicine &amp;amp; Cyber Surgery Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="4513" end="4521" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4564" end="4602" title="Area Military Health Unit Western Cape" label="Area Military Health Unit Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4604" end="4642" title="Area Military Health Unit Eastern Cape" label="Area Military Health Unit Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4644" end="4683" title="Area Military Health Unit Northern Cape" label="Area Military Health Unit Northern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4685" end="4721" title="Area Military Health Unit North-West" label="Area Military Health Unit North-West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4723" end="4759" title="Area Military Health Unit Free State" label="Area Military Health Unit Free State"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4761" end="4800" title="Area Military Health Unit KwaZulu-Natal" label="Area Military Health Unit KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4802" end="4835" title="Area Military Health Unit Gauteng" label="Area Military Health Unit Gauteng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4837" end="4873" title="Area Military Health Unit Mpumalanga" label="Area Military Health Unit Mpumalanga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4875" end="4908" title="Area Military Health Unit Limpopo" label="Area Military Health Unit Limpopo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5003" end="5038" title="School for Military Health Training" label="School for Military Health Training"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5040" end="5068" title="School for Military Training" label="School for Military Training"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5070" end="5091" title="SAMHS Nursing College" label="SAMHS Nursing College"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278904" start="5093" end="5103" title="Bands of the South African National Defence Force" label="SAMHS Band"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5105" end="5148" title="Medical Command Post Combat Training Centre" label="Medical Command Post Combat Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5160" end="5224" title="Joint Physical Training, Sports &amp;amp; Recreation Training Centre" label="Joint Physical Training, Sports &amp;amp; Recreation Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5269" end="5295" title="Military Health Base Depot" label="Military Health Base Depot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5297" end="5329" title="Military Health Procurement Unit" label="Military Health Procurement Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708831" start="5359" end="5372" title="Thaba Tshwane" label="Thaba Tshwane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228091" wikidata="Q16150316" url="?curid=1228091" title="List of political parties in New Caledonia">
<text>This article lists political parties in New Caledonia.

New Caledonia has a number of strong, well-developed political parties because of the use of proportional representation in the island&#x27;s Congress.

The major issue dividing the parties is the question of independence.

== Political parties ==
==Historical parties==
*Communist Party of New Caledonia (1941–1948)

==See also==
* Politics of New Caledonia
* List of political parties by country</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16150316" start="19" end="53" title="List of political parties in New Caledonia" label="political parties in New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="56" end="69" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="109" end="126" title="political party" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="149" end="176" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993118" start="198" end="206" title="Congress of New Caledonia" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="328" end="360" title="Communist Party of New Caledonia" label="Communist Party of New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394908" start="389" end="414" title="Politics of New Caledonia" label="Politics of New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18692890" start="417" end="453" title="List of political parties by country" label="List of political parties by country"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228095" wikidata="Q263678" url="?curid=1228095" title="Group Policy">
<text>Group Policy is a feature of the Microsoft Windows NT family of operating systems (including Windows 8.1, Windows 10, Windows 11) that controls the working environment of user accounts and computer accounts. Group Policy provides centralized management and configuration of operating systems, applications, and users&#x27; settings in an Active Directory environment. A set of Group Policy configurations is called a Group Policy Object (GPO). A version of Group Policy called Local Group Policy (LGPO or LocalGPO) allows Group Policy Object management without Active Directory on standalone computers.

Active Directory servers disseminate group policies by listing them in their LDAP directory under objects of class codice_1. These refer to fileserver paths (attribute codice_2) that store the actual group policy objects, typically in an SMB share \\domain.com\SYSVOL shared by the Active Directory server. If a group policy has registry settings, the associated file share will have a file codice_3 with the registry settings that the client needs to apply.

The Policy Editor (gpedit.msc) is not provided on Home versions of Windows XP/Vista/7/8/8.1/10/11.

==Operation==
Group Policies, in part, control what users can and cannot do on a computer system. For example, a Group Policy can be used to enforce a password complexity policy that prevents users from choosing an overly simple password. Other examples include: allowing or preventing unidentified users from remote computers to connect to a network share, or to block/restrict access to certain folders. A set of such configurations is called a Group Policy Object (GPO).

As part of Microsoft&#x27;s &quot;IntelliMirror&quot; technologies, Group Policy aims to reduce the cost of supporting users. IntelliMirror technologies relate to the management of disconnected machines or roaming users and include &quot;roaming user profiles&quot;, &quot;folder redirection&quot;, and &quot;offline files&quot;.

===Enforcement===
To accomplish the goal of central management of a group of computers, machines should receive and enforce GPOs. A GPO that resides on a single machine only applies to that computer. To apply a GPO to a group of computers, Group Policy relies on Active Directory (or on third-party products like ZENworks Desktop Management) for distribution. Active Directory can distribute GPOs to computers which belong to a Windows domain.

By default, Microsoft Windows refreshes its policy settings every 90 minutes with a random 30 minutes offset. On domain controllers, Microsoft Windows does so every five minutes. During the refresh, it discovers, fetches and applies all GPOs that apply to the machine and to logged-on users. Some settings - such as those for automated software installation, drive mappings, startup scripts or logon scripts - only apply during startup or user logon. Since Windows XP, users can manually initiate a refresh of the group policy by using the codice_4 command from a command prompt.

Group Policy Objects are processed in the following order (from top to bottom):

# Local - Any settings in the computer&#x27;s local policy. Prior to Windows Vista, there was only one local group policy stored per computer. Windows Vista and later Windows versions allow individual group policies per user accounts.
# Site - Any Group Policies associated with the &quot;Active Directory site&quot; in which the computer resides. (An Active Directory site is a logical grouping of computers, intended to facilitate management of those computers based on their physical proximity.) If multiple policies are linked to a site, they are processed in the order set by the administrator.
# Domain - Any Group Policies associated with the Windows domain in which the computer resides. If multiple policies are linked to a domain, they are processed in the order set by the administrator.
# Organizational Unit - Group policies assigned to the &quot;Active Directory organizational unit (OU)&quot; in which the computer or user are placed. (OUs are logical units that help organizing and managing a group of users, computers or other Active Directory objects.) If multiple policies are linked to an OU, they are processed in the order set by the administrator.

The resulting Group Policy settings applied to a given computer or user are known as the Resultant Set of Policy (RSoP). RSoP information may be displayed for both computers and users using the codice_5 command.

===Inheritance===
A policy setting inside a hierarchical structure is ordinarily passed from parent to children, and from children to grandchildren, and so forth. This is termed &quot;inheritance&quot;. It can be blocked or enforced to control what policies are applied at each level. If a higher level administrator (enterprise administrator) creates a policy that has inheritance blocked by a lower level administrator (domain administrator), this policy will still be processed.

Where a Group Policy Preference Settings is configured and there is also an equivalent Group Policy Setting configured, then the value of the Group Policy Setting will take precedence.

===Filtering===
&quot;WMI filtering&quot; is the process of customizing the scope of the GPO by choosing a (WMI) filter to apply. These filters allow administrators to apply the GPO only to, for example, computers of specific models, RAM, installed software, or anything available via WMI queries.

==Local Group Policy==
&quot;Local Group Policy (LGP, or LocalGPO)&quot; is a more basic version of Group Policy for standalone and non-domain computers, that has existed at least since Windows XP, and can be applied to domain computers. Prior to Windows Vista, LGP could enforce a Group Policy Object for a single local computer, but could not make policies for individual users or groups. From Windows Vista onward, LGP allow Local Group Policy management for individual users and groups as well, and also allows backup, importing and exporting of policies between standalone machines via &quot;GPO Packs&quot; – group policy containers which include the files needed to import the policy to the destination machine.

==Group Policy preferences==
Group Policy Preferences are a way for the administrator to set policies that are not mandatory, but optional for the user or computer.
There is a set of group policy setting extensions that were previously known as PolicyMaker. Microsoft bought PolicyMaker and then integrated them with Windows Server 2008. Microsoft has since released a migration tool that allows users to migrate PolicyMaker items to Group Policy Preferences.

Group Policy Preferences adds a number of new configuration items. These items also have a number of additional targeting options that can be used to granularly control the application of these setting items.

Group Policy Preferences are compatible with x86 and x64 versions of Windows XP, Windows Server 2003, and Windows Vista with the addition of the Client Side Extensions (also known as CSE).

Client Side Extensions are now included in Windows Server 2008, Windows 7, and Windows Server 2008 R2.

==Group Policy Management Console==
Originally, Group Policies were modified using the Group Policy Edit tool that was integrated with Active Directory Users and Computers Microsoft Management Console (MMC) snap-in, but it was later split into a separate MMC snap-in called the Group Policy Management Console (GPMC). The GPMC is now a user component in Windows Server 2008 and Windows Server 2008 R2 and is provided as a download as part of the Remote Server Administration Tools for Windows Vista and Windows 7.

==Advanced Group Policy Management==
Microsoft has also released a tool to make changes to Group Policy called Advanced Group Policy Management (a.k.a. AGPM). This tool is available for any organization that has licensed the Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack (a.k.a. MDOP). This advanced tool allows administrators to have a check in/out process for modification Group Policy Objects, track changes to Group Policy Objects, and implement approval workflows for changes to Group Policy Objects.

AGPM consists of two parts - server and client.
The server is a Windows Service that stores its Group Policy Objects in an archive located on the same computer or a network share.
The client is a snap-in to the Group Policy Management Console, and connects to the AGPM server. Configuration of the client is performed via Group Policy.

==Security==
Group Policy settings are enforced voluntarily by the targeted applications. In many cases, this merely consists of disabling the user interface for a particular function.

Alternatively, a malevolent user can modify or interfere with the application so that it cannot successfully read its Group Policy settings, thus enforcing potentially lower security defaults or even returning arbitrary values.

==Later enhancements to Group Policy==
Group Policy was enhanced following its initial release in Windows 2000. For example, Windows XP has introduced a new feature called Group Policy Update which replaced the codice_6 command. This feature allows an administrator to force a group policy update on all computers with accounts in a particular Organizational Unit. This overrides the default scheduled task on the computer which runs the codice_4 command within 90 minutes, adjusted by a random offset to avoid overloading the domain controller. 

Group Policy Infrastructure Status was introduced, which can report when any Group Policy Objects are not replicated correctly amongst domain controllers.

Group Policy Results Report also has a new feature that times the execution of individual components when doing a Group Policy Update.

==See also==
* Administrative Template
* Group Policy improvements in Windows Vista
* Workgroup Manager

==References==
==Further reading==
#
#
==External links==
* Group Policy Team Blog 
* Group Policy Settings Reference for Windows and Windows Server
* Force Gpupdate</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q263678" start="0" end="12" title="Group Policy" label="Group Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="43" end="53" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="64" end="80" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692" start="338" end="354" title="Active Directory" label="Active Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q263678" start="417" end="436" title="Group Policy" label="Group Policy Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q263678" start="438" end="441" title="Group Policy" label="GPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q263678" start="477" end="495" title="Group Policy" label="Local Group Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188816" start="681" end="685" title="LDAP" label="LDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q857655" start="842" end="845" title="Server Message Block" label="SMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448329" start="865" end="871" title="File Replication Service" label="SYSVOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172305" start="1507" end="1520" title="network share" label="network share"/>
<link wikidata="Q388462" start="1877" end="1898" title="Roaming profile" label="roaming user profiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464287" start="1912" end="1930" title="folder redirection" label="folder redirection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1948" end="1961" title="Windows Vista I/O technologies#Offline Files" label="offline files"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692" start="2233" end="2249" title="Active Directory" label="Active Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002922" start="2283" end="2310" title="ZENworks Desktop Management" label="ZENworks Desktop Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q616902" start="2398" end="2412" title="Windows domain" label="Windows domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757328" start="2528" end="2545" title="domain controller" label="domain controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="2872" end="2882" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079196" start="2964" end="2971" title="command (computing)" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="2979" end="2993" title="command prompt" label="command prompt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692" start="3366" end="3382" title="Active Directory" label="Active Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q616902" start="3727" end="3741" title="Windows domain" label="Windows domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="5616" end="5626" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233" start="6467" end="6486" title="Windows Server 2008" label="Windows Server 2008"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6966" end="6988" title="Client Side Extensions" label="Client Side Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233" start="7054" end="7073" title="Windows Server 2008" label="Windows Server 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="7075" end="7084" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q11226" start="7090" end="7112" title="Windows Server 2008 R2" label="Windows Server 2008 R2"/>
<link wikidata="Q731135" start="7287" end="7315" title="Microsoft Management Console" label="Microsoft Management Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233" start="7469" end="7488" title="Windows Server 2008" label="Windows Server 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q11226" start="7493" end="7515" title="Windows Server 2008 R2" label="Windows Server 2008 R2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7561" end="7595" title="Remote Server Administration Tools" label="Remote Server Administration Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="7600" end="7613" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="7618" end="7627" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="7667" end="7676" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840111" start="7855" end="7890" title="Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack" label="Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="8977" end="8989" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="9004" end="9014" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683492" start="9734" end="9757" title="Administrative Template" label="Administrative Template"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9760" end="9802" title="Management features new to Windows Vista#Group Policy" label="Group Policy improvements in Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020840" start="9805" end="9822" title="Workgroup Manager" label="Workgroup Manager"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228101" wikidata="Q5490142" url="?curid=1228101" title="Frank W. Cyr">
<text>Frank W. Cyr (July 7, 1900 – August 1, 1995) was an American educator and author known especially for his contribution to school busing.

As a specialist in rural education, he organized the United States&#x27; first national standards conference for school transportation in 1939, starting what became an ongoing cooperative effort by those building and operating school buses. One of the most memorable accomplishments of the conference was a move to develop and standardize a highly visible color for the buses and their markings to help identify them to other motorists. Afterwards, Dr. Cyr became known as the &quot;Father of the Yellow School Bus&quot;.

==Rural youth, education, professor==
Cyr was born July 7, 1900, on a farm close to Franklin, Nebraska.

After high school, Cyr attended Grinnell College and then in 1923 earned his BA in Education (or Agriculture) at the University of Nebraska. He became superintendent of schools in Chappell, Nebraska before continuing as a graduate student at Teachers College, Columbia University in New York City), where, by 1930, he had earned his PhD. His dissertation, &quot;Responsibility for Rural School Administrators&quot; was published by the Teachers College Bureau of Publications, the first of many of his published works.

After earning his doctorate, Cyr taught at Teachers College for over 30 years, retiring in 1965. While working in the education of teachers, he also became involved in studying and improving rural education and school transportation.

==U.S. school bus standards==

In the 1930s, Cyr made a study of school transportation. He learned that students were riding in all kinds of vehicles, including trucks and buses of every imaginable color and condition. One district&#x27;s buses sported red, white and blue decor, perhaps hoping to instill patriotism in its passengers. A Kansas district transported its students in horse-drawn wheat wagons. School bus manufacturers complained that because there were no national standards, they could not mass-produce the buses, nor make a profit and keep costs down.

In April 1939, Cyr organized a conference at Teachers College, funded by a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation for transportation officials from each of the then-48 states, as well as specialists from school bus manufacturing and paint companies.

Engineers from Blue Bird Body Co., Chevrolet, International Harvester, Dodge, and Ford Motor Company, as well as paint experts from DuPont and Pittsburgh Paint showed up. Together with the transportation administrators, they met for 7 days and agreed on 44 standards, including the color and some mechanical specs such as body length, ceiling height and aisle width.

It was at this meeting that yellow with black lettering was determined as easiest to see in the light of early morning and late afternoon. The distinctive yellow became known officially as &quot;National School Bus Chrome&quot; but is now known as National School Bus Glossy Yellow.

While most of those standards have long since changed, the yellow color stuck. In time, 35 U.S. states adopted the color with Minnesota as the last holdout, only changing in 1974 from &#x27;Minnesota Golden Orange&#x27; to National School Bus Chrome.

Following the conference, Cyr, who is recorded as having always thought the choice more orange than yellow, became widely regarded as the &quot;Father of the Yellow School Bus.&quot;

Cyr continued to be interested in school buses. In 1942, he chaired a federal conference that set school transportation policy during wartime.

In April 1989, he was honored at a luncheon at Teachers College marking the 50th anniversary of the original conference. The luncheon was held in the Grace Dodge Room at the College, where the original conference had been held.

At the luncheon, Cyr recalled that strips of different colors were hung from the wall and the participants in the 1939 conference talked until they narrowed the color down to three slightly different shades of yellow. The variation in shades was allowed, Cyr explained, because the color of the paint could not always be mixed exactly.

Cyr also said that he and the other attendees at the conference always used safety as the first criterion for the school-bus standards. &quot;The most often asked question was &#x27;Will this standard improve safety?&#x27;&quot; he recalled at the 1989 luncheon.

==Rural education specialist, author==

In 1940, Cyr served as president of the Rural Department of the National Education Association and authored &quot;A Policy for Rural Education in the United States&quot;, published that year as the Rural Department&#x27;s yearbook. Cyr was also the author of &quot;The Small School in Wartime&quot; (1942) and &quot;Rural Education in the United States&quot; (1943), which was translated into both Spanish and Portuguese. He was the coauthor of &quot;The Small High School at Work&quot; (1936), &quot;An Introduction to Modern Education&quot; (1936) and &quot;Planning the Rural School Building&quot; (1949).

==Legacy==
Frank W. Cyr died at the age of 95 in Stamford, New York, in 1995.

Dr. Cyr had become a Professor Emeritus of Rural Education at Columbia University Teachers College in New York.

As of September 1995, a television station in Stamford, New York, broadcast advanced placement classes to the rural schools of the area. That station was located in the Frank W. Cyr Educational Center of the Board of Cooperative Educational Services.

He is survived by his son William, 3 grandchildren and 6 great-grandchildren.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5490142" start="0" end="12" title="Frank W. Cyr" label="Frank W. Cyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q58678" start="365" end="375" title="school bus" label="school bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q952584" start="745" end="763" title="Franklin, Nebraska" label="Franklin, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982991" start="798" end="814" title="Grinnell College" label="Grinnell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353679" start="883" end="905" title="University of Nebraska" label="University of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q961368" start="946" end="964" title="Chappell, Nebraska" label="Chappell, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691246" start="1008" end="1045" title="Teachers College, Columbia University" label="Teachers College, Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="1859" end="1865" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q58678" start="1929" end="1939" title="School bus" label="School bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="2181" end="2203" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928875" start="2356" end="2374" title="Blue Bird Corporation" label="Blue Bird Body Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="2376" end="2385" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q263800" start="2387" end="2410" title="International Harvester" label="International Harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="2412" end="2417" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="2423" end="2441" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="2473" end="2479" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q48754" start="2484" end="2500" title="Pittsburgh Paint" label="Pittsburgh Paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q987293" start="2957" end="2990" title="School bus yellow" label="National School Bus Glossy Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120059" start="3389" end="3420" title="List of people known as the father or mother of something" label="Father of the Yellow School Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111510" start="4507" end="4537" title="National Education Association" label="National Education Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089011" start="4665" end="4673" title="yearbook" label="yearbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q941325" start="5102" end="5120" title="Stamford, New York" label="Stamford, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="5194" end="5213" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q941325" start="5291" end="5309" title="Stamford, New York" label="Stamford, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228105" wikidata="Q7411397" url="?curid=1228105" title="Samuel Forsyth">
<text>Samuel Forsyth, VC (3 April 1892 – 24 August 1918) was a New Zealand recipient of the Victoria Cross (VC), the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that could be awarded at the time to British and Commonwealth forces.

Born in 1892, Forsyth enlisted with the New Zealand Expeditionary Force shortly after the outbreak of the First World War in the summer of 1914. Serving with the New Zealand Engineers as a sapper, he participated in the Gallipoli Campaign and later fought on the Western Front. By August 1918, he was on probation to become a commissioned officer and was temporarily attached to an infantry battalion. On 24 August 1918, during the Second Battle of Bapaume, he played a key role in eliminating a machine gun nest that was holding up the advance of his battalion, but was then killed by a sniper. For this action, he was posthumously awarded the VC.

==Early life==
Samuel Forsyth was born in Wellington, New Zealand, on 3 April 1892, one of four children of Thomas Forsyth, a night watchman on the SS &quot;Maori&quot; of Thorndon, and his wife, Grace. He attended Thorndon School and later Terrace School. After completing his education, he found employment as a gold amalgamator for the Monowai Gold Mining Company based at Thames.

Forsyth participated in charity work, volunteering for the Sailor&#x27;s Friend Society. He was also interested in the military and in 1910, joined the Territorial Force in which he served as a field engineer.

==First World War==
On 13 August 1914, shortly after the outbreak of the First World War, Forsyth enlisted in the New Zealand Expeditionary Force and embarked for the Middle East in October 1914 as a sapper with the New Zealand Engineers. Sappers who had served in the Territorials, like Forsyth, were part of the Field Troop, which numbered 83 personnel and was part of the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade.

Forsyth landed at Anzac Cove in May 1915 during the Gallipoli Campaign. In the early stages of its service in the campaign, the Field Troop was posted on Walker&#x27;s Ridge where it worked on deepening the trenches there. Forsyth took sick in July 1915 with influenza but after receiving treatment in Cairo, soon returned to duty at Gallipoli. He was lightly wounded during the August offensive later that year, but remained in the front-line. Suffering from jaundice, he was medically evacuated in November 1915 to the island of Lemnos and then onto England, where he spent several months in various hospitals around the country. In the meantime, the New Zealand Division had been formed and needed its allotted complement of New Zealand Engineers. To achieve this, the Field Troop was disestablished, with its personnel forming the basis of the 3rd Field Company and reinforcements bringing it up to strength.

===Western Front===
On recovering his health, in April 1916 Forsyth was posted to the NZEF base at Étaples before rejoining the 3rd Field Company, now serving on the Western Front in support of the New Zealand Division&#x27;s 3rd Infantry Brigade. Later in the year he spent a period of leave in the United Kingdom and struck up a relationship with a Glaswegian, Mary, who he soon married. From mid-September 1916, during the New Zealand Division&#x27;s involvement in the Battle of the Somme, Forsyth&#x27;s company was heavily engaged in construction of roads and strongpoints and then from early October was stationed in Armentieres, now attached to the 2nd Infantry Brigade. The 3rd Field Company worked to improve the defences of the sector, which included the construction of several small dams to direct excess water towards the German trenches.

Forsyth was promoted to acting corporal in March 1917 having been made an acting lance corporal late the previous year. The 3rd Field Company was involved in the Battle of Messines of June 1917, following the infantry and constructing strongpoints in front of the village of Messines once it had been captured. During the following operations around the village of La Basseville, Forsyth was officially noted for his service. From early October, the New Zealand Engineers was involved in the maintenance of the roads during the Battle of Passchendaele, and later that month the 3rd Field Company helped in the consolidation phase of the Battle of Poelcappelle and in sorting out lines of communications and retrieving wounded in the subsequent First Battle of Passchendaele.

The following March saw the commencement of the German spring offensive and the involvement of the New Zealand Division in holding the frontline. The New Zealand Engineers built and improved defensive positions during this time. By the end of this defensive phase of the fighting, Forsyth had attained the rank of sergeant, having been promoted to this rank on 15 May 1918.

In late August 1918, Forsyth was on a temporary attachment to the 2nd Battalion, Auckland Infantry Regiment, during the early stages of the Hundred Days Offensive. He was on probation for a commission in his unit and his attachment to the battalion was to gain front-line experience. On 24 August 1918, during the Second Battle of Bapaume, the battalion was ordered to capture of the village of Grévillers. On reaching the outskirts of the village, German machine gun fire prevented any further forward movement. Forsyth, scouting ahead of his platoon, made contact with two British tanks and despite being exposed to the German machine guns, guided them in, providing covering fire for the New Zealanders. One tank was soon crippled by artillery fire. Despite having been wounded in the arm, he assisted its crew to evacuate the tank and then organised them, along with several other soldiers, into a flanking party to attack the machine gun nest holding up the advance. The Germans shortly withdrew and the advance was able to continue. Forsyth set about organising defensive positions but was fatally shot by a sniper.

Forsyth&#x27;s actions were instrumental in the capture of Grévillers and it was for this that he was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross (VC). The VC, instituted in 1856, was the highest award for valour that could be bestowed on a soldier of the British Empire. The citation for Forsyth&#x27;s VC read:

Forsyth is one of 70 New Zealanders buried at Adanac Military Cemetery, near Miraumont in France. His name is on a memorial headstone erected by his mother Grace Forsyth at Karori Cemetery in Wellington. In the same city, a memorial tablet was erected in his honour at the premises of the Sailor&#x27;s Friend Society. There is also a plaque to him in Queens Gardens in Dunedin.

==Medal==
King George V presented Forsyth&#x27;s wife, Mary, with the VC in a ceremony that took place in late November 1918 at Buckingham Palace. Following her death and having never had children, Forsyth&#x27;s medals, which included not only the VC but also the 1914–15 Star, British War Medal, and the Victory Medal, were inherited by a nephew. They were sold in 1982 to a collector in Melbourne, Australia. The medals were purchased by Lord Ashcroft in 1992 and are on display in the Imperial War Museum.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7411397" start="0" end="14" title="Samuel Forsyth" label="Samuel Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="16" end="18" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="213" end="225" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015353" start="275" end="306" title="New Zealand Expeditionary Force" label="New Zealand Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172592" start="397" end="418" title="New Zealand Engineers" label="New Zealand Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="424" end="430" title="sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="455" end="473" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="498" end="511" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="561" end="581" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="617" end="625" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443071" start="667" end="691" title="Second Battle of Bapaume" label="Second Battle of Bapaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="927" end="937" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1033" end="1053" title="SS Maori (Union Company)" label="SS &amp;quot;Maori&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796366" start="1057" end="1065" title="Thorndon, New Zealand" label="Thorndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796372" start="1100" end="1115" title="Thorndon School" label="Thorndon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q182574" start="1199" end="1215" title="Amalgam (chemistry)" label="gold amalgamator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691479" start="1261" end="1267" title="Thames, New Zealand" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="1422" end="1439" title="Territorial Force (New Zealand)" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015353" start="1595" end="1626" title="New Zealand Expeditionary Force" label="New Zealand Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="1681" end="1687" title="sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172592" start="1697" end="1718" title="New Zealand Engineers" label="New Zealand Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339084" start="1856" end="1890" title="New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade" label="New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q433110" start="1911" end="1921" title="ANZAC Cove" label="Anzac Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="1945" end="1963" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="2195" end="2200" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2272" end="2288" title="Battle of Chunuk Bair#August offensive" label="August offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="2353" end="2361" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="2424" end="2430" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4324015" start="2546" end="2566" title="New Zealand Division" label="New Zealand Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q273522" start="2906" end="2913" title="Étaples" label="Étaples"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="2973" end="2986" title="Western Front (WWI)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4324017" start="3033" end="3053" title="New Zealand Rifle Brigade (Earl of Liverpool&amp;#x27;s Own)" label="3rd Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="3158" end="3168" title="Glasgow" label="Glaswegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="3280" end="3299" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q193925" start="3431" end="3442" title="Armentieres" label="Armentieres"/>
<link wikidata="Q23002674" start="3464" end="3484" title="2nd Infantry Brigade (New Zealand)" label="2nd Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378201" start="3692" end="3700" title="corporal (rank)" label="corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144824" start="3823" end="3841" title="Battle of Messines (1917)" label="Battle of Messines"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="4189" end="4212" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Battle of Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872067" start="4298" end="4320" title="Battle of Poelcappelle" label="Battle of Poelcappelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921580" start="4405" end="4434" title="First Battle of Passchendaele" label="First Battle of Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="4485" end="4508" title="German spring offensive" label="German spring offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="4751" end="4759" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q112189958" start="4893" end="4919" title="Auckland Infantry Regiment" label="Auckland Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130507" start="4952" end="4974" title="Hundred Days Offensive" label="Hundred Days Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443071" start="5126" end="5150" title="Second Battle of Bapaume" label="Second Battle of Bapaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030038" start="5207" end="5217" title="Grévillers" label="Grévillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="6062" end="6076" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6187" end="6201" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132445" start="6291" end="6315" title="Adanac Military Cemetery" label="Adanac Military Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q380735" start="6322" end="6331" title="Miraumont" label="Miraumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052319" start="6418" end="6433" title="Karori Cemetery" label="Karori Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795303" start="6597" end="6611" title="Queens Gardens, Dunedin" label="Queens Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="6615" end="6622" title="Dunedin, New Zealand" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="6635" end="6648" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q430502" start="6890" end="6902" title="1914–15 Star" label="1914–15 Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q920315" start="6904" end="6921" title="British War Medal" label="British War Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410805" start="6931" end="6944" title="Victory Medal (United Kingdom)" label="Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="7015" end="7024" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q335530" start="7066" end="7079" title="Lord Ashcroft" label="Lord Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q749808" start="7114" end="7133" title="Imperial War Museum" label="Imperial War Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228109" wikidata="Q2641370" url="?curid=1228109" title="Alka-Seltzer">
<text>Alka-Seltzer is an effervescent antacid and pain reliever owned by Bayer since 1978. First marketed by the Dr. Miles Medicine Company of Elkhart, Indiana, United States, Alka-Seltzer contains three active ingredients: aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid or ASA), sodium bicarbonate, and anhydrous citric acid. The aspirin is a pain reliever and anti-inflammatory, the sodium bicarbonate is an antacid, and the citric acid reacts with the sodium bicarbonate and water to form effervescence.

It was developed by head chemist Maurice Treneer. Alka-Seltzer is marketed for relief of minor aches, pains, inflammation, fever, headache, heartburn, stomach ache, indigestion, acid reflux, and hangovers while neutralizing excess stomach acid. It was launched in 1931.

Its sister product, Alka-Seltzer Plus, treats cold and flu symptoms. A wide variety of formulae, many using acetaminophen (paracetamol) instead of aspirin, are available under the sister brand.

==Product information==

Alka-Seltzer is a combination of sodium bicarbonate, aspirin, and anhydrous citric acid used for the relief of heartburn, acid indigestion, and stomach aches.
Alka-Seltzer is sold in foil packets, each containing two tablets. Prior to 1984, it was also available stacked in cylindrical glass bottles. It is available in many different flavors.

It was once marketed as a cure-all; at one time, its ads even suggested taking it for &quot;the blahs&quot;. Subsequent promotion has taken into consideration that aspirin is a drug that is not tolerated by everyone, and the product is no longer advertised in this fashion.

Alka-Seltzer marketed as an antacid no longer contains aspirin (ASA). The original effervescent formula has aspirin as its main active ingredient, and is marketed for pain relief. 

===Chemistry of the effervescence===
Though important to the overall effect of the medication, the aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is not required to produce the effervescent action of Alka-Seltzer; the effervescence is produced by the baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) and citric acid reacting to form sodium citrate and carbon dioxide gas.
==Marketing==
The product has been extensively advertised since its launch in the United States. It was originally marketed by Mikey Wiseman, a company scientist of Dr. Miles Medicine Company, who also helped direct its development.

=== History ===
Print advertising was used immediately, and in 1932 the radio show &quot;Alka-Seltzer Comedy Star of Hollywood&quot; began, with National Barn Dance following in 1933, along with many more. The radio sponsorships continued into the 1950s, with the &quot;Alka-Seltzer Time&quot; show airing from 1949 to 1957.

In his 1976 revival, American actor and radio performer Richard Beals proclaimed Alka-Seltzer&#x27;s virtues and sang the &quot;Plop, plop, fizz, fizz, oh what a relief it is&quot; song in his iconic high, squeaky voice. In the early 1960s, a commercial showing two tablets dropping into a glass of water instead of the usual one caused sales to double.

Alka-Seltzer TV ads from the 1960s and 1970s in the US were among the most popular of the 20th century, ranking number 13, according to &quot;Advertising Age&quot;. To increase sales in a relatively flat business, Bayer revived several of the vintage spots.

During the race for space in the early 1960s before the Moon landing, there was a commercial with Speedy in a space suit and a jingle with the lyrics &quot;On Man&#x27;s first trip through space, I only hope that I&#x27;m aboard, securely strapped in place. They&#x27;ll track our ship with radar and telescopes and soon, imagine seeing Speedy Alka-Seltzer on the moon!&quot;

George Raft starred in the 1969 Alka-Seltzer commercial &quot;The Unfinished Lunch&quot;. It consisted of Raft incarcerated in a prison lunchroom. He takes a bite of the prison food and recoils. Suddenly he bangs his cup on the steel table. It ripples throughout the room. He starts intoning &quot;Alka-Seltzer, Alka-Seltzer...&quot; Soon, the other hundreds of inmates do the same. The commercial became so popular that several weeks later, Raft appeared as a guest on &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot;. Raft told Carson that it took more than 7 hours to tape the 30-second commercial. Raft was enraged by the end of the day, thus making his inmate portrayal that much more convincing for the final editing. The film crew gave Raft his crumpled tin cup, which he showed to Carson and the audience.

An animated mid-1960s commercial, animated by R. O. Blechman, shows a man and his own stomach sitting opposite each other in chairs, having an argument moderated by their therapist in a voiceover. The stomach (voiced by Gene Wilder) accuses the man of purposely trying to irritate it. The man accuses his stomach of complaining too much about the foods he likes. The therapist suggests Alka-Seltzer and that the two must take care of each other. The closing words are of the stomach saying to the man: &quot;Well, I&#x27;ll try — if you will.&quot;

Alka-Seltzer had a series of commercials during the mid-1960s that used a song called &quot;No Matter What Shape (Your Stomach&#x27;s In)&quot;. A different version was recorded by The T-Bones and was released as a single, which became a hit in 1966. The ads featured only the midsections (no faces) of people of all shapes and sizes. A clip of the ad can be seen briefly in the 1988 motion picture &quot;The In Crowd&quot;, immediately before the movie&#x27;s first live broadcast of the fictitious &quot;Perry Parker&#x27;s Dance Party.&quot;

In an Alka-Seltzer commercial from 1969, an actor named &quot;Jack&quot; (played by Jack Somack) in a commercial for the fictional product &quot;Magadini&#x27;s Meatballs&quot; has to eat a meatball and then say &quot;Mamma mia, that&#x27;s-a spicy meat-a ball-a!&quot; in an ersatz Italian accent. Take after take is ruined by some comedic trial or another (comedian Ronny Graham dropping the clapperboard). By the commercial&#x27;s end, Jack has eaten so many meatballs that it&#x27;s &quot;Alka-Seltzer to the rescue.&quot; With his stomach settled, Jack does a perfect take, except that the oven door falls off. The director (off-camera) sighs and says, &quot;OK, let&#x27;s break for lunch.&quot;

A 1970 commercial shows a newlywed couple in the bedroom after the woman (played by Alice Playten) has finished serving her husband (played by Terry Kiser) a giant dumpling; the implication is that her cooking skills are severely lacking, despite her husband&#x27;s lament, &quot;I can&#x27;t believe I ate that whole thing!&quot;, the commercial&#x27;s catchphrase. She lies on the bed in delusional triumph. She offers her beleaguered husband a heart-shaped meatloaf; he disappears to take some Alka-Seltzer. When she hears the fizzy noise coming from the bathroom, he quickly covers the glass of dissolving Alka-Seltzer as she wonders aloud if it is raining. Just when he has recovered his well-being, he hears her misreading recipes for dinner the next night: &quot;Marshmallowed meatballs,&quot; &quot;medium salad snails,&quot; and &quot;pouched (actually poached) oysters&quot;. He returns to the bathroom for more Alka-Seltzer. The catchphrase, Howie Cohen told the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, was inspired when he ate too much of the food at a London commercial shoot because &quot;I am a nice Jewish kid from the Bronx, so I ate everything,&quot; and when he told his wife &quot;I can&#x27;t believe I ate the whole thing&quot;, she said, &quot;There&#x27;s your next Alka-Seltzer commercial.&quot;

A 1971 commercial featured another catch-phrase from Cohen (along with Bob Pasqualina), &quot;Try it, you&#x27;ll like it!&quot; It was remade with Kathy Griffin in 2006. In 1972, an actor (Milt Moss) spent the commercial moaning, &quot;I can&#x27;t believe I ate that who-o-o-o-o-ole thing&quot; while his wife (Lynn Whinic) made sarcastic comments and finally advised him to take some Alka-Seltzer. In 2005, this ad was also remade, featuring Peter Boyle and Doris Roberts from the 1996–2005 TV sitcom &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot;.

In 2009, the brand was featured in television commercials supporting the United States Ski Team that included alpine skier Lindsey Vonn and Nordic combined skier Bill Demong. Miniature figures of the Speedy mascot were shown with each. Alka-Seltzer products are sold in nighttime and daytime, or non-drowsy, formulas. The non-drowsy claims have recently been questioned.

=== Speedy and &quot;Plop, plop, fizz, fizz&quot; ===
In 1951, the &quot;Speedy&quot; character was introduced. The character was conceived by creative directors Bob Watkins and Chuck Tennant of the Wade Advertising agency and designed by illustrator Wally Wood. Originally named Sparky, the name was changed to Speedy by sales manager Perry L. Shupert to align with that year&#x27;s promotional theme, &quot;Speedy Relief&quot;. Speedy appeared in over 200 TV commercials between 1954 and 1964. His body was one Alka-Seltzer tablet, while he wore another as a hat.

Buster Keaton appeared along with the animated Speedy Alka-Seltzer figure in a series of 1950s commercials based on the product slogan, &quot;Relief is just a swallow away.&quot; Speedy Alka-Seltzer was voiced by Dick Beals.

Paul Margulies (father of actress Julianna Margulies) created the famous &quot;Plop, plop, fizz, fizz&quot; ad campaign when he worked as a Madison Avenue ad executive. The ubiquitous jingle was composed by Tom Dawes, a former member of The Cyrkle. The slogan was altered to &quot;Plink, plink, fizz&quot; in the United Kingdom.

Speedy was revived for a &quot;Plop, plop, fizz, fizz&quot; song spot in 1976.

Sammy Davis Jr., recorded two versions of the &quot;Plop Plop Fizz Fizz&quot; jingle in 1978, one of which (the &quot;big band&quot; version) was featured on a television commercial. Both the big band and rock versions had additional lyrics (with at least one verse unique to each song) written by Tom Dawes, former lead singer of The Cyrkle who wrote the original jingle.

Speedy was again revived in 2008 when Alka-Seltzer began a series of new commercials featuring him (using a CGI character created by animation director David Hulin to recreate the stop-motion puppetry of the 1950s and 1960s); in these ads, he was voiced by Debi Derryberry.

==See also==
* Carbonated water
* Brioschi

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2641370" start="0" end="12" title="Alka-Seltzer" label="Alka-Seltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q902364" start="19" end="31" title="Effervescent tablet" label="effervescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q274083" start="32" end="39" title="antacid" label="antacid"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="67" end="72" title="Bayer" label="Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851442" start="107" end="133" title="Miles Laboratories" label="Dr. Miles Medicine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008706" start="137" end="153" title="Elkhart, Indiana" label="Elkhart, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="155" end="168" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="218" end="225" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="257" end="275" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745207" start="281" end="290" title="anhydrous" label="anhydrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="291" end="302" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="339" end="356" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797526" start="469" end="482" title="effervescence" label="effervescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="594" end="606" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="608" end="613" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="615" end="623" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q537297" start="625" end="634" title="heartburn" label="heartburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="636" end="648" title="Abdominal pain" label="stomach ache"/>
<link wikidata="Q653971" start="650" end="661" title="indigestion" label="indigestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="663" end="674" title="Gastroesophageal reflux disease" label="acid reflux"/>
<link wikidata="Q207334" start="680" end="689" title="Hangover" label="hangovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q337120" start="696" end="708" title="Neutralization (chemistry)" label="neutralizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q846270" start="716" end="728" title="Gastric acid" label="stomach acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q57055" start="864" end="877" title="paracetamol" label="acetaminophen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="1009" end="1027" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="1029" end="1036" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745207" start="1042" end="1051" title="anhydrous" label="anhydrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="1052" end="1063" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="1886" end="1906" title="acetylsalicylic acid" label="acetylsalicylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797526" start="1939" end="1951" title="Effervescence (chemistry)" label="effervescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="2026" end="2044" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="2050" end="2061" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966947" start="2497" end="2516" title="National Barn Dance" label="National Barn Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727612" start="2622" end="2639" title="Alka-Seltzer Time" label="Alka-Seltzer Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026564" start="2734" end="2747" title="Dick Beals" label="Richard Beals"/>
<link wikidata="Q380047" start="3175" end="3190" title="Advertising Age" label="Advertising Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q436187" start="3669" end="3680" title="George Raft" label="George Raft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="4145" end="4184" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273888" start="4533" end="4547" title="R. O. Blechman" label="R. O. Blechman"/>
<link wikidata="Q191966" start="4707" end="4718" title="Gene Wilder" label="Gene Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044453" start="5129" end="5174" title="No Matter What Shape (Your Stomach&amp;#x27;s In)" label="No Matter What Shape (Your Stomach&amp;#x27;s In)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767844" start="5218" end="5229" title="The T-Bones" label="The T-Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741659" start="5442" end="5454" title="The In Crowd (1988 film)" label="The In Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920049" start="5667" end="5678" title="Jack Somack" label="Jack Somack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441813" start="5951" end="5963" title="Ronny Graham" label="Ronny Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q454647" start="6370" end="6383" title="Alice Playten" label="Alice Playten"/>
<link wikidata="Q128541" start="6429" end="6440" title="Terry Kiser" label="Terry Kiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708515" start="6640" end="6651" title="catchphrase" label="catchphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="7266" end="7283" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7342" end="7348" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q432437" start="7747" end="7760" title="Kathy Griffin" label="Kathy Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315123" start="8044" end="8055" title="Peter Boyle" label="Peter Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q232959" start="8060" end="8073" title="Doris Roberts" label="Doris Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="8109" end="8132" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q30897012" start="8214" end="8236" title="United States Ski Team" label="United States Ski Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q10068" start="8264" end="8276" title="Lindsey Vonn" label="Lindsey Vonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q443189" start="8303" end="8314" title="Bill Demong" label="Bill Demong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304824" start="8764" end="8774" title="Wally Wood" label="Wally Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="9080" end="9093" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026564" start="9293" end="9303" title="Dick Beals" label="Dick Beals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18536847" start="9306" end="9320" title="Paul Margulies" label="Paul Margulies"/>
<link wikidata="Q229714" start="9340" end="9358" title="Julianna Margulies" label="Julianna Margulies"/>
<link wikidata="Q109849" start="9446" end="9460" title="Madison Avenue" label="Madison Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q475892" start="9543" end="9553" title="The Cyrkle" label="The Cyrkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="9716" end="9731" title="Sammy Davis Jr." label="Sammy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q475892" start="10047" end="10057" title="The Cyrkle" label="The Cyrkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="10198" end="10201" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18687874" start="10242" end="10253" title="David Hulin" label="David Hulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571728" start="10347" end="10362" title="Debi Derryberry" label="Debi Derryberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="10380" end="10396" title="Carbonated water" label="Carbonated water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968511" start="10399" end="10407" title="Brioschi (company)" label="Brioschi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228111" wikidata="Q5040790" url="?curid=1228111" title="Carl Schurz Park">
<text>Carl Schurz Park is a public park in the Yorkville neighborhood of Manhattan, New York City, named for German-born Secretary of the Interior Carl Schurz in 1910, at the edge of what was then the solidly German-American community of Yorkville. The park contains Gracie Mansion, the official residence of the Mayor of New York.

==Description==
Carl Schurz Park overlooks the waters of Hell Gate and Wards Island in the East River, and is the site of Gracie Mansion (built for Archibald Gracie, 1799, enlarged c. 1811), the official residence of the Mayor of New York since 1942. There are tours of the restored building every Wednesday. The park&#x27;s waterfront promenade is a deck built over the Franklin D. Roosevelt East River Drive, enclosing the roadway except on the side facing the East River. The park is bordered on the west by East End Avenue and on the south by Gracie Square, the extension of East 84th Street to the river. The East River Greenway, part of the Manhattan Waterfront Greenway, passes along the promenade platform.

The park contains winding, shady paths, green lawns, waterfront views, basketball courts, a large playground for children, and two dog runs: one designated for larger dogs and one for smaller dogs. The park is maintained by Carl Schurz Park Conservancy, the oldest park conservancy in New York City, in partnership with the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.

==History==
The bluff overlooking a curve in the East River at this point was named by an early owner, Siebert Classen, &quot;Hoorn&#x27;s Hook&quot;, for his native Hoorn on the Zuider Zee. The first house on the site was built for Jacob Walton, a few years before the Revolution, when the picturesque location suddenly gained tactical importance in the control of the East River. In February 1776, the house and grounds were commandeered for an American battery of nine guns on the site. This drew British fire on September 15, 1776, in a mopping-up operation to secure all of Manhattan Island following the Battle of Long Island; the bombardment demolished Walton&#x27;s house and forced an American withdrawal. The British kept an encampment on the site until Evacuation Day, 1783. Archibald Gracie leveled the remains of the star fort and constructed his timber-framed villa Gracie Mansion in 1799.

The section of the park lying south of 86th Street (set aside as &quot;East River Park&quot; in 1876), where John Jacob Astor once had a villa, was used as a picnic ground when the northern section was acquired by the City of New York in 1891. The easternmost block of 86th Street was acquired subsequently, and the street de-mapped. A new landscape design by Calvert Vaux and Samuel Parsons was completed in 1902, several years after Vaux&#x27;s death.

East River Park was renamed Carl Schurz Park in 1911. The park was reconstructed in 1935 by Robert Moses, due to the creation of the FDR Drive, with revised landscaping by Maud Sargent. The park&#x27;s restoration from a neglected state in the early 1970s was due to the energies of a neighborhood group, the not-for-profit Carl Schurz Park Conservancy (incorporated 1974), formed originally to clean up the park&#x27;s single playground.

Carl Schurz Park served as the location for the climactic fight scene in Spike Lee&#x27;s 2002 film &quot;25th Hour&quot;, starring Edward Norton and Philip Seymour Hoffman.

==Notes==
==References==
*&quot;The WPA Guide to New York City&quot;, (1939, 1982; p. 250f)
*Frank Bergen Kelley and Edward Hagaman Hall &quot;Historical Guide to the City of New York&quot; (City History Club of New York) 190, p. 135
*http://www.carlschurzparknyc.org/the-history-of-the-conservancy

==External links==

* Carl Schurz Park Conservancy Official Website
* Carl Schurz Park: Brief History
* Carl Schurz Park: Photos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5040790" start="0" end="16" title="Carl Schurz Park" label="Carl Schurz Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="22" end="33" title="public park" label="public park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189975" start="41" end="50" title="Yorkville, Manhattan" label="Yorkville"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="67" end="76" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="78" end="91" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q127437" start="141" end="152" title="Carl Schurz" label="Carl Schurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025091" start="261" end="275" title="Gracie Mansion" label="Gracie Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="307" end="324" title="Mayor of New York" label="Mayor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q838755" start="384" end="393" title="Hell Gate" label="Hell Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21042825" start="398" end="410" title="Wards Island" label="Wards Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="418" end="428" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025091" start="449" end="463" title="Gracie Mansion" label="Gracie Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786334" start="475" end="491" title="Archibald Gracie (1755–1829)" label="Archibald Gracie"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="548" end="565" title="Mayor of New York" label="Mayor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q124973" start="698" end="736" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt East River Drive" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt East River Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="790" end="800" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873530" start="838" end="853" title="East End Avenue" label="East End Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036759" start="941" end="960" title="East River Greenway" label="East River Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749328" start="974" end="1003" title="Manhattan Waterfront Greenway" label="Manhattan Waterfront Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="1467" end="1477" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q9938" start="1584" end="1589" title="Hoorn" label="Hoorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q228655" start="1597" end="1607" title="Zuider Zee" label="Zuider Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="1997" end="2013" title="Manhattan Island" label="Manhattan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q862751" start="2028" end="2049" title="Battle of Long Island" label="Battle of Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133590" start="2182" end="2196" title="Evacuation Day (New York)" label="Evacuation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786334" start="2204" end="2220" title="Archibald Gracie" label="Archibald Gracie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025091" start="2298" end="2312" title="Gracie Mansion" label="Gracie Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="2432" end="2448" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577471" start="2683" end="2695" title="Calvert Vaux" label="Calvert Vaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412362" start="2700" end="2714" title="Samuel Parsons" label="Samuel Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="2870" end="2882" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q60692270" start="2950" end="2962" title="Maud Sargent" label="Maud Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="3291" end="3300" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q218458" start="3324" end="3333" title="25th Hour" label="25th Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q125904" start="3350" end="3363" title="Edward Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q180560" start="3368" end="3390" title="Philip Seymour Hoffman" label="Philip Seymour Hoffman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228113" wikidata="Q6407890" url="?curid=1228113" title="Killough massacre">
<text>The Killough massacre is believed to have been both the largest and last Native American attack on white settlers in East Texas. The massacre took place on October 5, 1838, near Larissa, Texas, in the northwestern part of Cherokee County. There were eighteen victims, including Isaac Killough, Sr., and his extended family (viz. the families of four sons and two daughters). They had immigrated to the Republic of Texas from Talladega County, Alabama, in 1837.

==Context==

Apparently unaware that the land made available to them was hotly disputed by the Cherokee Indians who lived in the area, Isaac Killough and his homesteaders began clearing land for crops and building homes. Only a year earlier, however, the area surrounding their settlement had been set aside for the Cherokee under a treaty negotiated and signed by Sam Houston and John Forbes. When the Republic of Texas Senate refused to ratify the treaty and then, in December 1838, formally nullified it, the Cherokee, who already thought they had conceded enough, became homicidal.

The influx of Anglo settlers into lands thought to have been theirs increased Cherokee resentment, and as there was also residual bitterness among some Hispanics still loyal to Mexico, the atmosphere in the region became tense in early 1838. By the summer of that year, there were rumblings of coming insurrection from either or both of those factions, and evidence existed for collusion between them.

Fearing this growing unrest, Killough with his relatives and friends fled to Nacogdoches for refuge. On condition they would leave the area after doing so, the Cherokee leaders agreed to their safe passage if they would return simply to harvest their crops. They did so. But on October 5, 1838, a band of Cherokee who had not been party to the agreement attacked the settlement. Most of the Killough group—a total of eighteen—were killed or abducted as they worked their fields. Those who survived fled for a time to Lacy&#x27;s Fort on the San Antonio Road, just west of present-day Alto, Texas.

According to Tyler, Texas, newspaperman Charles Kilpatrick, several of the men walked into an ambush and the Native Americans then:

A stone obelisk commemorating the event was erected by the Work Progress Administration in the 1930s, and a historical marker was dedicated in 1965.

==See also==
*List of massacres in the United States
*Cherokee War of 1839

==References==
== External links ==
*Killough Massacre Burial Site Cemetery
*Killough Reunion Association
*Remembering the Killough Massacre , &quot;Tyler Morning Telegraph&quot;, Kenneth Dean – writer, June 21, 2010.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6407890" start="4" end="21" title="Killough massacre" label="Killough massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576428" start="117" end="127" title="East Texas" label="East Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199915" start="133" end="141" title="massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489470" start="178" end="192" title="Larissa, Texas" label="Larissa, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108842" start="222" end="237" title="Cherokee County, Texas" label="Cherokee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="402" end="419" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q302918" start="425" end="450" title="Talladega County, Alabama" label="Talladega County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="557" end="565" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="827" end="838" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q970482" start="1529" end="1540" title="Nacogdoches, Texas" label="Nacogdoches"/>
<link wikidata="Q818954" start="1993" end="2009" title="El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail" label="San Antonio Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q972861" start="2036" end="2047" title="Alto, Texas" label="Alto, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="2242" end="2270" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Work Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627309" start="2347" end="2385" title="List of massacres in the United States" label="List of massacres in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872959" start="2387" end="2407" title="Battle of the Neches" label="Cherokee War of 1839"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228120" wikidata="Q6384314" url="?curid=1228120" title="Keith Elliott">
<text>Keith Elliott, VC (25 April 1916 – 7 October 1989) was a New Zealand soldier who served with the New Zealand Military Forces during the Second World War. He was awarded the Victoria Cross, the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces, for his actions in the First Battle of El Alamein.

Born in Āpiti, near Kimbolton, New Zealand in the Manawatū, Elliott was a farm manager when the Second World War began. He volunteered for service abroad with the Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force (2NZEF) and was posted to the 22nd Battalion. He saw action during the Battles of Greece and Crete and then in North Africa. By now a sergeant, during Operation &quot;Crusader&quot; in November 1941, he was one of 700 New Zealanders made prisoners of war when their position was overrun by the Germans. Freed two months later, he was serving as a platoon commander during the First Battle of El Alamein. After he was awarded his VC, he was promoted to second lieutenant, sent home to New Zealand and discharged from the 2NZEF.

Returning to civilian life, he resumed his farming career, but in 1948 became a priest. He shifted around the lower half of the North Island for the next several years, serving in a number of churches. He was also a chaplain in the Territorial Force. He retired from the priesthood in 1981 and died eight years later at the age of 73.

==Early life==
Keith Elliott was born on 25 April 1916 in Āpiti, New Zealand, one of nine children of a farmer and his wife. He was educated in nearby Feilding, firstly at Lytton Street School and then at Feilding Agricultural High School. He was unable to complete his formal schooling because in 1933, he had to drop out to work on the family farm. Two years later, he began managing a large farm at Marima.

==Second World War==

Elliott tried to enlist in the New Zealand Military Forces on hearing of the outbreak of the Second World War but was initially declined due to the poor state of his teeth. He was successful on a later attempt and in January 1940 he joined the Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force (2NZEF) that was raised for service overseas. He was posted to 22nd Battalion, commanded by a Victoria Cross winner of the First World War, Lieutenant Colonel Leslie Andrew. The battalion embarked for the Middle East as part of the Second Echelon of the 2NZEF but was diverted to England during transit. It arrived in England in June 1940, where it remained for the rest of the year on garrison duty. While in England, Elliott was promoted to lance corporal.

In early 1941, the Second Echelon was redesignated the 5th Infantry Brigade, 2nd New Zealand Division, and was sent to Greece as part of an Allied contingent set to counter a likely invasion by the Germans. His battalion was positioned at the Olympus Pass, and shortly after the invasion commenced, engaged advancing German tanks. The New Zealanders withdrew after a day, beginning a gradual retreat from the country. Evacuated to Crete on 25 April, 22nd Battalion was defending Maleme airfield when German paratroopers attacked on 20 May. The airfield was abandoned that evening much to Elliott&#x27;s displeasure as his platoon was holding their positions. The Allies were eventually evacuated to Egypt a week later, but not before Elliott was wounded in the arm in a skirmish with enemy paratroopers.

===North Africa===
While the division was refitting and rearming following the fighting in Greece and Crete, Elliott was promoted to lance sergeant, then platoon sergeant. In November 1941, during Operation Crusader, his platoon was attached to the headquarters of the 5th Infantry Brigade for security. On 27 November, he, along with 700 other men, were captured when the headquarters was overrun by elements of &quot;Generalleutnant&quot; (Lieutenant General) Erwin Rommel&#x27;s Afrika Corps, which had outflanked the Allies. He spent two months under harsh conditions in captivity before being liberated by South African troops. He lost a considerable amount of weight during his time as a prisoner of war. He rejoined the 2nd New Zealand Division which was refitting in Syria, but then contracted malaria and missed out on its hasty recall to Egypt and the subsequent fighting at Minqar Qaim.

On his recovery, Elliott rejoined the 22nd Battalion on 13 July 1942, in time for the First Battle of Alamein. The battalion was short of commissioned officers, and he found himself acting platoon commander for the forthcoming operation to capture Ruweisat Ridge. After commencing the attack early in the morning of 15 July, the battalion reached the ridge and began digging in. At daybreak, it was discovered that the New Zealanders had passed several German tanks during their advance the previous evening. Elliott spotted the tanks when they began advancing towards the 22nd Battalion&#x27;s position at dawn and notified the commanders of nearby platoons. However, they believed the tanks to be British and disregarded Elliott&#x27;s warning until the German tanks began attacking the battalion&#x27;s positions. It was then that Elliott performed the actions that led to the award of the Victoria Cross (VC). The citation for his VC read:

All of the 22nd Battalion, bar Elliott&#x27;s platoon, were killed or captured during the fighting at Ruweisat Ridge. Some of the other battalions that participated in the battle also incurred heavy losses. Elliott managed to link up with elements of the 21st Battalion, the commander of which recommended him for the VC. Elliott was evacuated to hospital where he spent three months recovering from his various wounds before he returned to his battalion in September.

His VC was gazetted on 24 September 1942, but Elliott had learnt of his award the previous day. His divisional commander, Major General Bernard Freyberg, commissioned Elliott in the field as a second lieutenant shortly afterwards. He was presented with his VC ribbon by Lieutenant General Bernard Montgomery and was ordered to return to New Zealand. It is likely that this was due to the desire of military authorities to keep him out of harm&#x27;s way following the recent capture of the division&#x27;s other VC winner, Charles Upham, at Ruweisat. Elliott was unhappy at being sent home while his friends remained in the field. He was also uncomfortable with the attention he received from the public when he arrived back in New Zealand and remained modest about his achievements. He was discharged from the 2NZEF in December 1943 and resumed farming.

==Later life==
In February 1944, Elliott married Margaret Rachel Markham. The couple had first met before the war and would go on to have five children. Although he continued farming, he became interested in a career in the Anglican Church. Encouraged by a friend who had been a chaplain in the military, he began training for the priesthood in February 1946. He became a priest in 1948 and took up a curacy in Palmerston North, before becoming chaplain at the nearby Linton Military Camp. This entailed him joining the New Zealand Territorial Force with the rank of chaplain, 4th class.

For the next several years, Elliott moved around a number of parishes in the lower North Island. He also spent periods of time at the City Mission in Wellington. He was present at the unveiling of the Alamein Memorial in Egypt in 1954, and two years later attended VC centenary celebrations in London. In 1967, he co-authored a book of his life, &quot;From Cowshed to Dog Collar&quot;. He retired from the priesthood in April 1981 and moved to Raumati.

In 1953, Elliott was awarded the Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Medal, and in 1977 he received the Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal.

He died of cancer on 7 October 1989, survived by his wife and five children. He was buried with full military honours at Paraparaumu Cemetery.
Elliott donated his Victoria Cross to his former school, Feilding Agricultural High School, in 1972. It was later loaned to the QEII Army Memorial Museum in Waiouru for display. It was one of nine Victoria Crosses among 96 medals stolen from the museum on 2 December 2007. On 16 February 2008, the New Zealand Police announced all the medals had been recovered as a result of a NZ$300,000 reward offered by Michael Ashcroft and Tom Sturgess.

==Notes==
==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6384314" start="0" end="13" title="Keith Elliott" label="Keith Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="15" end="17" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="97" end="124" title="New Zealand Military Forces" label="New Zealand Military Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="136" end="152" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="173" end="187" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="281" end="293" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q162250" start="325" end="351" title="First Battle of El Alamein" label="First Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15051428" start="362" end="367" title="Āpiti" label="Āpiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410012" start="374" end="396" title="Kimbolton, New Zealand" label="Kimbolton, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q613305" start="404" end="412" title="Manawatū District" label="Manawatū"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015353" start="517" end="555" title="New Zealand Expeditionary Force" label="Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631348" start="586" end="600" title="22nd Battalion (New Zealand)" label="22nd Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="627" end="644" title="Battle of Greece" label="Battles of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="649" end="654" title="Battle of Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="690" end="698" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q327085" start="707" end="737" title="Operation Crusader" label="Operation &amp;quot;Crusader&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="1008" end="1025" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="1212" end="1224" title="North Island, New Zealand" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="1316" end="1333" title="Territorial Force (New Zealand)" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15051428" start="1478" end="1483" title="Āpiti" label="Āpiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q992577" start="1571" end="1579" title="Feilding" label="Feilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441551" start="1625" end="1658" title="Feilding Agricultural High School" label="Feilding Agricultural High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1822" end="1828" title="Marima, New Zealand" label="Marima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="1884" end="1911" title="New Zealand Military Forces" label="New Zealand Military Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1946" end="1962" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015353" start="2097" end="2135" title="New Zealand Expeditionary Force" label="Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631348" start="2199" end="2213" title="22nd Battalion (New Zealand)" label="22nd Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="2230" end="2244" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2259" end="2274" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530599" start="2295" end="2308" title="Leslie Andrew" label="Leslie Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463070" start="2579" end="2593" title="lance corporal" label="lance corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057678" start="2651" end="2671" title="5th Infantry Brigade (New Zealand)" label="5th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797825" start="2673" end="2697" title="2nd New Zealand Division" label="2nd New Zealand Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="3027" end="3032" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606076" start="3075" end="3090" title="Maleme Airport" label="Maleme airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801805" start="3534" end="3548" title="lance sergeant" label="lance sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="3563" end="3571" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q327085" start="3598" end="3616" title="Operation Crusader" label="Operation Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100519" start="3820" end="3835" title="Generalleutnant" label="Generalleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="3863" end="3875" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="3883" end="3895" title="Afrika Corps" label="Afrika Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="4203" end="4210" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22947785" start="4263" end="4282" title="Battle of Mersa Matruh" label="subsequent fighting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4286" end="4297" title="Minqar Qaim" label="Minqar Qaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q162250" start="4386" end="4409" title="First Battle of Alamein" label="First Battle of Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383593" start="4548" end="4562" title="Ruweisat Ridge" label="Ruweisat Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="5193" end="5207" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631040" start="5500" end="5514" title="21st Battalion (New Zealand)" label="21st Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q334990" start="5851" end="5867" title="Bernard Freyberg" label="Bernard Freyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="5908" end="5925" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="6004" end="6022" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972477" start="6238" end="6251" title="Charles Upham" label="Charles Upham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="6795" end="6810" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q208762" start="6850" end="6858" title="chaplain" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753370" start="6972" end="6978" title="curacy" label="curacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212289" start="6982" end="6998" title="Palmerston North" label="Palmerston North"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554908" start="7039" end="7059" title="Linton Military Camp" label="Linton Military Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="7103" end="7120" title="Territorial Force (New Zealand)" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="7243" end="7255" title="North Island, New Zealand" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="7310" end="7320" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16161233" start="7361" end="7377" title="Alamein Memorial" label="Alamein Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7454" end="7460" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387551" start="7604" end="7611" title="Raumati South" label="Raumati"/>
<link wikidata="Q94793" start="7647" end="7682" title="Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059227" start="7712" end="7751" title="Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330644" start="8025" end="8050" title="QEII Army Memorial Museum" label="QEII Army Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q912379" start="8054" end="8061" title="Waiouru" label="Waiouru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472704" start="8275" end="8278" title="New Zealand dollar" label="NZ$"/>
<link wikidata="Q335530" start="8304" end="8320" title="Michael Ashcroft, Baron Ashcroft" label="Michael Ashcroft"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228125" wikidata="Q5757448" url="?curid=1228125" title="Attacks on High Wood">
<text>The Attacks on High Wood, near Bazentin le Petit in the Somme &quot;département&quot; of northern France, took place between the British Fourth Army and the German 1st Army during the Battle of the Somme. After the Battle of Bazentin Ridge on 14 July 1916, High Wood lay undefended for most of the day but delays in communication and confusion caused by orders and counter-orders from British corps headquarters, which had overlapping responsibilities, led to the occupation of High Wood being forestalled by German reserves, which had moved forward to counter-attack British troops in the villages of Bazentin-le-Grand and Bazentin-le-Petit.

Men from the 7th Division managed to occupy the southern half of the wood and two cavalry squadrons advanced on the east side to Wood Lane, which connected the wood to Longueval. On 15 July, the wood was evacuated by the survivors and the cavalry retired. The British and the Germans fought for control of the wood from 14 July to 15 September. Both sides had many casualties and chronic communication problems; inclement weather grounded aircraft, obscured the view and slowed movement on the roads, which had been severely bombarded and turned to mud as soon as it rained. Trenches and shell holes filled with water, which made infantry movement exceedingly difficult and exhausted trench garrisons. The British and French found it impossible to arrange co-ordinated attacks and fought many small piecemeal actions, rather than general attacks until 15 September.

British-French co-operation broke down again and the French did not attack on 15 September, when the British captured the wood during the Battle of Flers–Courcelette (15–22 September). The German defenders had great difficulty finding fresh troops for the Somme front, despite ending the Battle of Verdun and had to send divisions to the Eastern Front and to Romania after it declared war on 27 August. Turnover of German divisions was high and many had to be withdrawn and replaced after fourteen days in the front line. The Germans lacked the resources to make many big organised counter-attacks and those at High Wood and the vicinity were often as costly and ineffective as corresponding British attacks.
==Background==

===High Wood===

The French name for the wood was (now ) but to the British infantry it was known as High Wood. The wood is on the D 107 road, which runs from Martinpuich to Longueval, about half-way between Bazentin-le-Petit and Bazentin-le-Grand to the south-west, Martinpuich to the north-west and Longueval to the south-east. Delville Wood lay to the east. Before the Battle of the Somme the wood was behind the German second line, which lay in front of Bazentin-le-Grand and Bazentin-le-Petit. The wood crowned a ridge which was about high and overlooked the ground around for a considerable distance. An attack on the wood could be seen easily from the ridge which ran through the north end of the wood. Before the battle the trees were undamaged and the ground had not been churned by shell-fire.

==Prelude==

===German preparations===
Despite considerable debate among German staff officers, Falkenhayn laid down a continuation of the policy of unyielding defence. On the Somme front, the fortification construction plan ordered by Falkenhayn in January 1915 had been completed. The reserve line, renamed the second line, was as well built and wired as the first line and had been built beyond the range of Allied field artillery, to force attackers to stop and move their artillery forward before an attack. The second line had become the front line in the area of High Wood, after the Battle of Bazentin Ridge on 14 July. German artillery was organised in a series of (barrage sectors) for the simpler task of placing barrages on no man&#x27;s land. Telephone lines between the German front lines and their artillery support were often cut but the front line troops used signal flares to communicate. High Wood had grassy rides and many saplings in the undergrowth, which impeded movement off the rides and the wood had been fortified.

===British preparations===
General Henry Rawlinson, the Fourth Army commander, planned an attack at dawn on 14 July, when there would be insufficient light for German machine-gunners to see far ahead. XIII Corps was to attack with two divisions from Longueval to Bazentin-le-Grand and XV Corps was to attack from Bazentin-le-Petit to the north-west edge of Mametz Wood; one division of III Corps was to attack further west. The British infantry was to cross up to of no man&#x27;s land in the dark and assemble close to the German second line. In this area the second line had become the front line, after the British and French advances during the Battle of Albert A preparatory bombardment began on 11 July and a shortage of heavy artillery ammunition along with transport difficulties over wet and cut up ground, were eased by the air supremacy of the Royal Flying Corps (RFC), which made it impossible for the German air units to reconnoitre behind the British lines. On 14 July, the 9th (Secunderabad) Cavalry Brigade of the 2nd Indian Cavalry Division were to capture the wood and the Switch Line either side with two cavalry regiments, after which the 7th Division was to relieve the cavalry and the 21st Division was to advance and occupy the area between Bazentin-le-Petit and Martinpuich. The advance was expected to assist III Corps to the west, when it attacked the German second position and then combined with the 1st Division attack at as the 34th Division probed towards Pozières in the west.

==Battle==

===Battle of Bazentin Ridge, 14–15 July===

The Fourth Army attacked High Wood with divisions from XV Corps on 14 July, during the Battle of Bazentin Ridge. The wood was abandoned by the Germans but delays meant that the British did not attempt to occupy it until Rawlinson had ordered the 7th Division forward at but the order was over-ruled by Lieutenant-General Henry Horne, the XV Corps commander, because the capture of Longueval, on the flank of the proposed advance, was incomplete. The 7th Division advanced and two battalions managed to occupy the southern half of the wood, after German reserves had arrived and counter-attacked several times. On the right flank, a squadron from each of the 7th Dragoon Guards and the 20th Deccan Horse of the 2nd Indian Cavalry Division, had been ordered forward at but took until early evening to make their way across trenches and devastated ground.

The 20th Deccan Horse made the only cavalry charge of the Battle of the Somme, against III Battalion, Infantry Regiment 26 concealed in crops east of the wood. The crew of an aircraft of 3 Squadron RFC saw the infantry and cavalry advance and the pilot dived at the German troops, strafing them from a height of . The observer dropped a sketch of the German dispositions onto the cavalry before the aircraft departed, having been riddled by ground fire. Reserves of the 2nd Guard Division were incapable of assisting the defenders, as they had been caught by British machine-gun fire as they moved up towards Bazentin-le-Petit and machine-gunners in Longueval were silenced by the cavalry machine-guns. German heavy artillery had been withdrawn and field artillery was unable to take aim at such a fast-moving target. About were killed or taken prisoner in the cornfields, eight cavalrymen were killed, about wounded and were killed or wounded.
The cavalry took up a line from Longueval to the southern corner of High Wood until the early morning of 15 July and began to withdraw from Alarmist reports that the British cavalry had broken through between Longueval and Pozières and were advancing beyond High Wood, reached the German IV Corps and 2nd Army headquarters. General Fritz von Below, the 2nd Army commander, put the 8th Division, 5th Division, 24th Reserve Division and the 8th Royal Bavarian Reserve Division at the disposal of General Friedrich Sixt von Armin, the IV Corps commander, to counter-attack the British breakthrough. When the truth emerged, the counter-attack was called off and the 5th and 8th Bavarian Reserve divisions went back into reserve. At on 15 July, the 7th Division attacked the wood with the 91st Brigade. The British infantry were stopped by machine-gun fire from the Switch Line where it ran through the wood. After a preliminary bombardment by German artillery, II Battalion, Infantry Regiment 165 of the 7th Division and III Battalion, Infantry Regiment 72 of the 8th Division, which had relieved the 183rd Division, counter-attacked at and recaptured part of the wood, until driven out by the brigade reserve.

At the British attacked after a bombardment which inflicted many casualties on the German infantry but failed to overwhelm the defenders. High Wood was not visible to British ground observers and at a 3 Squadron reconnaissance sortie, reported that British troops were in the west of the wood and south of the Bazentin-le-Petit road. Flags were seen in the west side of the wood but the east side was full of Germans and the Switch Trench was packed with German infantry. High Wood was judged to be untenable and at the 91st Brigade was withdrawn and the wood was bombarded by the divisional artillery. The 1/9th Highland Light Infantry (HLI) of the 33rd Division had also attacked the wood at on 15 July, during an attack on the Switch Line, when three platoons advanced on the west side of the wood. Machine-gun fire from the II and III battalions of Infantry Regiment 93 in High Wood, hit the attackers from the flank and the attack was repulsed. The 16th Battalion, King&#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps and the 2nd Worcester were sent forward as reinforcements but were back on the start line by Two German infantry companies worked southwards from the Switch Line for later in the evening but a renewal of the counter-attack was found to be impossible, due to the tremendous volume of British barrage fire and the presence of British reconnaissance and artillery-observation aircraft.

===July===

====20–21 July====

The 33rd Division attacked again at dusk on 19 July, when a battalion from the 100th Brigade pushed advanced posts towards the wood from Bazentin-le-Petit as a flank guard. Two battalions of the 19th Brigade crept forward on 20 July, during a bombardment and attacked when it lifted at The infantry got into the wood against machine-gun fire from the 8th Division troops of II Battalion, Infantry Regiment 165 and part of III Battalion, Infantry Regiment 72 in the Switch Line and a strong point in the western corner. Observers of 3 Squadron flew over the wood and despite mist, glimpsed enough to report that all but the north end of the wood had been captured and in the evening reported the loss of the north end to a counter-attack.

A third battalion on the right flank arrived and helped to occupy the southern portion of the wood, thirty Germans being taken prisoner. During the afternoon of 21 July, another battalion went forward and managed to reach the northern fringe of the wood. Due to the number of British casualties, two more battalions were sent forward as reinforcements but as dark fell a German bombardment forced the British from the north end of the wood, which was re-occupied by German troops near (known to the British as the Switch Line) and both sides dug in. During the fighting for High Wood, the 5th Division and 7th Division attacked the Switch Line to the east. The 51st (Highland) Division relieved the 33rd Division after dark.

====22/23 July====
Fog covered the area around High Wood until 22 July when vague reports of German digging in front of the Switch Line were confirmed. The crew of a 34 Squadron aircraft dived through the mist and saw a new German trench, several hundred yards in front of the Switch Trench, parallel to the British line from Bazentin-le-Peitit to High Wood. This new Intermediate Line was full of German troops and the III Corps headquarters immediately cancelled the 19th (Western) Division attack on the Switch Line, to make the new line the first objective. On the night of the 51st (Highland) Division attacked High Wood with two battalions of the 154th Brigade at to capture the rest of the wood and of the Switch Line. The British bombardment had begun at on 22 July, under the direction of low-flying British artillery-observation aircraft. German sources reported that the shelling was of &quot;painful accuracy&quot; and prevented the troops in High Wood from being relieved, despite the number of casualties. One battalion lost direction in the wood and had many casualties to machine-gun fire. The second battalion attacked up a dip to the south-west of the wood but was also caught by machine-gun fire from the Intermediate Line; by both battalions were back on the start line having lost 

The Germans in the wood also suffered greatly in the hand-to-hand fighting. III Battalion, Infantry Regiment 165 of the 7th Division and part of I Battalion, Infantry Regiment 62 of the 12th Division, were reinforced from the Switch Line by I Battalion, Infantry Regiment 91, early on 23 July. British gunners had difficulty supporting attacks on High Wood, because they had to fire over Bazentin Ridge. The low elevation of the guns meant that shells skimmed the British trenches, the margin for error was small and numerous complaints were made that British infantry casualties were caused by the British artillery. Worn guns, defective ammunition and inaccurate information about the location of British infantry positions were blamed for short-shooting. The 51st (Highland) Division pushed saps forward on 2 August, towards the Switch Line and dug a new trench near Wood Lane to the east of High Wood.

===August – 14 September===

====August====

The 33rd Division relieved the 51st (Highland) Division and on 11 August, continued to push sap heads forward towards the Switch line and dug a new trench closer to Wood Lane to the east. Two large flame-throwers and pipe-pushers (devices to force a pipe filled with explosives underground, parallel with the surface, to create a sap when the explosives were detonated) were brought forward, as both sides patrolled the area. On 18 August, a battalion of the 33rd Division attacked the wood, using the flame throwers and thirty oil drums thrown by Livens Projectors but the flame throwers failed and the projectors were buried by British artillery-fire which fell short; the pipe pushers fouled tree roots in the wood and one was deflected backwards, blowing a crater into the trench line of one of the attacking battalions. All attempts by the infantry to advance failed, although some troops broke into the German defences and were ejected by I Battalion, Infantry Regiment 134 and Infantry Regiment 104 recorded many casualties. On 20 August, the division attacked the wood with one battalion, to occupy a trench on the western edge of the wood. On 24 August, three battalions of the 100th Brigade attacked between High Wood and Delville Wood. On the night of the 1st Division relieved part of the 33rd Division and next day attacked on the east side of the wood, advancing a short distance. The rest of the 33rd Division was relieved by the 24th Division on 31 August. The largest German counter-attack of the Battle of the Somme, took place on the same day to the east of the wood, in the afternoon and evening. Troops of the II Bavarian Corps and XII Corps, pushed one battalion into the eastern side of the wood at Edge Trench.

====September====

On 3 September, a 1st Brigade battalion of the 1st Division attacked in High Wood as part of the fighting for Guillemont, making another attempt to use the flame-throwers and Livens Projectors. A 178th Tunnelling Company mine, with of explosives, was sprung under the strong point at the east corner of the wood thirty seconds before the infantry advance. The strong point was overrun by an infantry company and consolidated by an engineer field company. The pipe pushers blew back and a mortar bomb dropped short and set off the oil drums in the Livens Projectors, causing much confusion among the attackers.

Bombers worked towards the western flank but a counter-attack at by Bavarian Infantry Regiment 5 from the Switch Line forced the British back to their start line. At a fresh battalion advanced to the middle of the wood and reached its objective on the right flank but was checked in the left. An attack on the south-west face of the wood also reached the objective and two companies of the 15th (Scottish) Division got into the western corner and repulsed a German counter-attack with Lewis-gun fire. Another counter-attack was defeated at but the British then withdrew, except for one company which retired at 

On 8 September, the 1st Division attacked the west end of the wood at with two battalions. The right-hand battalion reached its objective on its right flank, where German troops were found to be in wired shell-craters but not on its left flank. The left-hand battalion attacked the south-west face and reached the objective as a battalion of the 15th (Scottish) Division to the west captured a German trench beyond the west side of the wood. Two German counter-attacks were repulsed but the British were ordered to retire and by midnight were back on their start lines. About fifty prisoners of III Battalion, Bavarian Infantry Regiment 18 of the 3rd Royal Bavarian Division were taken.

The 178th Tunnelling Company reopened the gallery of the mine fired on 3 September and charged it with another of ammonal. On 9 September, the 1st Division attacked High Wood and German positions on the right flank; two battalions captured Wood Lane and two battalions attacked in the wood after the new mine was exploded thirty seconds before zero hour. The crater was occupied but the garrison was then bombed out by the Bavarians after an advance on the western side also failed. By 14 September, it was estimated that the British had suffered in the struggle for High Wood.

===Battle of Flers–Courcelette, 15 September===
====Capture of High Wood====

On 15 September, the 47th (1/2nd London) Division, which had relieved the 1st Division from attacked the wood and the adjacent areas to the right and left with two brigades, between the New Zealand and 50th divisions. Due to the narrowness of no man&#x27;s land in and around the wood, the British troops were withdrawn during the preliminary bombardment but then sent forward again and the creeping bombardment was fired beyond the German front line. The artillery were given the wrong map coordinates, which led to the creeping barrage being fired another further on; four of the eight tanks allotted to the corps were substituted for a closer creeping bombardment at High Wood. The tanks advanced at and two reached the south of the wood but then turned east to find open ground. Tank D-22 lost direction, ditched in the British front line and then fired on British troops by mistake.

The second tank drove into a shell hole but D-13 got into the wood and fired on Bavarian Infantry Regiment 18 in the German support line, until the tank was hit and set on fire. A German infantryman crept up on the tank and shot one of the crew in the leg through a loophole; the fourth tank broke down in no man&#x27;s land. The fate of the three tanks was reported at by the crew of a 34 Squadron contact patrol, who then flew back to the wood and saw that the attacks by the New Zealanders and the 50th (Northumbrian) Division had enveloped the wood and the defenders of the Switch Trench nearby. On their return, the crew convinced the III Corps headquarters to cancel an attack from the wood. The infantry advance into the wood had been stopped by machine-gun fire and in the , part of the three battalions advancing ready to attack the second objective, went into the wood and joined in.

At the 140th Trench Mortar Battery fired a hurricane bombardment of bombs into the wood in fifteen minutes. The 34 Squadron crew made a second sortie and at watched as parties of Germans began to surrender to bombers working forward along the edges of the wood. Several hundred soldiers of Bavarian Infantry Regiment 23 of the 3rd Royal Bavarian Division were taken prisoner, along with six machine-guns and two heavy howitzers and the survivors of the 141st Brigade captured the wood by As night fell, the division had no organised front line, except on the extreme right and only the first objective had been captured, although this gave the British observation of the German defences north-eastwards to Bapaume.

The survivors of Bavarian Infantry Regiment 23 managed to rally beyond Martinpuich and reinforcements from the 50th Reserve Division arrived and then counter-attacked with the remnants of the Bavarians at The Germans managed to advance to within several hundred yards of High Wood and Martinpuich and then dug in. Engineers of the 50th (Northumbrian) Division on the left of the 47th (1/2nd London) Division worked from using bricks from Bazentin-le-Petit to fill shell holes in the road leading to High Wood and dug Boast Trench to link the flanks of both divisions, which had been separated for three days. Tramlines were built west of the wood towards Eaucourt l&#x27;Abbaye and later extended to Bazentin-le-Petit, so that the wood could be avoided.

==Aftermath==
===Analysis===
The 47th (1/2nd London) Division was considered to have failed, because High Wood was only the first objective. In four days of fighting, the division had suffered over and the 141st Brigade was so depleted that after the occupation of the wood, it was reorganised into a composite battalion. The divisional commander Major-General Charles Barter had urged Lieutenant-General William Pulteney, the III Corps commander, to cancel the attempt to use tanks in the wood as a substitute for artillery but had been over-ruled. The failure of the tanks was considered by the 47th (1/2nd London) Division to have been the main cause of the large number of casualties in the division but Barter was sacked on 28 September, for &quot;wanton waste of men&quot;.

Peter Liddle wrote that beyond imposing a delay, the German policy of unyielding defence and counter-attack failed and ought to be judged on the same terms as British and French methods. Haig and Joffre were right to believe that a serious German collapse was possible until late July and no convincing alternative to attrition, in the circumstances of late July to early September, has been proposed. Analysis of captured documents and prisoner interrogations indicated the strain being imposed on the German army. William Philpott criticised the weeks of costly, small, narrow-front attacks against a skilful and determined defence by the Germans, yet Gallwitz &quot;had no better tactical method&quot;, which reduced operations to a battle of wills. In the Fourth Army area from counter-attacks were made against attacks, exposing German infantry to similar costly and frustrating failures. German artillery and air inferiority was a great disadvantage and led to constant losses.
Sheldon also wrote that Allied aerial dominance in August put the Germans at a serious tactical disadvantage, that some troops began to avoid the remaining dugouts and that much of the Allied artillery was used constantly to bombard targets deep behind German lines. J. P.Harris wrote that on the German side, conditions were worse and the British improved the accuracy of their artillery-fire, with the help of aircraft observation. At the end of August, Falkenhayn was dismissed, partly due to disagreements over his conduct of the defence of the Somme. Prior and Wilson analysed the British on the Somme from which included the fighting for High Wood. In the first sixty days of the offensive, thirty-two British divisions had engaged and had suffered 126,000 casualties. The British were bogged down, having advanced on a front.

On fifty days in the period, an average of eight divisions were in the line but fewer than six battalions attacked and only twice were more than half of the battalions in the line engaged simultaneously. British assaults were constant, small and narrow-front, against which the Germans could concentrate artillery, easily to inflict many casualties. British divisions stayed in the front line from and casualties varied from day in the 5th Division to fewer than day in the 23rd Division. Gary Sheffield wrote that criticism of Haig underestimated the difficulty in balancing tactical, operational and strategic demands; line straightening attacks were costly but were better than imposing complicated manoeuvres on the infantry.

===Casualties===
From the 1st Division suffered and from the 7th Division lost The German 7th and 8th divisions had from on the front from Delville Wood to High Wood. From August, the 51st (Highland) Division had and the 47th (1/2nd London) Division suffered more than from At least and German soldiers died in the wood in 1916.

==Commemoration==
On the edge of High Wood is the London Cemetery and Extension. This Commonwealth cemetery was opened with the interment of of the 47th (1/2nd London) Division in the days following 15 September 1916 and extended in 1934. The men were buried in a large shell hole and by 1987, the cemetery contained the remains of whom have no name. Opposite the cemetery is a 47th (1/2nd London) Division memorial and a cairn for the 9th (Glasgow Highlanders) Highland Light Infantry. A memorial to the Cameron Highlanders and Black Watch lies on the east side of the wood. Memorials to the 1st and 51st divisions, 1st Northumberland Fusiliers, Cameron Highlanders, 1st South Wales Borderers, 10th Glosters and the 20th Royal Fusiliers were also built in the wood; Thistle Dump Cemetery is in a field to the south. High Wood is also mentioned in a poem by Siegfried Sassoon and is the subject of &quot;High Wood&quot; by P. Johnstone. Ted Hughes describes his uncle Walter (16th King&#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps) wounded from a German sniper&#x27;s bullet and lying out in No Man&#x27;s Land after one of the 33rd Division attacks in &quot;Walt - I: Under High Wood&quot;. The stench of rotting corpses in the wood was overwhelming and it inspired Ewart MacKintosh to write a parody of &quot;Chalk Farm to Camberwell Green&quot;.

==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
* First published in &quot;First and Always: Poems for Great Ormond Street Children&#x27;s Hospital&quot; (1988) and then in Wolfwatching (1989) 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Campaign Map, Commonwealth War Graves Commission
* Maps and photographs of High Wood and memorials
* High Wood photo essay</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5757448" start="4" end="24" title="Attacks on High Wood" label="Attacks on High Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q45755" start="31" end="48" title="Bazentin le Petit" label="Bazentin le Petit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12770" start="56" end="61" title="Somme (department)" label="Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="68" end="79" title="Départements of France" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="98" end="104" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q230071" start="137" end="148" title="Fourth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q161713" start="164" end="172" title="1st Army (German Empire)" label="1st Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="184" end="203" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634717" start="215" end="239" title="Battle of Bazentin Ridge" label="Battle of Bazentin Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q45755" start="602" end="619" title="Bazentin" label="Bazentin-le-Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644073" start="657" end="669" title="7th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="7th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q313484" start="812" end="821" title="Longueval" label="Longueval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381142" start="1649" end="1676" title="Battle of Flers–Courcelette" label="Battle of Flers–Courcelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="1799" end="1815" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Battle of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="1849" end="1862" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="1870" end="1877" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2257" end="2263" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="2608" end="2627" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q958348" start="4119" end="4134" title="Henry Rawlinson, 1st Baron Rawlinson" label="Henry Rawlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q230071" start="4140" end="4151" title="Fourth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992231" start="4733" end="4749" title="Battle of Albert (1916)" label="Battle of Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="4939" end="4957" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646487" start="5072" end="5106" title="9th (Secunderabad) Cavalry Brigade" label="9th (Secunderabad) Cavalry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815962" start="5114" end="5141" title="2nd Indian Cavalry Division" label="2nd Indian Cavalry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631096" start="5291" end="5304" title="21st Division (United Kingdom)" label="21st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q161896" start="5512" end="5524" title="1st (United Kingdom) Division" label="1st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635405" start="5542" end="5555" title="34th Division (United Kingdom)" label="34th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634717" start="5737" end="5761" title="Battle of Bazentin Ridge" label="Battle of Bazentin Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q957699" start="5971" end="5982" title="Henry Horne, 1st Baron Horne" label="Henry Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042561" start="5988" end="5996" title="XV Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644013" start="6308" end="6326" title="7th Dragoon Guards" label="7th Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818842" start="6335" end="6352" title="20th Deccan Horse" label="20th Deccan Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q745245" start="6691" end="6701" title="No. 3 Squadron RAF" label="3 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430863" start="6785" end="6793" title="strafing" label="strafing"/>
<link wikidata="Q209941" start="6974" end="6992" title="2nd Guards Infantry Division (German Empire)" label="2nd Guard Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655050" start="7737" end="7745" title="IV Corps (German Empire)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q77414" start="7781" end="7796" title="Fritz von Below" label="Fritz von Below"/>
<link wikidata="Q270304" start="7830" end="7842" title="8th Division (German Empire)" label="8th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q238973" start="7844" end="7856" title="5th Division (German Empire)" label="5th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q216911" start="7858" end="7879" title="24th Reserve Division (German Empire)" label="24th Reserve Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q270604" start="7888" end="7923" title="8th Bavarian Reserve Division (German Empire)" label="8th Royal Bavarian Reserve Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q73384" start="7951" end="7975" title="Friedrich Sixt von Armin" label="Friedrich Sixt von Armin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201268" start="8546" end="8560" title="183rd Infantry Division (German Empire)" label="183rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758886" start="9270" end="9293" title="Highland Light Infantry" label="Highland Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635252" start="9307" end="9320" title="33rd Division (United Kingdom)" label="33rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997813" start="9627" end="9656" title="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps" label="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185093" start="11401" end="11413" title="5th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="5th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438997" start="11473" end="11497" title="51st (Highland) Division (World War I)" label="51st (Highland) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595720" start="12007" end="12030" title="19th (Western) Division" label="19th (Western) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q171765" start="13028" end="13041" title="12th Division (German Empire)" label="12th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="13441" end="13458" title="friendly fire" label="British artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="13636" end="13640" title="Sapper" label="saps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994685" start="14342" end="14358" title="Livens Projector" label="Livens Projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631949" start="15239" end="15252" title="24th Division (United Kingdom)" label="24th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q610167" start="15659" end="15669" title="Guillemont" label="Guillemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q19899346" start="15745" end="15769" title="178th Tunnelling Company" label="178th Tunnelling Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q223339" start="17420" end="17447" title="3rd Royal Bavarian Division" label="3rd Royal Bavarian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638515" start="18139" end="18167" title="47th (1/2nd London) Division" label="47th (1/2nd London) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043413" start="19394" end="19405" title="No. 34 Squadron RAF" label="34 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q460942" start="19945" end="19966" title="hurricane bombardment" label="hurricane bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q240399" start="20729" end="20750" title="50th Reserve Division (German Empire)" label="50th Reserve Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549655" start="21579" end="21592" title="141st (5th London) Brigade" label="141st Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="21720" end="21733" title="Major-general (United Kingdom)" label="Major-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082611" start="21734" end="21748" title="Charles St Leger Barter" label="Charles Barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568897" start="21778" end="21794" title="William Pulteney (British Army officer)" label="William Pulteney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971311" start="21800" end="21809" title="III Corps (United Kingdom)" label="III Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="24548" end="24556" title="Military tactics" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287072" start="24558" end="24569" title="Operational level of war" label="operational"/>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="24574" end="24583" title="Strategy" label="strategic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405173" start="25083" end="25112" title="London Cemetery and Extension" label="London Cemetery and Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q363729" start="25891" end="25908" title="Siegfried Sassoon" label="Siegfried Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272194" start="25970" end="25980" title="Ted Hughes" label="Ted Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418928" start="26280" end="26296" title="Ewart Alan Mackintosh" label="Ewart MacKintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="26308" end="26314" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030237" start="26533" end="26545" title="Wolfwatching" label="Wolfwatching"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228141" wikidata="Q146575" url="?curid=1228141" title="Dry season">
<text>The dry season is a yearly period of low rainfall, especially in the tropics. The weather in the tropics is dominated by the tropical rain belt, which moves from the northern to the southern tropics and back over the course of the year. The temperate counterpart to the tropical dry season is summer or winter.

==Rain belt==
The tropical rain belt lies in the southern hemisphere roughly from November to March; during that time the northern tropics have a dry season with sparser precipitation, and days are typically sunny throughout. From May to September, the rain belt lies in the northern hemisphere, and the southern tropics have their dry season. Under the Köppen climate classification, for tropical climates, a dry season month is defined as a month when average precipitation is below .

The rain belt reaches roughly as far north as the Tropic of Cancer and as far south as the Tropic of Capricorn. Near these latitudes, there is one wet season and one dry season annually. At the equator there are two wet and two dry seasons, as the rain belt passes over twice a year, once moving north and once moving south. Between the tropics and the equator, locations may experience a short wet or a long wet season; and a short dry or a long dry season. Local geography may substantially modify these climate patterns, however they can.

==Drought==
During the dry season, humidity is very low, causing some watering holes and rivers to dry up. This lack of water (and lack of food supply) may force many grazing animals to migrate to more fertile spots. Examples of such animals are: zebras, elephants, giraffes, hippos, rhinos, antelopes and wildebeest, wild water buffaloes, African buffaloes, gaur, tapirs, emus, ostriches, rheas, and kangaroos. Because of the lack of water in the plants, bushfires (wildfires) are common.

==Diseases==
Data shows that in Africa the start of the dry season coincides with a rise in the cases of measles—which researchers believe might be attributed to the higher concentration of people in the dry season, as agricultural operations are all but impossible without irrigation. During this time, some farmers move into cities, creating hubs of higher population density, and allowing the disease to spread more easily.

==Research==
New data shows that in the seasonal parts of the South American Amazon rainforest, foliage growth and coverage varies between the dry and wet seasons—with about 25% more leaves and faster growth in the dry season. Researchers believe that the Amazon itself has an effect in bringing the onset of the wet season: by growing more foliage, it evaporates more water. However, this growth appears only in the undisturbed parts of the Amazon basin, where researchers believe roots can reach deeper and gather more rainwater. It has also been shown that ozone levels are much higher in the dry than in the wet season in the Amazon basin.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="4" end="14" title="Dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="69" end="76" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846180" start="125" end="143" title="tropical rain belt" label="tropical rain belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="241" end="250" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="293" end="299" title="summer" label="summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="303" end="309" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="482" end="495" title="precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="666" end="695" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="701" end="717" title="tropical climate" label="tropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="850" end="866" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="891" end="910" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="994" end="1001" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q32789" start="1590" end="1595" title="zebra" label="zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="1598" end="1606" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q862089" start="1609" end="1616" title="giraffe" label="giraffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213336" start="1619" end="1624" title="Hippopotamidae" label="hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="1627" end="1632" title="Rhinoceros" label="rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="1635" end="1643" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609" start="1649" end="1659" title="wildebeest" label="wildebeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914208" start="1661" end="1679" title="wild water buffalo" label="wild water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160042" start="1683" end="1698" title="African buffalo" label="African buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174296" start="1702" end="1706" title="gaur" label="gaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745367" start="1708" end="1713" title="tapir" label="tapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q93208" start="1716" end="1719" title="emu" label="emu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576337" start="1722" end="1729" title="ostrich" label="ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q19171" start="1733" end="1737" title="rhea (bird)" label="rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="1744" end="1752" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="1799" end="1807" title="bushfire" label="bushfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="1939" end="1946" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2324" end="2337" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="2339" end="2356" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="2822" end="2827" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228143" wikidata="Q1399671" url="?curid=1228143" title="Ravi Zacharias">
<text>Frederick Antony Ravi Kumar Zacharias (26 March 194619 May 2020) was an Indian-born Canadian-American Christian evangelical minister and Christian apologist who founded Ravi Zacharias International Ministries (RZIM). He was involved in Christian apologetics for a period spanning more than forty years, authoring more than thirty books. He also hosted the radio programs &quot;Let My People Think&quot; and &quot;Just Thinking&quot;. Zacharias belonged to the Christian and Missionary Alliance (C&amp;MA), the Keswickian Christian denomination in which he was ordained as a minister. After his death, allegations of sexual harassment against him emerged, were investigated, and found to be true. 
== Early life and education ==
Ravi Zacharias was born on 26 March 1946 in Madras, India, and grew up in Delhi.

Zacharias&#x27; family was Anglican, but he was a &quot;skeptic&quot; until the age of 17 when he attempted suicide by swallowing poison. While he was in the hospital, a local Christian worker brought him a Bible and told his mother to read to him from John 14, which contains Jesus&#x27; words to Thomas the Apostle. Zacharias said it was John 14:19 that touched him as the defining paradigm, &quot;Because I live, you also will live&quot;, and that he thought, &quot;This may be my only hope: A new way of living. Life as defined by the Author of Life.&quot; Zacharias committed his life to Christ, praying that &quot;Jesus if you are the one who gives life as it is meant to be, I want it. Please get me out of this hospital bed well, and I promise I will leave no stone unturned in my pursuit of truth.&quot;

In 1966, Zacharias emigrated with his family to Canada, earning his undergraduate degree from the Ontario Bible College in 1972 (now Tyndale University) and his M.Div. from Trinity International University in 1976. In 1990 he participated in guided study at Ridley Hall, a Church of England theological school in Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, England.

== Career ==
=== Ministry ===

Zacharias spent the summer of 1971 in South Vietnam, where he evangelized U.S. soldiers as well as imprisoned Viet Cong members. After graduating from Ontario Bible College, he began an itinerant ministry with the Christian and Missionary Alliance (C&amp;MA) in Canada. In 1974 the C&amp;MA sent him to Cambodia, where he preached only a short time before its fall to the Khmer Rouge. He was later ordained by the C&amp;MA in 1980, and between 1980 and 1984 he taught at the C&amp;MA-affiliated Alliance Theological Seminary, where he was a professor of evangelism.

In 1983, Zacharias spoke in Amsterdam at the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association&#x27;s first International Conference for Itinerant Evangelists. After Amsterdam, he spent the summer evangelizing in India, where he continued to see the need for apologetic ministry, both to lead people to Christ and to train Christian leaders. In August 1984, Ravi Zacharias International Ministries (RZIM) was founded in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, to pursue his calling as a &quot;classical evangelist in the arena of the intellectually resistant.&quot; Later its headquarters were located in the suburbs of Atlanta, Georgia, United States.

In 1989, shortly after the fall of the Berlin Wall, Zacharias spoke in Moscow with students at the Lenin Military-Political Academy as well as political leaders at the Center for Geopolitical Strategy. This was the first of many evangelism events in the political sphere. Future events included one in Bogotá, Colombia, in 1993, where he spoke to members of the judiciary on the importance of having a solid moral foundation.

The following year, Zacharias wrote his first book, &quot;A Shattered Visage: The Real Face of Atheism.&quot; In 1992, Zacharias spoke at his first Veritas Forum at Harvard University, and later that year was one of the keynote speakers at Urbana. He continued to be a frequent guest at these forums, both giving lectures and answering students in question-and-answer sessions at academic institutions including the University of Georgia, the University of Michigan, and Penn State.

In 2004, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) opened its signature pulpit at the Salt Lake Tabernacle to Zacharias for a series of messages. He delivered a sermon on &quot;Who Is the Truth? Defending Jesus Christ as The Way, The Truth and The Life&quot; to some 7,000 lay-persons and scholars from both LDS and Protestant camps in an initiatory move towards open dialogue between the groups. Some evangelicals criticized Zacharias&#x27; decision not to use this opportunity to directly address the &quot;deep and foundational&quot; differences between the traditional Christian faith and the teachings of the LDS Church. He responded by asserting that Christians should not immediately condemn so-called the LDS Church&#x27;s theological differences but &quot;graciously build one step at a time in communicating our faith with clarity and conviction&quot;, stating that this would be just as effective as showing someone the faults of their faith. The speaking engagement was nearly sabotaged by an allegation by event organizer Greg Johnson, president of Standing Together, that Zacharias had nothing to do with editing the book &quot;The Kingdom of the Cults&quot; and had only loaned his name to the latest edition; Johnson later apologized for his comment.

Zacharias was a frequent keynote lecturer within the evangelical community at events including the Future of Truth conference in 2004, the National Religious Broadcasters&#x27; Convention and Exposition in 2005, and the National Conference on Christian Apologetics in 2006. On successive nights in October 2007, he addressed first the students and faculty of Virginia Tech, then the community of Blacksburg, Virginia, on the topic of evil and suffering in the wake of the Virginia Tech massacre. Zacharias represented the evangelical community at occasions such as the National Day of Prayer in Washington, D.C., the Annual Prayer Breakfast at the United Nations, the African Union Prayer Breakfast in Maputo, Mozambique, and was named honorary chairman of the 2008 National Day of Prayer task force. He also participated in the ecumenical Together 2016 meetings, which Pope Francis addressed, describing the event as a valiant effort.

In 2006, Ravi Zacharias along with Wycliffe Hall established the Oxford Centre for Christian Apologetics (OCCA) in Oxfordshire, England though it is now entirely separate from Wycliffe.

In November 2009, Zacharias signed the ecumenical &quot;Manhattan Declaration&quot; which affirms the sanctity of human life, the dignity of marriage as a union of husband and wife, and freedom of religion as foundational principles of justice and the common good. In 2016, Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio appointed Zacharias to his anti-abortion &quot;Dignity of Life&quot; advisory panel.

In 2015, according to RZIM&#x27;s public Form 990 tax return, Zacharias and his wife earned a combined total of $523,926 from the ministry.

===Worldview===
Zacharias argued that a coherent worldview must be able to satisfactorily answer four questions: that of origin, meaning of life, morality, and destiny. He said that while every major religion makes exclusive claims about truth, the Christian faith is unique in its ability to answer all four of these questions. He routinely spoke on the coherence of the Christian worldview, saying that Christianity is capable of withstanding the toughest philosophical attacks. Zacharias believed that the apologist must argue from three levels: from logic to make it tenable; from feelings to make it liveable; and from whether one has the right to use it to make moral judgments. Zacharias&#x27; style of apologetics focused predominantly on Christianity&#x27;s answers to life&#x27;s great existential questions with defense of God. He argued that the dominance of the visual in modern communication systems has impacted people&#x27;s capacity for abstract reasoning altering their way of perceiving things; however, the integration of abstract reasoning into one&#x27;s worldview is important to have its base grounded in absolutes rather than on relative feelings and fads.

==Academic credential controversies==
In an earlier edition of his biography and in other literature, Zacharias claimed to have studied at the University of Cambridge and was a visiting professor at the University of Oxford. In multiple speaking engagements he said that he had taken a class in quantum mechanics under John Polkinghorne and while a visiting scholar at Cambridge had heard Stephen Hawking lecture, seeing him struggle between agnosticism and theism. Zacharias often claimed in books and sermons that he was invited to be a visiting scholar at Cambridge, where he focused his studies on Romantic writers and moralist philosophers.

The veracity of Zacharias&#x27;s purported academic positions at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge was questioned. Christian academic Warren Throckmorton stated that Zacharias &quot;wasn&#x27;t being truthful&quot; in his claims, pointing out that he had been a visiting scholar at Ridley Hall, a theology school in the city of Cambridge which is unaffiliated with the university. Atheist commentator Steve Baughman also ran a website exposing how Zacharias exaggerated his qualifications.

In 2017, &quot;Christianity Today&quot; reported accusations that Zacharias had exaggerated his academic credentials; for instance that he had referred to himself in multiple articles and videos with the title &quot;Doctor&quot; or &quot;Dr.&quot;, despite lacking a PhD qualification. In response, Zacharias said he had been &quot;conferred ten honorary doctorates&quot; and said further that &quot;in Ravi&#x27;s homeland of India… honorific titles are customary and are used frequently out of respect for elders, including by the RZIM India team when addressing Ravi.&quot; In a statement, RZIM indicated that &quot;[in] earlier years, &#x27;Dr.&#x27; did appear before Ravi&#x27;s name in some of our materials, including on our website, which is an appropriate and acceptable practice with honorary doctorates. However, because this practice can be contentious in certain circles, we no longer use it.&quot; &quot;Christianity Today&quot; reported that Zacharias&#x27; online biography was edited following the accusations regarding his credentials.

==Sexual abuse==
Both before and after his death in May 2020, multiple women alleged that Zacharias had engaged in habitual sexual misconduct and/or abuse. Ruth Malhotra, a former member of RZIM, claims that suspicions regarding Zacharias&#x27; behavior had existed during his lifetime but that RZIM employees were not allowed to investigate.

===Lori Anne Thompson&#x27;s lawsuit===
In April 2017, RZIM claimed that Canadians Lori Anne and Brad Thompson sent a demand letter to Zacharias requiring him to pay $5 million in exchange for them refraining from filing a lawsuit that would have accused him of impropriety. Their evidence included text exchanges, which included nude photos sent by Lori Anne Thompson to Zacharias. In response, Zacharias filed a lawsuit accusing the couple of extortion. The case was settled in November 2017 with a non-disclosure agreement. In a statement issued on December 3, 2017, Zacharias said, &quot;Let me state categorically that I never met [Thompson] alone, publicly or privately. The question is not whether I solicited or sent any illicit photos or messages to [her]—I did not, and there is no evidence to the contrary—but rather, whether I should have been a willing participant in any extended communication with a woman, not my wife. The answer, I can unequivocally say, is no, and I fully accept responsibility.&quot; He added that he had been &quot;absolutely faithful&quot; to his wife throughout their marriage, but acknowledged that he &quot;failed to exercise wise caution and to protect [himself] from even the appearance of impropriety&quot;.

===2020 abuse allegations and preliminary report===
Four months after Zacharias&#x27; death in 2020, three women who worked at two day spas he had co-owned in the Atlanta area came forward alleging that he had sexually harassed multiple massage therapists over the course of five years. According to &quot;Christianity Today&quot;, Zacharias masturbated in front of one of the women more than fifty times, requested explicit photos of her, and asked for sex on at least two occasions. Other women claimed that Zacharias had inappropriately groped or fondled them. A former business partner, Anurag Sharma, expressed regret at not stopping Zacharias and issued an apology to one of the alleged victims in the &quot;Christianity Today&quot; article.

RZIM initially denied the claims, but subsequently hired the law firm Miller &amp; Martin to conduct an investigation. Miller &amp; Martin engaged the services of a private investigation firm consisting of former federal law enforcement officers. The investigators interviewed more than fifty people, including more than a dozen massage therapists, and accessed data from four mobile devices used by Zacharias. On December 23, 2020, RZIM confirmed that the allegations were true and released a preliminary report from the investigation, which concluded:

===Full report and subsequent allegations===
On 11 February 2021, RZIM released the full results of its investigation, concluding that there was credible evidence that Zacharias had engaged in sexual misconduct. Accordingly, it was found that Zacharias solicited and received sexually explicit photos from more than 200 women who were in their early twenties until a few months before his death in 2020. According to investigators, Zacharias also used thousands of dollars of ministry funds which had been dedicated to a &quot;humanitarian effort&quot; to pay for massage therapists, providing them housing, schooling, and monthly support for extended periods of time.

In an article on the report, &quot;The Gospel Coalition&quot; noted that, 
On Zacharias&#x27; financial irregularities, &quot;The Gospel Coalition&quot; further noted from the report that RZIM would pay rent for Zacharias to stay at his own apartment while in Bangkok. They wrote, 

&quot;Christianity Today&quot; while reporting on the findings wrote that,
Vicki Blue maintains that Zacharias threatened to make her and her daughter Becca (who was also abused) miserable if she disclosed abuse. She stated, “Ravi kept talking about an anonymous donor that he could get limitless money from,” Blue said. “He said, ‘I can keep it going and make your life miserable until you die.’” Blue said initially Zacharias helped a great deal over her spiritual confusion and she thought he was, “the closest person to God other than Jesus.” Later Zacharias maintained his marriage was unsatisfactory and maintained Blue was “his soulmate” and he, “couldn’t survive without (her),” Blue maintains Zacharias put his hand into her groin and continued sexual advances after she said, “no”. Zacharias exposed himself and masturbated in front of her 50 to 100 times, he twice asked her to have sex but she refused. At the time Blue believed Zacharias was in love with her. She claims she was confused and vulnerable, stating, “It’s hard to explain. When someone gives you spiritual advice and you know everything he says about God is true, yet he’s also doing these things to you—it took years of therapy to realize I didn’t do anything wrong.” Blue was persuaded to open a spa with Zacharias as a co-owner and it failed financially. Blue maintains her daughter Becca said Zacharias molested her and six other spa therapists also complained he had done something perverted or molested them. “I realized then how much I had been used and manipulated,” Blue stated.

In an interview, Shirley Steward, a retired Ontario Provincial Police Officer, recounts that Ravi Zacharias, who was already a Christian minister at the time, pressured her to have an abortion after she became pregnant as a teenager by his brother Ramesh.

===Repercussions===
In their release of the full report, the board of RZIM stated that it was &quot;shocked and grieved by Ravi&#x27;s actions&quot;, and apologized to his victims: &quot;Words cannot come close to expressing the sorrow that we feel for what you have been through or the gratitude we feel for the bravery with which you have responded.&quot; Carson Weitnauer, a former RZIM employee, referred to Zacharias as &quot;one of [his generation&#x27;s] greatest frauds,&quot; a &quot;sexual predator&quot;, and a &quot;uniquely charismatic manipulator.&quot;

On 12 February 2021, Zacharias Trust, the UK branch of RZIM, decided to change its name and cut ties to the parent ministry, criticizing their response to the scandal as inadequate. By 24 February, RZIM Africa had suspended its operations while RZIM itself scaled back its website. On March 8, RZIM stated it would alter its name and remove all material related to Zacharias. As a result of falling donations, RZIM decided to make 60% of its workforce worldwide redundant and changed from running evangelists and apologists to making grants to other organizations, supporting evangelism and &quot;the prevention of and caring for victims of sexual abuse.&quot; In addition, RZIM Canada began winding down operations.

On 12 February 2021,The IWU Society of World Changers Committee unanimously voted to remove Ravi Zacharias from the Society of World Changers. 

On 19 February 2021, the Alliance World Fellowship revoked Zacharias&#x27; ordination after its own investigation confirmed a &quot;pattern of predatory behaviour.&quot; HarperCollins Christian Publishing, which includes Zondervan and Thomas Nelson, confirmed that it would no longer sell books by Zacharias and that it was working with Christian author Lee Strobel to remove Zacharias from other works.

In early August 2021, the Brad Sohn Law Firm filed a lawsuit on behalf of several former RZIM donors, including NFL player Derek Carrier and his wife Dora, seeking the return of donations they had given to RZIM between 2004 and 9 February 2021. The plaintiffs asserted that they donated to RZIM believing it was to finance spreading the Christian message when in fact the money financed Zacharias&#x27; predatory behavior. The case was settled and dismissed in April 2023, after the district court granted RZIM&#x27;s motion to strike the class in March 2023.

==Personal life==
On 7 May 1972, Zacharias married Margaret &quot;Margie&quot; Reynolds, whom he met at his church&#x27;s youth group. They had three children. He lived in Atlanta, Georgia.

In March 2020, Zacharias announced that he had been diagnosed with sarcoma of the sacrum, and on 19 May 2020, he died of that cancer at his home in Atlanta at the age of 74. Following his death, a number of high-profile Christians posted messages online detailing Zacharias&#x27;s influence upon them.

Then-White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany and then-U.S. Vice President Mike Pence were among many who expressed their sympathies for Zacharias following his death.

==Bibliography==
*&quot;A Shattered Visage: The Real Face of Atheism&quot; (1994, 2004) 
*&quot;Can Man Live Without God?&quot; (1994, 1996) 
* &quot;Deliver Us from Evil&quot; (1996, 1998) 
*&quot;Cries of the Heart&quot; (1998, 2002) 
*&quot;The Merchant and the Thief&quot; (1999; children&#x27;s) 
*&quot;The Broken Promise&quot; (2000; children&#x27;s) 
*&quot;Jesus Among Other Gods&quot; (2000, 2002) 
*&quot;Jesus Among Other Gods&quot; (youth ed., 2000) 
*&quot;The Lotus and the Cross: Jesus Talks with Buddha&quot; (2001) 
*&quot;Sense and Sensuality: Jesus Talks with Oscar Wilde&quot; (2002) 
*&quot;Light in the Shadow of Jihad: The Struggle For Truth&quot; (2002) 
*&quot;Recapture the Wonder&quot; (2003) 
*&quot;Is Your Church Ready?: Motivating Leaders to Live an Apologetic Life&quot; (2003) (Editor, with Norman Geisler) 
*&quot;Who Made God? And Answers to Over 100 Other Tough Questions of Faith&quot; (2003) (General editor, with Norman Geisler) 
*&quot;The Kingdom of the Cults&quot; (2003) (Editor) 
*&quot;I, Isaac Take Thee, Rebekah: Moving From Romance to Lasting Love&quot; (2004) 
*&quot;The Prince and the Prophet: Jesus Talks With Mohammed&quot; (copyright 2004, to be released posthumously) 
*&quot;The Lamb and the Führer: Jesus Talks with Hitler&quot; (2005) 
* , 205 pp.
* &quot;The Grand Weaver: How God Shapes Us Through the Events of Our Lives&quot; (2007) 
*&quot;Beyond Opinion: Living the Faith We Defend&quot; (2008) 
*&quot;The End of Reason: A Response to the New Atheists&quot; (2008) 
*&quot;Is There Not a Cause&quot; (2008; National Day of Prayer Feature Book) ; Audio CD .
*&quot;New Birth or Rebirth: Jesus Talks with Krishna&quot; (2008) 
*&quot;There is a Plan&quot; (2009) (excerpts from &quot;The Grand Weaver&quot;) 
*&quot;Has Christianity Failed You?&quot; (2010) 
*&quot;The Lotus and the Cross: Jesus Talks with Buddha&quot; (2010) 
*&quot;Why Jesus? Rediscovering His Truth in an Age of Mass Marketed Spirituality&quot; (2012) 
*&quot;The Lamb and the Führer&quot; (graphic novel, 2014) 
*&quot;Why Suffering? Finding Meaning and Comfort When Life Doesn&#x27;t Make Sense&quot; (2014) 
* with Vince Vitale, &quot;Jesus Among Secular Gods: The Countercultural Claims of Christ&quot; (2017) 
*&quot;The Logic of God: 52 Christian Essentials for the Heart and Mind&quot; (2019) 
* with Abdu Murray, &quot;Seeing Jesus from The East: A Fresh Look at History&#x27;s Most Influential Figure&quot; (2020) 

==References==
==External links==

* Official RZIM website
* Defending Ravi</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1399671" start="0" end="37" title="Ravi Zacharias" label="Frederick Antony Ravi Kumar Zacharias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="102" end="111" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="112" end="123" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="124" end="132" title="pastor" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="137" end="156" title="Christian apologetics" label="Christian apologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272897" start="460" end="493" title="Alliance World Fellowship" label="Christian and Missionary Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758212" start="510" end="520" title="Keswickian" label="Keswickian"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="560" end="568" title="holy orders" label="ordained"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="616" end="633" title="sexual harassment" label="sexual harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="772" end="778" title="Chennai" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="780" end="785" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="802" end="807" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="837" end="845" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="918" end="925" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1017" end="1022" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165928" start="1063" end="1070" title="John 14" label="John 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="1108" end="1126" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Thomas the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1403" end="1409" title="Jesus" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q13428647" start="1757" end="1775" title="Tyndale University" label="Tyndale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907864" start="1785" end="1791" title="Masters of Divinity" label="M.Div."/>
<link wikidata="Q7842863" start="1797" end="1829" title="Trinity International University" label="Trinity International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333011" start="1882" end="1893" title="Ridley Hall, Cambridge" label="Ridley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1897" end="1914" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="1915" end="1933" title="theological school" label="theological school"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="1937" end="1946" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23112" start="1948" end="1962" title="Cambridgeshire" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="2043" end="2056" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="2115" end="2124" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094740" start="2191" end="2200" title="Itinerant minister" label="itinerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272897" start="2219" end="2252" title="Alliance World Fellowship" label="Christian and Missionary Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="2377" end="2388" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732333" start="2500" end="2529" title="Alliance Theological Seminary" label="Alliance Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2600" end="2609" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307630" start="2617" end="2654" title="Billy Graham Evangelistic Association" label="Billy Graham Evangelistic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2980" end="2987" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="2989" end="2996" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="3166" end="3173" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="3175" end="3182" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="3239" end="3250" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3271" end="3277" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935120" start="3299" end="3331" title="Lenin Military-Political Academy" label="Lenin Military-Political Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="3502" end="3508" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="3722" end="3729" title="Atheism" label="Atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921385" start="3775" end="3788" title="Veritas Forum" label="Veritas Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3792" end="3810" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900199" start="3867" end="3873" title="Urbana (convention)" label="Urbana"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="4043" end="4064" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="4070" end="4092" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="4098" end="4108" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Penn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="4120" end="4167" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140759" start="4216" end="4236" title="Salt Lake Tabernacle" label="Salt Lake Tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4446" end="4456" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744640" start="5272" end="5296" title="The Kingdom of the Cults" label="The Kingdom of the Cults"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473527" start="5537" end="5568" title="National Religious Broadcasters" label="National Religious Broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="5757" end="5770" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q285816" start="5794" end="5804" title="Blacksburg, Virginia" label="Blacksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5806" end="5814" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188799" start="5870" end="5892" title="Virginia Tech massacre" label="Virginia Tech massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972140" start="5967" end="5989" title="National Day of Prayer" label="National Day of Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5993" end="6009" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6046" end="6060" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="6066" end="6079" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="6100" end="6106" title="Maputo, Mozambique" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="6268" end="6280" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402788" start="6370" end="6383" title="Wycliffe Hall, Oxford" label="Wycliffe Hall"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6578" end="6599" title="Manhattan Declaration: A Call of Christian Conscience" label="Manhattan Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6796" end="6806" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q324546" start="6830" end="6841" title="Marco Rubio" label="Marco Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="6869" end="6882" title="anti-abortion" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905923" start="6969" end="6977" title="Form 990" label="Form 990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="7109" end="7117" title="Consistency" label="coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49447" start="7118" end="7127" title="worldview" label="worldview"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="7190" end="7196" title="Abiogenesis" label="origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223675" start="7198" end="7213" title="meaning of life" label="meaning of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="7215" end="7223" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="7229" end="7236" title="destiny" label="destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="7269" end="7277" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="7307" end="7312" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="7424" end="7433" title="Logic" label="coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110409" start="7441" end="7460" title="Christian worldview" label="Christian worldview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="7578" end="7587" title="Christian apologetics" label="apologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603358" start="7865" end="7886" title="Existential crisis" label="existential questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="7892" end="7906" title="Apologetics" label="defense of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="8395" end="8418" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="8455" end="8475" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q726724" start="8571" end="8588" title="John Polkinghorne" label="John Polkinghorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="8641" end="8656" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8677" end="8716" title="Stephen Hawking#Religion and atheism" label="struggle between agnosticism and theism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977111" start="8854" end="8870" title="Romantic literature" label="Romantic writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642576" start="8984" end="9004" title="Oxbridge" label="Oxford and Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582585" start="9040" end="9059" title="Warren Throckmorton" label="Warren Throckmorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="9226" end="9243" title="Cambridge" label="city of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q680794" start="9412" end="9430" title="Christianity Today" label="Christianity Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618975" start="9601" end="9644" title="Doctor (title)" label="title &amp;quot;Doctor&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;Dr.&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="9664" end="9667" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458798" start="10577" end="10594" title="sexual misconduct" label="sexual misconduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="10602" end="10607" title="sexual abuse" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255040" start="10915" end="10928" title="demand letter" label="demand letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="11020" end="11027" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="11096" end="11109" title="text message" label="text exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="11242" end="11251" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053818" start="11298" end="11322" title="non-disclosure agreement" label="non-disclosure agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11290050" start="12181" end="12188" title="day spa" label="day spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="12260" end="12277" title="sexual harassment" label="sexually harassed"/>
<link wikidata="Q680794" start="12356" end="12374" title="Christianity Today" label="Christianity Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="12392" end="12403" title="masturbation" label="masturbated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859058" start="12869" end="12888" title="Miller &amp;amp; Martin" label="Miller &amp;amp; Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="12964" end="12985" title="private investigation" label="private investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="13176" end="13189" title="mobile device" label="mobile device"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737370" start="14059" end="14079" title="The Gospel Coalition" label="The Gospel Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207313" start="16622" end="16637" title="sexual predator" label="sexual predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="17731" end="17765" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins Christian Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073886" start="17782" end="17791" title="Zondervan" label="Zondervan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648991" start="17796" end="17809" title="Thomas Nelson (publisher)" label="Thomas Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q709789" start="17915" end="17926" title="Lee Strobel" label="Lee Strobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="18078" end="18081" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705835" start="18089" end="18102" title="Derek Carrier" label="Derek Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="18699" end="18706" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q223911" start="18785" end="18792" title="sarcoma" label="sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="18800" end="18806" title="sacrum" label="sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27733823" start="19054" end="19070" title="Kayleigh McEnany" label="Kayleigh McEnany"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="19100" end="19110" title="Mike Pence" label="Mike Pence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228146" wikidata="Q21492896" url="?curid=1228146" title="Hagedorn">
<text>Hagedorn is a surname of German language origin, meaning &quot;hawthorn&quot;. Notable people with the surname include:

* Bettina Hagedorn (born 1955), German politician
* Bob Hagedorn, US Democratic legislator from Colorado
* Brian Hagedorn, Wisconsin Judge
* Britt Hagedorn, German model and talk show host
* Edward Hagedorn (artist) (1902–1982), American artist
* Edward S. Hagedorn, mayor of the city Puerto Princesa in the Philippines
* Eric E. Hagedorn, American politician
* Erwin Hagedorn (1952–1972), German serial killer
* Friedrich Hagedorn, 19th-century German watercolorist
* Friedrich von Hagedorn, early 18th-century German poet
* Gregor Hagedorn (born 1965), German botanist
* Hans Christian Hagedorn, Danish biologist and pharmacologist with focus on insulin research
* Hermann Hagedorn (1882–1964), American author, poet and biographer
* Hermann Hagedorn (poet) (1884–1951), German poet
* Horace Hagedorn, American businessman and co-founder of the Miracle-Gro company
* Jessica Hagedorn, Filipino playwright, novelist, poet and musician living in New York
* Jim Hagedorn (1962–2022), American politician, member of the United States House of Representatives
* John Hagedorn, US associate professor of criminal justice
* Karl Hagedorn (1889–1969), German-born painter, naturalised British
* Karl Hagedorn (1922–2005), German-American painter
* Katherine Hagedorn (1961–2013), American academic
* Mary Hagedorn, US marine biologist
* Rolf Hagedorn, German physicist who spent most of his career at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland
* Tom Hagedorn (born 1943), US politician</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q832631" start="123" end="139" title="Bettina Hagedorn" label="Bettina Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932645" start="173" end="185" title="Bob Hagedorn" label="Bob Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063752" start="228" end="242" title="Brian Hagedorn" label="Brian Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107799" start="262" end="276" title="Britt Reinecke" label="Britt Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q24069087" start="312" end="336" title="Edward Hagedorn (artist)" label="Edward Hagedorn (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598165" start="368" end="386" title="Edward S. Hagedorn" label="Edward S. Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867411" start="443" end="459" title="Eric E. Hagedorn" label="Eric E. Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362986" start="483" end="497" title="Erwin Hagedorn" label="Erwin Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503816" start="534" end="552" title="Friedrich Hagedorn" label="Friedrich Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q63985" start="590" end="612" title="Friedrich von Hagedorn" label="Friedrich von Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28913574" start="647" end="662" title="Gregor Hagedorn" label="Gregor Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q901736" start="694" end="717" title="Hans Christian Hagedorn" label="Hans Christian Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611358" start="788" end="804" title="Hermann Hagedorn" label="Hermann Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q90860" start="857" end="880" title="Hermann Hagedorn (poet)" label="Hermann Hagedorn (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901793" start="908" end="923" title="Horace Hagedorn" label="Horace Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q465222" start="990" end="1006" title="Jessica Hagedorn" label="Jessica Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q58494532" start="1078" end="1090" title="Jim Hagedorn" label="Jim Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237204" start="1180" end="1193" title="John Hagedorn" label="John Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19509622" start="1240" end="1265" title="Karl Hagedorn (1889–1969)" label="Karl Hagedorn (1889–1969)"/>
<link wikidata="Q238708" start="1310" end="1335" title="Karl Hagedorn (1922–2005)" label="Karl Hagedorn (1922–2005)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993044" start="1363" end="1381" title="Katherine Hagedorn" label="Katherine Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247008" start="1415" end="1428" title="Mary Hagedorn" label="Mary Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q103622" start="1452" end="1465" title="Rolf Hagedorn" label="Rolf Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="1516" end="1520" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1524" end="1530" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1532" end="1543" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704699" start="1546" end="1558" title="Tom Hagedorn" label="Tom Hagedorn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228148" wikidata="Q6252565" url="?curid=1228148" title="John Perie">
<text>John Perie VC (1831 – 17 September 1874) was a Scottish recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.

==Details==

Perie was born in Gartly, north-west of Aberdeen on 7 April 1821.

Perie was approximately 25 years old, and a sapper in the Royal Sappers and Miners, British Army during the Crimean War when the following deed took place for which he was awarded the VC.
On 18 June 1855 during the Siege of Sevastopol, Sapper Perie showed conspicuous gallantry, with a lieutenant (Gerald Graham) in leading a ladder party at the assault on the Redan. He also volunteered to go with the lieutenant to help bring in a wounded sailor lying in the open, even though he was himself suffering from a musket wound in the side.

He died at 69 East North Street in Aberdeen on 17 September 1874 and was buried in the &quot;Strangers Land&quot; (communal paupers grave) of St Peter&#x27;s Cemetery in north Aberdeen.

==The medal==
His Victoria Cross is displayed at the Royal Engineers Museum in Chatham, Kent.

==Family==

He was married to Isabella Howie (1834–1901) and had four children, most of whom began spelling their name as &quot;Pirie&quot;.

==References==

*Monuments to Courage (David Harvey, 1999)
*The Register of the Victoria Cross (This England, 1997)
*The Sapper VCs (Gerald Napier, 1998)
*Scotland&#x27;s Forgotten Valour (Graham Ross, 1995)

==External links==
*Royal Engineers Museum Sappers VCs
*Location of grave and VC medal &quot;(Grampian)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6252565" start="0" end="10" title="John Perie" label="John Perie"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="11" end="13" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="47" end="55" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="73" end="87" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="202" end="214" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524417" start="255" end="261" title="Gartly" label="Gartly"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="277" end="285" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="348" end="354" title="sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969488" start="362" end="386" title="Royal Sappers and Miners" label="Royal Sappers and Miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="388" end="400" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="412" end="423" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q815216" start="519" end="538" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1854–1855)" label="Siege of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509889" start="602" end="615" title="Gerald Graham" label="Gerald Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374153" start="1082" end="1104" title="Royal Engineers Museum" label="Royal Engineers Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q729006" start="1108" end="1115" title="Chatham, Kent" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="1117" end="1121" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264386" start="1283" end="1303" title="Monuments to Courage" label="Monuments to Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760066" start="1326" end="1360" title="The Register of the Victoria Cross" label="The Register of the Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="1383" end="1397" title="The Sapper VCs" label="The Sapper VCs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228152" wikidata="Q3117517" url="?curid=1228152" title="Wet season">
<text>Thewet season (sometimes called the rainy season or monsoon season) is the time of year when most of a region&#x27;s average annual rainfall occurs. Generally, the season lasts at least one month. The term green season is also sometimes used as a euphemism by tourist authorities. Areas with wet seasons are dispersed across portions of the tropics and subtropics.

Under the Köppen climate classification, for tropical climates, a wet season month is defined as a month where average precipitation is or more. In contrast to areas with savanna climates and monsoon regimes, Mediterranean climates have wet winters and dry summers. Dry and rainy months are characteristic of tropical seasonal forests: in contrast to tropical rainforests, which do not have dry or wet seasons, since their rainfall is equally distributed throughout the year. Some areas with pronounced rainy seasons will see a break in rainfall mid-season, when the Intertropical Convergence Zone or monsoon trough moves to higher latitudes in the middle of the warm season.

When the wet season occurs during a warm season, or summer, precipitation falls mainly during the late afternoon and early evening. In the wet season, air quality improves, fresh water quality improves, and vegetation grows substantially, leading to crop yields late in the season. Rivers overflow their banks, and some animals retreat to higher ground. Soil nutrients diminish and erosion increases. The incidence of malaria and dengue increases in areas where the rainy season coincides with high temperatures, particularly in tropical areas. Some animals have adaptation and survival strategies for the wet season. Often, the previous dry season leads to food shortages in the wet season, as the crops have yet to mature. Crops which can be successfully planted during the wet or rainy season are cassava, maize, groundnut, millet, rice and yam.
The temperate counterpart to the tropical wet season is spring or autumn.

==Character of the rainfall==
In areas where the heavy rainfall is associated with a wind shift, the wet season is known as the monsoon season. Many tropical and subtropical climates experience monsoon rainfall patterns. Rainfall in the wet season is mainly due to daytime heating, which leads to diurnal thunderstorm activity within a pre-existing moist airmass , so the rain mainly falls in late afternoon and early evening in savanna and monsoon regions.

Much of the total rainfall each day occurs in the first minutes of the downpour, before the storms mature into their stratiform stage. Most places have only one wet season, but areas of the tropics can have two wet seasons, because the monsoon trough, or Intertropical Convergence Zone, can pass over locations in the tropics twice per year. However, since rain forests have rainfall spread evenly through the year, they do not have a wet season.

==Areas affected==
Areas with a savanna climate in Sub-Saharan Africa, such as Ghana, Burkina Faso, Darfur, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Botswana have a distinct rainy season. Also subtropical areas like Florida, South and Southeast Texas, and southern Louisiana in the United States have a rainy season. Monsoon regions include the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia (including Indonesia and Philippines), northern sections of Australia, Polynesia, Central America, western and southern Mexico, the Desert Southwest of the United States, southern Guyana, and northeast Brazil.

Northern Guyana has two wet seasons: one in early spring and the other in early winter. In western Africa, there are two rainy seasons across southern sections, but only one across the north. Within the Mediterranean climate regime, the west coast of the United States, the southwest coast of Australia and South Africa, the Mediterranean coastline of Italy, Spain, Greece, Lebanon, Syria, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, and Turkey, as well as areas further inland in Western Asia which include Jordan, Northern Iraq and most parts of Iran, experience a wet season in the winter months. Similarly, the wet season in the Negev Desert of Israel extends from October through May. At the boundary between the Mediterranean and monsoon climates lies the Sonoran Desert, which receives the two rainy seasons associated with each climate regime.

The wet season is known by many different local names throughout the world. For example, in Mexico it is known as &quot;storm season&quot;. Different names are given to the various short &quot;seasons&quot; of the year by the First Nations of Northern Australia: the wet season typically experienced there from December to March is called &quot;Gudjewg&quot;. The precise meaning of the word is disputed, although it is widely accepted to relate to the severe thunderstorms, flooding, and abundant vegetation growth commonly experienced at this time.
== Effects ==
In tropical areas, when the monsoon arrives, high daytime high temperatures drop and overnight low temperatures increase, thus reducing diurnal temperature variation. During the wet season, a combination of heavy rainfall and, in some places such as Hong Kong, an onshore wind, improve air quality.

In Brazil, the wet season is correlated with weaker trade winds off the ocean. The pH level of water becomes more balanced due to the charging of local aquifers during the wet season. Water also softens, as the concentration of dissolved materials reduces during the rainy season. Erosion is also increased during rainy periods.

Arroyos that are dry at other times of the year fill with runoff, in some cases with water as deep as . Leaching of soils during periods of heavy rainfall depletes nutrients. The higher runoff from land masses affects nearby ocean areas, which are more stratified, or less mixed, due to stronger surface currents forced by the heavy rainfall runoff.

===Floods===
High rainfall can cause widespread flooding, which can lead to landslides and mudflows in mountainous areas. Such floods cause rivers to burst their banks and submerge homes. The Ghaggar-Hakra River, which only flows during India&#x27;s monsoon season, can flood and severely damage local crops. Floods can be exacerbated by fires that occurred during the previous dry season, which cause soils which are sandy or composed of loam to become hydrophobic, or water repellent. In various ways governments may help people deal with wet season floods. Flood plain mapping identifies which areas are more prone to flooding. Instructions on controlling erosion through outreach are also provided by telephone or the internet.

== Life adaptations ==
===Humans===
The wet season is the main period of vegetation growth within the Savanna climate regime. However, this also means that wet season is a time for food shortages before crops reach their full maturity. This causes seasonal weight changes for people in developing countries, with a drop occurring during the wet season until the time of the first harvest, when weights rebound. Malaria incidence increases during periods of high temperature and heavy rainfall.

===Animals===
Cows calve, or give birth, at the beginning of the wet season. The onset of the rainy season signals the departure of the monarch butterfly from Mexico. Tropical species of butterflies show larger dot markings on their wings to fend off possible predators and are more active during the wet season than the dry season. Within the tropics and warmer areas of the subtropics, decreased salinity of near shore wetlands due to the rains causes an increase in crocodile nesting. Other species, such as the arroyo toad, spawn within the couple of months after the seasonal rains. Armadillos and rattlesnakes seek higher ground.

== See also ==
* Season of the Inundation (Akhet)
* East Asian rainy season
* Dry season

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="3" end="13" title="Wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="36" end="48" title="Wet season" label="rainy season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="52" end="66" title="Wet season" label="monsoon season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="132" end="140" title="rainfall" label="rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="247" end="256" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="341" end="348" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="353" end="363" title="subtropics" label="subtropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="376" end="405" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="411" end="427" title="tropical climate" label="tropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="537" end="544" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="558" end="565" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="575" end="596" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582968" start="675" end="699" title="tropical seasonal forest" label="tropical seasonal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="717" end="736" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="933" end="963" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244298" start="967" end="981" title="monsoon trough" label="monsoon trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="1095" end="1101" title="summer" label="summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="1103" end="1116" title="precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="1194" end="1205" title="air quality" label="air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q625376" start="1222" end="1235" title="water quality" label="water quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="1250" end="1260" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1397" end="1401" title="Soil" label="Soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="1461" end="1468" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="1681" end="1691" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="1843" end="1850" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1852" end="1857" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="1859" end="1868" title="peanut" label="groundnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="1870" end="1876" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="1878" end="1882" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="1887" end="1890" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="1896" end="1905" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="1948" end="1954" title="Spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="1958" end="1964" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="2095" end="2102" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="2681" end="2711" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="2906" end="2913" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="2925" end="2943" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2953" end="2958" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="2960" end="2972" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="2974" end="2980" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="2982" end="2989" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="2991" end="2999" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="3005" end="3013" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="3072" end="3079" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="3081" end="3086" title="South Texas" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985389" start="3091" end="3100" title="Southeast Texas" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="3121" end="3130" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3138" end="3151" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="3201" end="3220" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="3222" end="3236" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3248" end="3257" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3262" end="3273" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3297" end="3306" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="3308" end="3317" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="3319" end="3334" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="3357" end="3363" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="3417" end="3423" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="3439" end="3445" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="3457" end="3463" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="3773" end="3786" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="4064" end="4076" title="Negev Desert" label="Negev Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="4080" end="4086" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="4193" end="4207" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017944" start="4527" end="4545" title="Northern Australia" label="Northern Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="4985" end="5014" title="diurnal temperature variation" label="diurnal temperature variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="5099" end="5108" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="5135" end="5146" title="air quality" label="air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="5201" end="5212" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="5232" end="5234" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="5301" end="5308" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q373315" start="5479" end="5486" title="Arroyo (watercourse)" label="Arroyos"/>
<link wikidata="Q122911643" start="5732" end="5742" title="Ocean stratification" label="stratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q798422" start="6022" end="6041" title="Ghaggar-Hakra River" label="Ghaggar-Hakra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131303" start="6269" end="6273" title="loam" label="loam"/>
<link wikidata="Q212398" start="7194" end="7211" title="monarch butterfly" label="monarch butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="7245" end="7256" title="butterfly" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="7379" end="7389" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28030852" start="7573" end="7584" title="arroyo toad" label="arroyo toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="7646" end="7655" title="Armadillo" label="Armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282840" start="7661" end="7672" title="rattlesnake" label="rattlesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q770568" start="7712" end="7736" title="Season of the Inundation" label="Season of the Inundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q658486" start="7747" end="7770" title="East Asian rainy season" label="East Asian rainy season"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="7773" end="7783" title="Dry season" label="Dry season"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228157" wikidata="Q6911720" url="?curid=1228157" title="Morgan John Rhys">
<text>Morgan John Rhys, also Rhees (8 December 1760 – 7 December 1804) was a Welsh radical evangelical Baptist minister. He preached the principles of the French Revolution, against slavery, and in favour of the reform of parliament.

==Life==
Morgan John Rhys was a Welsh radical evangelical Baptist minister. He preached the principles of the French Revolution, against slavery, and in favor of the reform of parliament

In 1794 he grew tired of the repression in Britain and emigrated to America where he established a Welsh colony, Cambria. He bought land in the Allegheny Mountains of Pennsylvania from Dr. Benjamin Rush and founded the town of Beula, which to his dismay, never became a fully realized endeavor and died promptly within a decade of its founding (1796–1804). Despite the town&#x27;s short lifespan, while it was in full bloom in the early years, Rhys established his own religious denomination and a newspaper, &quot;The Western Sky&quot;. After emigrating to America he changed his surname to Rhees. He vied desperately to the state and even federal government that there be a county in Pennsylvania called Cambria, and that his town of Beula ought to be the county seat. When in 1804 the Pennsylvania state government carved out Cambria County, Beula lost the vote to become its seat by one, instead, the nearby town of Ebensburg – originally part of Beula – became the county seat. Rhys died two weeks after the verdict was released.

He moved to Somerset County in 1799 and died there in 1804.

== Descendants ==
Morgan Rhees&#x27; second son, via his wife Anne Loxley (a daughter of Benjamin Loxley), Benjamin Rush Rhees (1798 –1831) was named after Morgan&#x27;s friend and benefactor Benjamin Rush. He would become a prominent physician and one of the founders and first faculty members of Jefferson Medical College.

He was also the great-grandfather of (Benjamin) Rush Rhees (1860–1939), the third president of the University of Rochester and, in turn, great-great-grandfather of Wittgensteinian philosopher Rush Rhees. Morgan Rhees was also the great-grandfather of Nicholas Murray Butler, President of Columbia University.

==References==

==Further reading==
* V. Gagermeier, Joseph, &quot;A Civilized Mountain: The Story of Ebensburg&quot; (2021)
*J. Evans, &quot;Morgan John Rhys a&#x27;i Amserau&quot; (1935)
* Gwyn Alf Williams, &quot;The Search for Beulah Land&quot; (1980)
* E. Wyn James,&#x27; &quot;Seren Wib Olau&quot;: Gweledigaeth a Chenhadaeth Morgan John Rhys (1760–1804)&#x27;, &quot;Trafodion Cymdeithas Hanes y Bedyddwyr&quot; (2007), pp. 5–37. ISSN 1462-9429
* E. Wyn James, &#x27;Morgan John Rhys a Chaethwasiaeth Americanaidd&#x27;, in &quot;Canu Caeth: Y Cymry a&#x27;r Affro-Americaniaid&quot;, ed. Daniel G. Williams (Llandysul: Gwasg Gomer, 2010), 2–25. .
* E. Wyn James, &#x27;Welsh Ballads and American Slavery&#x27;, &quot;The Welsh Journal of Religious History&quot;, 2 (2007), pp. 59–86. ISSN 0967-3938.

==External links==
*Morgan J. Rhees papers, 1794-1968 at Columbia University
*http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/special-collections/subject-guides/welsh-ballads/slavery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6911720" start="0" end="16" title="Morgan John Rhys" label="Morgan John Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911720" start="23" end="28" title="Morgan John Rhys" label="Rhees"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="97" end="104" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="149" end="166" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="176" end="183" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="485" end="492" title="United States" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256168" start="530" end="537" title="Cambria, Pennsylvania" label="Cambria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141373" start="561" end="580" title="Allegheny Mountains" label="Allegheny Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="584" end="596" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="602" end="619" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Dr. Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q107534911" start="644" end="649" title="Beula, Pennsylvania" label="Beula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130214" start="1337" end="1346" title="Ebensburg, Pennsylvania" label="Ebensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q490908" start="1465" end="1480" title="Somerset County, Pennsylvania" label="Somerset County"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741608" start="1603" end="1618" title="Benjamin Loxley" label="Benjamin Loxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="1706" end="1719" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471216" start="1812" end="1837" title="Jefferson Medical College" label="Jefferson Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889188" start="1877" end="1898" title="Benjamin Rush Rhees" label="(Benjamin) Rush Rhees"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="1939" end="1962" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090271" start="2032" end="2042" title="Rush Rhees" label="Rush Rhees"/>
<link wikidata="Q271517" start="2091" end="2113" title="Nicholas Murray Butler" label="Nicholas Murray Butler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228163" wikidata="Q7873874" url="?curid=1228163" title="USS Sassacus (1862)">
<text>The first USS &quot;Sassacus&quot;, a wooden, double-ended, sidewheel steamer in commission in the United States Navy from 1863 to 1865. She saw service in the American Civil War.

==Construction and commissioning==
&quot;Sassacus&quot; was launched on 23 December 1862 by the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery, Maine, sponsored by Miss Wilhelmina G. Lambert. &quot;Sassacus&quot; was commissioned at the Boston Navy Yard in Boston, Massachusetts, on 5 October 1863 with Lieutenant Commander Francis A. Roe in command.

==Operational history==

===Blockade duty===

That day, the new steamer got underway for trials at sea and returned to Boston for repairs. Later, en route to Hampton Roads to join the North Atlantic Blockading Squadron, the ship suffered mechanical difficulty and was detained at the Washington Navy Yard for repairs from 19 November 1863 to 22 January 1864. When she finally reached Hampton Roads late in January, the double-ender was assigned to the outer blockade of Wilmington, North Carolina, and stationed off Cape Lookout Shoals to intercept inward-bound blockade runners attempting to slip through the net of Union ships.

On 1 February, &quot;Sassacus&quot; found the new and fast steamer, &quot;Wild Dayrell&quot;, near New Topsail Inlet, North Carolina, where the blockade runner had gone aground and discharged much of her cargo. The Federal double-ender, later aided by , tried for three days to refloat the prize. During their efforts to salvage the steamer, the crews were harassed by Confederate riflemen who were eventually driven off by fire from the Union ships. Finally, parties from the blockaders set the ship ablaze and destroyed her by shelling.

At daybreak on 4 February, lookouts on &quot;Sassacus&quot; spotted black smoke to the northwest, and the double-ender started out in pursuit. About noon, she was within range of the chase and opened fire. The fleeing blockade runner headed for New Inlet, North Carolina, and ran aground. There, her crew set fire to their ship, left her engine running, and fled. A boarding party from &quot;Sassacus&quot; reached the steamer about one o&#x27;clock and found her to be the paddle wheeler &quot;Nutfield&quot;, inward bound from Bermuda: &quot;one of the last and best steamers out of the Thames.&quot;

&quot;Sassacus&quot; rescued the runner&#x27;s purser, the sole survivor from one of &quot;Nutfield&#x27;s&quot; capsized boats. He reported that during her flight, his ship had jettisoned a battery of eight Whitworth rifled guns and a large quantity of pig lead. &quot;Sassacus&quot; seized about 600 new rifled muskets from Austria and England which were still on board. Meanwhile, &quot;Sassacus&quot; and &quot;Florida&quot;, which again offered assistance, attempted to refloat the prize. When it was evident that the ship could not be freed, the Union sailors set her on fire and riddled her hull with solid shot fired at her waterline.

After learning of &quot;Sassacus&#x27;s&quot; performance on blockade duty, her squadron commander, Rear Admiral Samuel Phillips Lee, reported to United States Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles, &quot;The &quot;Sassacus&quot; had done well... I congratulate you on the success of this class [of ship]... they&#x27;ll beat the Clyders.
===Albemarle Sound===

In March, &quot;Sassacus&quot; returned to Hampton Roads for repairs and then proceeded to the Washington Navy Yard to add two 12 pounder Dahlgren rifles to her battery. She departed Washington, D.C., on 15 April, and left Hampton Roads a week later for duty in the North Carolina sounds where, on 19 April, the ironclad ram CSS &quot;Albemarle&quot; had spearheaded a joint Confederate sea/land offensive, sinking Union double-ender , and helping to wrest Plymouth, North Carolina, from Union hands. On 26 April, &quot;Sassacus&quot; crossed the bar into North Carolina&#x27;s inland waters and was assigned to Albemarle Sound, where other United States Navy ships awaited the reappearance of the dreaded Southern ram. &quot;Albemarle&quot;, accompanied by troop-carrying steamers CSS &quot;Cotton Plant&quot; and CSS &quot;Bombshell&quot;, reemerged from Roanoke Run on the afternoon of 5 May bent on attacking New Bern, North Carolina. The Union ships in the vicinity slowly fell back while the Union transport &quot;Trumpeter&quot; raced away to carry word of the Southern ram&#x27;s advance to Captain Melancton Smith, the senior Union Naval officer in the sounds. Smith in , followed by &quot;Sassacus&quot;, and , immediately got underway and dashed toward Confederate Captain James W. Cooke&#x27;s little task force. Soon after &quot;Albemarle&quot; opened fire, &quot;Sassacus&quot;, &quot;Mattabesett&quot; and &quot;Wyalusing&quot; concentrated their fire on &quot;Bombshell&quot; and forced the little steamer to surrender. Meanwhile, &quot;Cotton Plant&quot; withdrew up the Roanoke River. Then Commander Roe &quot;ordered full steam and open throttle&quot; and headed &quot;Sassacus&quot; straight for the ram. &quot;Sassacus&quot; struck &quot;Albemarle&quot;&#x27;s starboard broadside. The double-ender was damaged by the collision and by a shot from the ram which hit her starboard boiler. Escaping steam killed one fireman outright and scalded others who died in the next few days. &quot;Albemarle&quot; suffered only superficial damage.

For about ten minutes, the ships were locked together and engulfed in steam, while &quot;Sassacus&quot; attempted to penetrate deeper into her adversary, and &quot;Albemarle&quot; struggled to pull free. Bluejackets on the double-ender threw grenades at the ironclad&#x27;s deck hatch despite musketry from the ram. &quot;Sassacus&quot; starboard wheel spun across &quot;Albemarle&quot;&#x27;s stern, badly damaging itself as it smashed a launch and other gear on the ram&#x27;s deck. In the Union ship&#x27;s engine room, First Assistant Engineer James H. Hobby, ignoring all-but-lethal burns, struggled to maintain power. As the ram wrenched free, the Federal gunners, blanketed in scalding vapor, manned their pieces and sent salvo after salvo at the tough iron casement which protected the Southern ship.

For more than three hours, the Union warships struggled to destroy &quot;Albemarle&quot; without seriously damaging their tough-hided opponent. As dusk approached, the ram slipped away from the melee and retired up the Roanoke.

===James River===

&quot;Sassacus&quot;, operating with only jury-rig repairs, remained in the sounds for over six weeks struggling to help maintain the Union&#x27;s tenuous grasp on eastern North Carolina. Then, steaming stern first to minimize the pressure on her battered bow, she headed for the James River, where Union strength afloat was needed by General Ulysses S. Grant in his drive toward Richmond, Virginia. The ship reached Newport News, Virginia on 22 June. The next day, &quot;although sadly yet honorably mutilated,&quot; she ascended the river and reported for duty. The ship operated on the James through the summer, from time to time engaging riflemen along the river banks. In September, she finally sailed north for overdue repairs, reaching Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on 1864-09-06.

===Fort Fisher===

Early in November, &quot;Sassacus&quot; returned to Hampton Roads where preparations were underway for a joint Army-Navy expedition against Fort Fisher, which protected Wilmington, the Confederacy&#x27;s last major blockade-running center. During the ensuing weeks, the double-ender performed blockade duty off that strategic port and assisted the United States Coast Survey in the vicinity of the mouth of the Cape Fear River to obtain topographic intelligence for the forthcoming operations.

The U.S. Navy had long wanted to move against Wilmington, but the Army had always found other uses for the troops necessary to take that strong Confederate fortification. Army reluctance had been dispelled by Major General Benjamin F. Butler&#x27;s fascination with a plan to destroy Fort Fisher by detonating an explosive-filled ship as close as possible to the fortress. Although Union naval leaders had little faith in the effectiveness of this plan, they readily cooperated in its implementation, hoping to thereby secure Army cooperation.

The screw steamer was selected as the powder ship, taken to Hampton Roads, stripped, and partially laden with explosives. On 13 December, &quot;Sassacus&quot; took &quot;Louisiana&quot; into tow and pulled her to Beaufort, North Carolina where she took on additional explosives. &quot;Sassacus&quot;, accompanied by Admiral David Dixon Porter&#x27;s fleet, then got underway and towed the fully loaded &quot;Louisiana&quot; to the mouth of the Cape Fear, arriving off Fort Fisher on 18 December. There, for five days, bad weather prevented from towing the giant bomb into position for detonation. Finally, on the night of 23–24 December, &quot;Wilderness&quot; managed to get &quot;Louisiana&quot; within 200 to 300 yards of the shore. At 1:18 am, a great blast shook and lighted the area for many miles, but left Fort Fisher undamaged.

The task of leveling the Confederate works was left to naval gunfire, and &quot;Sassacus&quot; readily joined in the bombardment which began at daylight on Christmas Eve and was maintained throughout the day. That night, the wooden ships withdrew to anchor in deeper waters, and Porter&#x27;s ironclads continued harassing fire during the darkness. On Christmas morning, the wooden ships reformed their battle line and opened fire at 10:30. In the afternoon, troops landed; but, after receiving a pessimistic report on a reconnaissance of the fortress, General Butler ordered his troops to reembark on their transports. During the next two days, while laboring to return the last of the troops to ships, &quot;Sassacus&quot;&#x27;s launch and second cutter were both damaged in the heavy surf, abandoned on the beach under orders from Brigadier General Newton Martin Curtis, and later destroyed.

Disappointed by Butler&#x27;s indecisive leadership, Admiral Porter managed to get General Grant to commit the Army to a prompt return to Fort Fisher. The new task force, containing a reinforced Army contingent commanded by Major General Alfred Terry, arrived at Beaufort on 8 January 1865 but was held up there by bad weather. The ships got underway again on 12 January.

The next day, &quot;Sassacus&quot; joined in the pre-invasion bombardment, and then, as her boats were landing troops, shelled the woods ahead of the Union skirmish line. On 14 January, she continued the barrage while her boats and working parties landed artillery and provisions for the Army and also helped to replenish the monitors&#x27; magazines.

On 15 January, the ship landed a party of 37 volunteers from her crew to join a naval assault force. Although Confederate defenders repulsed the ensuing spirited attack by sailors and marines storming Fort Fisher&#x27;s seaward wall, in doing so, they neglected to defend adequately the opposite side of the stronghold and allowed Terry&#x27;s troops to enter from the beach along the Cape Fear. That night, after the Southern garrison had surrendered, two men of the &quot;Sassacus&quot; party were killed by a magazine explosion, swelling the double-ender&#x27;s casualty list for the operation to three killed and three wounded.

===Late and post war service===

For more than a month, &quot;Sassacus&quot; fought with Porter against Southern fortifications up the Cape Fear, and was on hand for the fall of Fort Anderson and Fort Strong. During operations against the latter, she was hit three times, once by a shot below her waterline which caused heavy leaking. Late in February, the durable double-ender was ordered back to the James River to support Grant as he closed his stranglehold on the southern capital. After the Confederacy collapsed, &quot;Sassacus&quot; cruised in the Chesapeake Bay to prevent any possible attempt of conspirators in the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln to escape by sea. Upon her return to Hampton Roads on 2 May, the ship, in need of extensive repairs, was ordered north. She sailed for Philadelphia on the evening of 4 May. &quot;Sassacus&quot; was decommissioned and was laid up at the Philadelphia Navy Yard on 13 May 1865. She was sold there on 28 August 1868 to John Roach.

==See also==
*Union Navy
*Ships captured in the American Civil War

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7873874" start="10" end="28" title="USS Sassacus (1862)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sassacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121471" start="60" end="69" title="Paddle steamer" label="sidewheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="70" end="77" title="Steamboat" label="steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="99" end="117" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="160" end="178" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="241" end="249" title="Ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778836" start="277" end="302" title="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard" label="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q973112" start="306" end="313" title="Kittery, Maine" label="Kittery"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="315" end="320" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497970" start="322" end="331" title="Ship sponsor" label="sponsored"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="388" end="400" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q894573" start="408" end="424" title="Boston Navy Yard" label="Boston Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="428" end="434" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="436" end="449" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983433" start="474" end="494" title="Lieutenant commander (United States)" label="Lieutenant Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q14573316" start="495" end="509" title="Francis A. Roe" label="Francis A. Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="510" end="520" title="Commanding officer" label="in command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="681" end="694" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493703" start="707" end="741" title="North Atlantic Blockading Squadron" label="North Atlantic Blockading Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637241" start="807" end="827" title="Washington Navy Yard" label="Washington Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="993" end="1019" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508107" start="1039" end="1051" title="Cape Lookout, North Carolina" label="Cape Lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1140" end="1145" title="United States" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825149" start="1253" end="1270" title="Topsail Island" label="New Topsail Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1523" end="1534" title="Confederate States" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17123628" start="1939" end="1948" title="New Inlet" label="New Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="2223" end="2230" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="2283" end="2289" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2624" end="2631" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="3042" end="3054" title="Rear Admiral" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218751" start="3055" end="3074" title="Samuel Phillips Lee" label="Samuel Phillips Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="3088" end="3123" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="United States Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303939" start="3124" end="3137" title="Gideon Welles" label="Gideon Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="3614" end="3622" title="ironclad" label="ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841788" start="3627" end="3652" title="CSS Albemarle" label="CSS &amp;quot;Albemarle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028307" start="3759" end="3783" title="Plymouth, North Carolina" label="Plymouth, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441345" start="3914" end="3929" title="Albemarle Sound" label="Albemarle Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3943" end="3961" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014277" start="4084" end="4112" title="CSS Cotton Plant" label="CSS &amp;quot;Cotton Plant&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014269" start="4117" end="4142" title="CSS Bombshell" label="CSS &amp;quot;Bombshell&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002490" start="4215" end="4239" title="New Bern, North Carolina" label="New Bern, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="4401" end="4408" title="Captain (U.S. Navy)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811209" start="4409" end="4424" title="Melancton Smith (1810-1893)" label="Melancton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q576960" start="4586" end="4600" title="James W. Cooke" label="James W. Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584933" start="4890" end="4903" title="Roanoke River" label="Roanoke River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870201" start="5908" end="5922" title="James H. Hobby" label="James H. Hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="6698" end="6709" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="6761" end="6777" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q256931" start="7363" end="7374" title="Fort Fisher" label="Fort Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q103439667" start="7571" end="7597" title="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey" label="United States Coast Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034421" start="7634" end="7649" title="Cape Fear River" label="Cape Fear River"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="7660" end="7671" title="Topography" label="topographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="7927" end="7940" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q817488" start="7941" end="7959" title="Benjamin Butler (politician)" label="Benjamin F. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q813374" start="8476" end="8500" title="Beaufort, North Carolina" label="Beaufort, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="8579" end="8586" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q387130" start="8587" end="8605" title="David Dixon Porter" label="David Dixon Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="9936" end="9953" title="Brigadier General" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219094" start="9954" end="9974" title="Newton Martin Curtis" label="Newton Martin Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="10222" end="10235" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q722473" start="10236" end="10248" title="Alfred Terry" label="Alfred Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q137823" start="10697" end="10704" title="monitor (warship)" label="monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470729" start="11535" end="11548" title="Fort Anderson (North Carolina)" label="Fort Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472138" start="11553" end="11564" title="Fort Strong" label="Fort Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="11912" end="11926" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="11999" end="12008" title="U.S. President" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="12009" end="12024" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="12261" end="12283" title="Philadelphia Navy Yard" label="Philadelphia Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255029" start="12340" end="12350" title="John Roach (shipbuilder)" label="John Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550003" start="12367" end="12377" title="Union Navy" label="Union Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12379" end="12419" title="List of ships captured in the 19th century#American Civil War" label="Ships captured in the American Civil War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228167" wikidata="Q837907" url="?curid=1228167" title="Teledyne DALSA">
<text>Teledyne DALSA (formerly DALSA Corporation) is a Canadian company specializing in the design and manufacture of specialized electronic imaging components (image sensors, cameras, frame grabbers, imaging software) as well as specialized semiconductor fabrication (MEMS, high voltage ASICs). Teledyne DALSA is part of the Teledyne Imaging group, the leading-edge imaging companies aligned under the Teledyne umbrella.

== History ==
The company was founded in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada in 1980 by imaging pioneer Savvas Chamberlain, a former professor in electrical engineering at the University of Waterloo. It originally concentrated in developing and generating charge-coupled device (CCD) image sensor technology.

The company was capitalised in November 1984 and was publicly listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange in May 1996.

It has grown into an industry leader in semiconductor technology, employing as of 2011 approximately 1000 individuals worldwide and earning revenues of more than $200 million. Headquarters remain in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, but the company has expanded operations into Billerica, Massachusetts; Santa Clara, California; Bromont and Montreal, Quebec; Eindhoven and Enschede, Netherlands, in addition to sales offices in Germany, Japan, and China. 

DALSA was acquired by Teledyne in February 2011.

== Technology and applications ==
The company designs and manufactures digital imaging products for industrial, scientific, and medical applications, including semiconductor wafer inspection, printed circuit inspection, general machine vision, digital radiography, medium format photography, aerial photogrammetry, and astronomy. Notably, many of the image sensors employed in NASA’s &quot;Spirit&quot; (2004), &quot;Opportunity&quot; (2004), and &quot;Curiosity&quot; (2011) Mars Rovers were manufactured by DALSA.

DALSA is one of few industrial digital camera producers that has a vertically integrated supply chain. In 2002, Dalsa bought the Bromont semiconductor wafer foundry from Zarlink Semiconductor Inc. DALSA owns the wafer forge where many of its imaging sensors are manufactured and is one of the few manufacturers offering both CCD and CMOS sensors.

In 2005 DALSA acquired Canadian frame grabber and camera manufacturer Coreco (based in Montreal). In doing so, Teledyne DALSA added software, acquisition and further gigabit Ethernet technology to its portfolio.

In 2003 DALSA introduced a digital cinema camera (the Origin camera system), but despite remarkable imaging performance the system was not a commercial success and the project was wound down in 2009. In 2007, it was redesigned to provide a better image output and was renamed the Dasla Origin II, later that same year the Evolution camera was also released.

In 2023, Teledyne DALSA announced the production of a new camera, the Linea2 4k Multispectral 5GigE.

== Recognition ==
In 2007, DALSA was named one of Canada&#x27;s Top 100 Employers, as published in Maclean&#x27;s magazine, one of a few manufacturing companies to receive this honour.

In 2010, Yole Développement named DALSA’s wafer foundry as &quot;the leading independent pure‐play MEMS foundry worldwide&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*Teledyne DALSA Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q837907" start="0" end="14" title="Teledyne DALSA" label="Teledyne DALSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440676" start="179" end="193" title="Frame grabber" label="frame grabbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q175561" start="263" end="267" title="Microelectromechanical systems" label="MEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="282" end="287" title="Application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASICs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696127" start="320" end="328" title="Teledyne Technologies" label="Teledyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q639408" start="458" end="475" title="Waterloo, Ontario" label="Waterloo, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428462" start="511" end="529" title="Savvas Chamberlain" label="Savvas Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="540" end="549" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="553" end="575" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="583" end="605" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="663" end="684" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q818723" start="793" end="815" title="Toronto Stock Exchange" label="Toronto Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="870" end="883" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q639408" start="1029" end="1046" title="Waterloo, Ontario" label="Waterloo, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="1101" end="1110" title="Billerica" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1112" end="1125" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159260" start="1127" end="1138" title="Santa Clara, California" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1140" end="1150" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q141983" start="1152" end="1159" title="Bromont" label="Bromont"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1164" end="1172" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1174" end="1180" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="1182" end="1191" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q10002" start="1196" end="1204" title="Enschede" label="Enschede"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1206" end="1217" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1251" end="1258" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1260" end="1265" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1271" end="1276" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696127" start="1302" end="1310" title="Teledyne" label="Teledyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425977" start="1558" end="1572" title="machine vision" label="machine vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="1582" end="1593" title="radiography" label="radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146074" start="1595" end="1620" title="Medium format (film)" label="medium format photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q190149" start="1629" end="1643" title="photogrammetry" label="photogrammetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q176276" start="1714" end="1732" title="Spirit rover" label="&amp;quot;Spirit&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193538" start="1741" end="1764" title="Opportunity rover" label="&amp;quot;Opportunity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48485" start="1777" end="1798" title="Curiosity rover" label="&amp;quot;Curiosity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="1914" end="1935" title="vertical integration" label="vertically integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="2059" end="2070" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="wafer forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="2172" end="2175" title="Charge-coupled device" label="CCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="2180" end="2184" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440676" start="2227" end="2240" title="frame grabber" label="frame grabber"/>
<link wikidata="Q761706" start="2435" end="2449" title="digital cinema" label="digital cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994638" start="2462" end="2475" title="Dalsa Origin" label="Origin camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029243" start="2919" end="2950" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Top 100 Employers" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Top 100 Employers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184850" start="2968" end="2982" title="Maclean&amp;#x27;s" label="Maclean&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228168" wikidata="Q171980" url="?curid=1228168" title="Alan Stacey">
<text>Alan Stacey (29 August 1933 – 19 June 1960) was a British racing driver. He began his association with Lotus when he built one of the MkVI kits then being offered by the company. Having raced this car he went on to build an Eleven, eventually campaigning it at Le Mans under the Team Lotus umbrella. During the following years he spent much time developing the Lotus Grand Prix cars, most notably the front-engined 16 and then the 18. He participated in seven Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 19 July 1958. He scored no championship points. He also participated in several non-championship Formula One races.

Stacey was an amputee, racing with an artificial lower right leg due to a motorcycle accident when he was 17.

== Sports cars ==

Stacey competed successfully in many sports car races driving Lotus cars, initially as a private entrant in his own car and later for Team Lotus. He drove with Peter Ashdown in a 1098cc Lotus Eleven in the 1957 24 Hours of Le Mans but they failed to finish. He drove a Lotus XV-Climax to victory at Aintree, in a July 1959 race for sports cars of 1400cc to two litres. His time was 37 minutes 39.4 seconds.

== Formula One ==
Stacey made his Formula One debut for Team Lotus at the 1958 British Grand Prix. He was promoted to a full-time role in 1960. Stacey&#x27;s best race came at the 1960 Dutch Grand Prix, where he ran third for a majority of the race, before retiring on lap 57 due to transmission failure.

Due to his disability, he had a motorcycle throttle on the gear-lever during his time at Team Lotus. Friend and journalist Jabby Crombac believed it put him at a considerable disadvantage at Formula One level, due to the more precise throttle control the cars needed compared to lower-formula cars.

Stacey&#x27;s driving was &quot;conservative&quot; according to one observer.

== Death ==

Stacey was killed during the 1960 Belgian Grand Prix, at Spa-Francorchamps, when he crashed at after being hit in the face by a bird on lap 25, while lying sixth in his Lotus 18-Climax (the same type Lotus as Stirling Moss, Jim Clark and Innes Ireland).

Stacey&#x27;s car went off the road on the inside of the fast, sweeping right-hand Burneville curve (the same corner where Moss crashed the previous day), climbed a waist-high embankment, penetrated of thick hedges, and fell into a field. Stacey died within a few minutes of Chris Bristow, and within a few hundred feet of that wreck. In a mid-1980s edition of &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot; magazine, Stacey&#x27;s friend and teammate Innes Ireland wrote an article about Stacey&#x27;s death, in which he stated some spectators claimed a bird had flown into Stacey&#x27;s face while he was approaching the curve, possibly knocking him unconscious, or even possibly killing him by breaking his neck or inflicting a fatal head injury, before the car crashed.

== More recently ==

Stacey&#x27;s original Lotus Mk VI was purchased from its owner by the Stacey Family and underwent complete, but sympathetic restoration in the hands of Stacey&#x27;s schoolfriend, VSCC, Bentley Drivers Club and Historic Grand Prix Drivers Association racer, Ian Bentall, who had originally helped construct the car. The Lotus is still in the hands of the Stacey Family where it makes occasional appearances on the track.

== Complete Formula One World Championship results ==
(key)
===Non-championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position)
(Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171980" start="0" end="11" title="Alan Stacey" label="Alan Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="58" end="71" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995183" start="134" end="138" title="Lotus 6" label="MkVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q507192" start="224" end="230" title="Lotus Eleven" label="Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="261" end="268" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="460" end="471" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="647" end="654" title="Amputation" label="amputee"/>
<link wikidata="Q173410" start="923" end="936" title="Peter Ashdown" label="Peter Ashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q216414" start="969" end="993" title="1957 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1957 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221467" start="1062" end="1069" title="Aintree Motor Racing Circuit" label="Aintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1205" end="1216" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="1227" end="1237" title="Team Lotus" label="Team Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q306218" start="1245" end="1268" title="1958 British Grand Prix" label="1958 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q69146" start="1309" end="1313" title="1960 Formula One season" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q423570" start="1351" end="1372" title="1960 Dutch Grand Prix" label="1960 Dutch Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="1566" end="1576" title="Team Lotus" label="Team Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q117582" start="1600" end="1613" title="Gérard Crombac" label="Jabby Crombac"/>
<link wikidata="Q20884" start="1898" end="1921" title="1960 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1960 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172851" start="1926" end="1943" title="Circuit de Spa-Francorchamps" label="Spa-Francorchamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q172700" start="2038" end="2046" title="Lotus 18" label="Lotus 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q173016" start="2047" end="2053" title="Coventry Climax" label="Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="2078" end="2091" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137" start="2093" end="2102" title="Jim Clark" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q173336" start="2107" end="2120" title="Innes Ireland" label="Innes Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172103" start="2399" end="2412" title="Chris Bristow" label="Chris Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781030" start="2491" end="2507" title="Road &amp;amp; Track" label="Road &amp;amp; Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q173336" start="2558" end="2571" title="Innes Ireland" label="Innes Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3380" end="3383" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3417" end="3420" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228170" wikidata="Q116272" url="?curid=1228170" title="Albert Scherrer">
<text>Albert Scherrer (28 February 1908 in Riehen – 5 July 1986 in Basel) was a racing driver from Switzerland. He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, the 1953 Swiss Grand Prix. He finished 16 laps down and unclassified, scoring no championship points.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q116272" start="0" end="15" title="Albert Scherrer" label="Albert Scherrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262" start="37" end="43" title="Riehen" label="Riehen"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="61" end="66" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="74" end="87" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="93" end="104" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="129" end="140" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173048" start="176" end="197" title="1953 Swiss Grand Prix" label="1953 Swiss Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="328" end="331" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228171" wikidata="Q173195" url="?curid=1228171" title="Alberto Uría">
<text>Alberto Uría (11 July 1924 – 4 December 1988), was a racing driver from Uruguay. He participated in two Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 16 January 1955. He entered two Argentine Grand Prix races as a privateer running a Maserati. He scored no championship points, his best finish being a shared sixth place with Óscar González in 1956.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
:&quot;* Indicates shared drive with Óscar González&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Profile on OldRacingCars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173195" start="0" end="12" title="Alberto Uría" label="Alberto Uría"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="53" end="66" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="72" end="79" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="104" end="115" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7854" start="192" end="212" title="Argentine Grand Prix" label="Argentine Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="244" end="252" title="Maserati in motorsport" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q173597" start="336" end="350" title="Óscar González (racing driver)" label="Óscar González"/>
<link wikidata="" start="414" end="417" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q173597" start="457" end="471" title="Óscar González (racing driver)" label="Óscar González"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228173" wikidata="Q172467" url="?curid=1228173" title="Aldo Gordini">
<text>Aldo Gordini (20 May 1921 – 28 January 1995) was a racing driver from France. Born in Bologna, Italy, he was the son of Amédée Gordini, owner of the French sports car manufacturer Gordini. Aldo worked for the family&#x27;s racing team as a mechanic and occasionally drove in Grand Prix motor racing events and Formula Two races.

He participated in one Formula One World Championship race on 1 July 1951 as well as one non-Championship Formula One race. That same year he also drove for the Gordini team at the 24 hours of Le Mans but fuel pump problems forced him out of the race.

Aldo Gordini died in Paris in 1995.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
===Non-Championship Formula One results===
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172467" start="0" end="12" title="Aldo Gordini" label="Aldo Gordini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="51" end="64" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="86" end="93" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407259" start="120" end="134" title="Amédée Gordini" label="Amédée Gordini"/>
<link wikidata="Q173222" start="180" end="187" title="Gordini" label="Gordini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="275" end="298" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="310" end="321" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="353" end="364" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="511" end="530" title="24 hours of Le Mans" label="24 hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="604" end="609" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="" start="673" end="676" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="723" end="726" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228175" wikidata="Q1653016" url="?curid=1228175" title="IAI Westwind">
<text>The IAI Westwind is a business jet initially produced by Aero Commander as the 1121 Jet Commander.

Powered by twin GE CJ610 turbojets, it first flew on January 27, 1963, and received its type certification on November 4, 1964, before the first delivery.
The program was bought by Israel Aircraft Industries (IAI) in 1968, which stretched it slightly into the 1123 Westwind, and then re-engined it with Garrett TFE731 turbofans into the 1124 Westwind.

The MTOW aircraft can carry up to 8 or 10 passengers, and 442 were produced until 1987.

==Development==



=== Aero Commander ===
The Westwind was originally designed in the United States by Aero Commander as a development of its twin-propeller namesake aircraft, first flying on January 27, 1963, as the Aero Commander 1121 Jet Commander.
After successful testing, the aircraft was put into series production with deliveries to customers beginning in early 1965.

After initial testing of the prototype, it was modified to production standard with an addition of 2.5 ft to the fuselage length and increased payload and maximum weights. The second prototype first flew on April 14, 1964, which was followed by the first production aircraft in November 1964. Type approval was awarded by the FAA in November, enabling the first customer delivery on January 11, 1965.

Shortly thereafter, Aero Commander was acquired by North American Rockwell. The Jet Commander created a problem, since Rockwell already had an executive jet of its own design, the Sabreliner, and could not keep both in production because of antitrust laws. Therefore, the company decided to sell off the rights to the Jet Commander, which were purchased by IAI in 1968.

=== Israel Aircraft Industries ===
Jet Commander production amounted to 150 aircraft in the United States and Israel before IAI undertook a series of modifications to create the 1123 Westwind. These included stretching the fuselage and increasing maximum takeoff, maximum landing, and maximum zero-fuel weights, with the wing modified to incorporate double-slotted flaps and drooped leading edges and tip tanks. The trimmable horizontal stabiliser was also modified to have increased span and more travel. Not long after the aircraft went into production, the original General Electric CJ610 turbojet engines were replaced by more fuel-efficient Garrett TFE731 turbofans Numerous airframe modifications also were made, such as drooped leading edges on the wings, a dorsal fin, revised engine pylons and nacelles, and further increases in maximum takeoff, maximum landing, and maximum zero-fuel weights. With improvements to a number of onboard systems incorporated, as well, these changes resulted in the 1124 Westwind delivered from 1976.

In 1976, in the wake of the terrorist takeover of the Savoy hotel in Tel Aviv, the Israeli Air Force decided to use the Westwind as the basis for a maritime patrol aircraft, which became known as the IAI Sea Scan. It had originally been developed to meet a requirement for the United States Coast Guard to replace the Grumman HU-16 Albatross, but they selected the Dassault Falcon instead.

In 1980, deliveries of the Model 1124A commenced; modifications included a new wing centre-section and the addition of winglets to the tips. The revamped aircraft was called the Westwind II, replacing the original design in production. IAI built its last Westwind in 1987, after a total of 442 Jet Commanders and Westwinds had been built, switching production to the Astra.

By 2018, 1980s Westwind 1124s were priced from $300,000 to $700,000.

==Design==
The Jet Commander/Westwind was of broadly conventional business jet arrangement, with two engines mounted in nacelles carried on the rear fuselage, but the wings were mounted halfway up the fuselage instead of the typical low-wing arrangement of aircraft in this class.

At FL310 and , the 1124 burns per hour, and at .

==Variants==

The 1122 Type Certificate was cancelled, the two airplanes manufactured have been converted to model 1123.
The 1124N Sea Scan is a maritime surveillance aircraft, and the 1124 was renamed Westwind I after the introduction of the 1124A Westwind II.
The 1121C is an unofficial designation for 1121 aircraft modified under a Supplemental Type Certificate with an increased all-up weight available from 1971.
The 1123 Westwind was stretched by .

==Operators==

===Civil operators===
===Military operators===
==Accidents and incidents==

*The Rockwell 1121 had 21 hull-loss accidents causing 45 fatalities, and the IAI 1124 had 25 hull-loss accidents causing 47 fatalities.
*The latest, on March 29, 2020, an air ambulance operated by Lionair, caught fire and exploded during take off at Manila Airport, killing all five passengers and three crew.

==Specifications (1124A Westwind II)==

==See also==

* Aero Commander 500
* British Aerospace 125 
* Hamburger Flugzeugbau HFB 320 Hansa Jet 
* Piaggio PD.808 
* Learjet 35/36 
* Cessna Citation III 

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1653016" start="4" end="16" title="IAI Westwind" label="IAI Westwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="22" end="34" title="business jet" label="business jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q381279" start="57" end="71" title="Aero Commander (aircraft manufacturer)" label="Aero Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653016" start="79" end="97" title="IAI Westwind" label="1121 Jet Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759471" start="116" end="124" title="General Electric CJ610" label="GE CJ610"/>
<link wikidata="Q876017" start="281" end="307" title="Israel Aircraft Industries" label="Israel Aircraft Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653016" start="360" end="373" title="IAI Westwind" label="1123 Westwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476206" start="403" end="417" title="Garrett TFE731" label="Garrett TFE731"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653016" start="437" end="450" title="IAI Westwind" label="1124 Westwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q938476" start="457" end="461" title="max takeoff weight" label="MTOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q381283" start="699" end="716" title="Aero Commander 500" label="namesake aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="1245" end="1248" title="FAA" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="1372" end="1395" title="Rockwell International" label="North American Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q844656" start="1501" end="1511" title="North American Sabreliner" label="Sabreliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="1562" end="1576" title="Competition law" label="antitrust laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116750" start="2108" end="2139" title="stabilator" label="trimmable horizontal stabiliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759471" start="2261" end="2292" title="General Electric CJ610" label="General Electric CJ610 turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476206" start="2338" end="2352" title="Garrett TFE731" label="Garrett TFE731"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="2353" end="2361" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468376" start="2761" end="2798" title="Savoy Hotel attack" label="terrorist takeover of the Savoy hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="2816" end="2833" title="Israeli Air Force" label="Israeli Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142879" start="3098" end="3113" title="Dassault Falcon" label="Dassault Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q691858" start="3243" end="3251" title="Wingtip device" label="winglets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877369" start="3491" end="3496" title="IAI Astra" label="Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27070220" start="3689" end="3696" title="nacelle" label="nacelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931405" start="4475" end="4484" title="hull-loss" label="hull-loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="4620" end="4633" title="air ambulance" label="air ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555481" start="4646" end="4653" title="Lionair (Philippines)" label="Lionair"/>
<link wikidata="Q86446" start="4699" end="4713" title="Manila Airport" label="Manila Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q381283" start="4816" end="4834" title="Aero Commander 500" label="Aero Commander 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591686" start="4837" end="4858" title="British Aerospace 125" label="British Aerospace 125"/>
<link wikidata="Q643927" start="4862" end="4901" title="Hamburger Flugzeugbau HFB 320 Hansa Jet" label="Hamburger Flugzeugbau HFB 320 Hansa Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520239" start="4905" end="4919" title="Piaggio PD.808" label="Piaggio PD.808"/>
<link wikidata="Q667988" start="4923" end="4936" title="Learjet 35/36" label="Learjet 35/36"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057324" start="4940" end="4959" title="Cessna Citation III" label="Cessna Citation III"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228177" wikidata="Q172545" url="?curid=1228177" title="Alessandro Pesenti-Rossi">
<text>Alessandro Pesenti-Rossi (born 31 August 1942) is a former racing driver from Italy, born in Bergamo. He participated in four Formula One World Championship Grands Prix with a privately entered Tyrrell, debuting on 1 August 1976. He scored no championship points, but managed to finish every race that he started.

Prior to his brief time in Formula One, Pesenti-Rossi was a regular race winner in Italian Formula Three, narrowly missing the 1975 title when the final race was abandoned due to rain as he was leading it. He lost the title to Luciano Pavesi by a single point. He also fielded a private March 742 in Formula Two in 1976 but with only moderate success, and he returned to Formula Two in 1977 after his four Grands Prix.

==Racing record==
===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One results===
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172545" start="0" end="24" title="Alessandro Pesenti-Rossi" label="Alessandro Pesenti-Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="59" end="72" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="93" end="100" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="126" end="137" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="194" end="201" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110061" start="398" end="419" title="Italian Formula Three" label="Italian Formula Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="615" end="626" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="" start="811" end="814" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="942" end="945" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228180" wikidata="Q172246" url="?curid=1228180" title="Àlex Soler-Roig">
<text>Àlex Soler-Roig i Janer (; born 29 October 1931) is a former racing driver from Barcelona, Spain. He participated in 10 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 19 April 1970, and scored no championship points. He also participated in several non-Championship Formula One races.

==Biography==
Son of Dr. Soler-Roig, Alex began his career with motorcycles before entering the world car racing, participating in rallies with Fiat and Porsche. His first victories came in 1958 at the Nuvolari trophy in Barcelona and the Rally Catalunya. This allowed him some sponsorship to enter the Monte Carlo Rally. In 1968 raced the 24 Hours of Le Mans with team Porsche driving a 907/6 Langheck and a year later in the 24 Hours of Daytona, where he led his class until his co-driver Rudy Lins had an accident. In the same year he finished 4th in the 12 Hours of Sebring with a Porsche 907. That same year enters the F2 championship driving a Lola, and in 1969 placed seventh in Barcelona Grand Prix in a Lotus F2 from Roy Winckelman Team led by Bernie Ecclestone. Achieved victories in several races with Jochen Rindt on the 6 Hours of Jarama and second in the 1000 km of Buenos Aires.

His first race in Formula 1 was at the 1970 Spanish Grand Prix with a Lotus 49. Race organisers limited the race to 16 starters, resulting in Soler-Roig failing to qualify, despite lapping only a tenth of a second slower than Mario Andretti. However, on race morning there was a suggestion that the non-qualifiers might be allowed to start after all, so their cars were placed on the grid, only for the organisers to stick to their original decision, removing Soler-Roig&#x27;s car from the grid as well as those of Jo Siffert and Andrea de Adamich. He subsequently participated at the Belgian Grand Prix, driving the Lotus 72 that was meant for Jochen Rindt. However, the car was not ready for Friday&#x27;s practice and he only managed to complete three laps in Saturday&#x27;s qualifying, and was therefore not allowed to start the race. His final Formula One outing for the season was another non-qualification at the French Grand Prix in a 49. He won the Spanish GT-Sport Championship that same year.

He started the 1971 season driving for the works March team, combining the Formula 1 Championship with the Spanish and German Touring Car Championships with Ford Capri. He won the Spanish Championship and finished fourth in Germany, but failed to finish any races in Formula 1.

Soler-Roig joined the Marlboro BRM F1 team for the 1972 season, but after a few races with problems in the car and the team, decided to spend the rest of the year racing the European Touring Car Championship with Ford, getting great results and victories in the 24 Hours of Spa, the 24 Hours of Paul Ricard, the 4 Hours of Zandvoort, 4 Hours of Jarama and the 3 Hours of Montjuich. His withdrawal from the world of competition occurred at the end of 1972, before his 41st birthday, to pursue his family business.

==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Complete Formula One non-Championship results===
(key)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172246" start="0" end="23" title="Àlex Soler-Roig" label="Àlex Soler-Roig i Janer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="61" end="74" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="80" end="89" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="91" end="96" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="120" end="131" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q216442" start="635" end="654" title="1968 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q216330" start="722" end="741" title="24 Hours of Daytona" label="24 Hours of Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="853" end="872" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q172724" start="1048" end="1065" title="Bernie Ecclestone" label="Bernie Ecclestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234" start="1108" end="1120" title="Jochen Rindt" label="Jochen Rindt"/>
<link wikidata="Q171709" start="1229" end="1252" title="1970 Spanish Grand Prix" label="1970 Spanish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172662" start="1260" end="1268" title="Lotus 49" label="Lotus 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="1416" end="1430" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q171531" start="1706" end="1716" title="Jo Siffert" label="Jo Siffert"/>
<link wikidata="Q173250" start="1721" end="1738" title="Andrea de Adamich" label="Andrea de Adamich"/>
<link wikidata="Q20902" start="1776" end="1794" title="1970 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234" start="1836" end="1848" title="Jochen Rindt" label="Jochen Rindt"/>
<link wikidata="Q171844" start="2112" end="2129" title="1970 French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="2246" end="2251" title="March Engineering" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="Q173012" start="2507" end="2510" title="BRM" label="BRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q216585" start="2738" end="2753" title="24 Hours of Spa" label="24 Hours of Spa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3064" end="3067" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3122" end="3125" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228182" wikidata="Q27787126" url="?curid=1228182" title="SICM">
<text>SICM is an abbreviation that may refer to:

* Scanning ion-conductance microscopy, a scanning probe microscopy technique that uses an electrode as the probe tip
* Society of Intensive Care Medicine, Singapore-based representative body for intensive care medicine
* Structure and Interpretation of Classical Mechanics, a classical mechanics textbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7430068" start="46" end="81" title="Scanning ion-conductance microscopy" label="Scanning ion-conductance microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456650" start="163" end="197" title="Society of Intensive Care Medicine" label="Society of Intensive Care Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625084" start="265" end="316" title="Structure and Interpretation of Classical Mechanics" label="Structure and Interpretation of Classical Mechanics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228184" wikidata="Q658123" url="?curid=1228184" title="Light-gas gun">
<text>The light-gas gun is an apparatus for physics experiments. It is a highly specialized gun designed to generate extremely high velocities. It is usually used to study high-speed impact phenomena (hypervelocity research), such as the formation of impact craters by meteorites or the erosion of materials by micrometeoroids. Some basic material research relies on projectile impact to create high pressure; such systems are capable of forcing liquid hydrogen into a metallic state.

==Operation==

A light-gas gun works on the same principle as a spring piston airgun. A large-diameter piston is used to force a gaseous working fluid through a smaller-diameter barrel containing the projectile to be accelerated. This reduction in diameter acts as a lever, increasing the speed while decreasing the pressure. In an airgun, the large piston is powered by a spring or compressed air, and the working fluid is atmospheric air.

In a light-gas gun, the piston is powered by a chemical reaction (usually gunpowder), and the working fluid is a lighter gas, such as helium or hydrogen (though helium is much safer to work with, hydrogen offers the best performance [as explained below] and causes less launch-tube erosion). One addition that a light-gas gun adds to the airgun is a rupture disk, which is a disk (usually metal) of carefully calibrated thickness designed to act as a valve. When the pressure builds up to the desired level behind the disk, the disk tears open, allowing the high-pressure, light gas to pass into the barrel. This ensures that the maximum amount of energy is available when the projectile begins moving.

The light-gas guns are typically divided into categories of single-stage and two-stage light gas gun. 

One such single-stage light gas gun is located at Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI. It had been used for studying polymers and metals in pressure regions up to 20 GPa. The light gas gun at Marquette was manufactured by PAI and delivered in 2015. It has two barrels: a 15 foot, two inch smooth bore and a 13 foot, two inch slotted bore. The slotted bore allows for pressure-shear loading and complex target-flyer interactions. The maximum working pressure is 10,000 psi which allows for a 200 g projectile to be launched up to 1,200 m/s. The target tank is generally configured for planar and inclined impact experiments. Soft catch systems are often used to recover materials for post-shot analysis. 

One particular light-gas gun used by NASA uses a modified 40mm cannon for power. The cannon uses gunpowder to propel a plastic (usually HDPE) piston down the cannon barrel, which is filled with high-pressure hydrogen gas. At the end of the cannon barrel is a conical section, leading down to the 5-mm barrel that fires the projectile. In this conical section is a stainless steel disk, approximately 2 mm thick, with an &quot;x&quot; pattern scored into the surface in the middle. When the hydrogen develops sufficient pressure to burst the scored section of the disk, the hydrogen flows through the hole and accelerates the projectile to a velocity of in a distance of about a meter.

NASA also operates light-gas guns with launch tube sizes ranging from to at Ames Research Center. Hazardous testing is conducted at White Sands Test Facility. These guns have been used in support of various missions beginning with Apollo program reentry studies in the 1960s and most recently for high-speed thermal imaging. Velocities ranging from 1 km/s up to 8.5 km/s can be achieved. The largest of these involves a diameter piston weighing more than to compress the hydrogen.
Arnold Air Force Base&#x27;s Range-G is the &quot;largest routinely operated two-stage, light-gas gun system in the United States&quot;. Range-G utilizes interchangeable launch tubes ranging from a bore diameter of to with a piston weighing up to . Projectile velocities can reach for the configuration and for the launcher configuration. The primary use of the range facilities at Arnold Air Force Base is the measurement of released kinetic energy upon projectile impact.

===Design physics===
The muzzle velocity of an airgun, firearm, or light-gas gun is limited by, but not limited to, the speed of sound in the working fluid—the air, burning gunpowder, or a light gas. Up to the speed of sound, thermodynamics provides a simple, approximate calculation approach: the projectile is accelerated by the pressure difference between its ends, and since such a pressure wave cannot propagate any faster than the speed of sound in the medium, thermodynamic analysis suggests that the muzzle velocity is limited to the speed of sound. However, beyond the speed of sound, the kinetic theory of gases, which determines the speed of sound, provides a more detailed analysis in terms of the gas particles that comprise the working fluid. Kinetic theory indicates that the velocity of the gas particles is Maxwell-Boltzmann distributed, with the velocity of a large fraction of the particles exceeding the speed of sound in the gas. That fraction of the gas can continue to apply pressure to and therefore accelerate the projectile beyond the speed of sound in diminishing amounts as the projectile&#x27;s speed increases.

The speed of sound in helium is about three times that in air, and in hydrogen 3.8 times that in air. The speed of sound also increases with the temperature of the fluid (but is independent of the pressure), so the heat formed by the compression of the working fluid serves to increase the maximum possible speed. Spring piston airguns increase the temperature of the air in the chamber by adiabatic heating; this raises the local speed of sound enough to overcome frictional and other efficiency losses and propel the projectile at more than the speed of sound in the ambient conditions.

===Hybrid electrothermal light-gas gun===
The hybrid electrothermal light-gas gun works on similar principles of the standard light-gas gun, but adds an electric arc to heat the light gas to a higher temperature and pressure than the piston alone. The arc is applied in the chamber containing the light gas, raising the temperature and pressure to the point where the gas both breaks the bursting disk and ignites the propellant behind the piston, which is perforated to allow ignition. The resulting combination of electrical heating and piston compression provide higher pressures and temperatures, resulting in more power and a higher potential speed than a standard light-gas gun.

===Impact profile===

When the projectile fired by a light-gas gun impacts its target, the pressure applied depends upon the mass of the projectile and the surface area, or cross-section, over which the impact force is distributed. Because air-launched projectiles experience friction with air molecules, drag increases proportionally to increased projectile surface area, which results in slower velocities the larger the surface area of a projectile is. As such, a dense and narrow projectile will apply more pressure overall than a light and wide one. Looking at constant cross-sectional projectiles, researchers have recently begun to vary their projectiles&#x27; density as a function of length. Since the projectiles travel at a known velocity, changes in density as a function of length have a predictable relationship to the impact pressure applied as a function of time. With materials in a wide range of densities (from tungsten powder to glass microspheres) applied in thin layers, carefully made projectiles can be used in constant-pressure experiments, or even controlled compression–expansion–compression sequences.

==See also==
* Combustion light-gas gun, a high-velocity gun that uses combusted gas as propellant.
* Ram accelerator, a high-velocity gun that uses different principles to achieve similar projectile velocities.
* Shock tube, a tool used to demonstrate the properties of very high speed gases.
* Voitenko compressor, a shaped charge driven device which uses hydrogen gas to accelerate thin disks up to about 40 km/s.
* Super High Altitude Research Project
* Space gun

==References==
== External links ==
* Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory&#x27;s gas gun
* QuickLaunch, aka TekLaunch, plans to commercialize a 1 km hydrogen gun to launch fuel to low Earth orbit
* Test Sequencer and high-speed camera controller with real-time reaction to hypervelocity events and trigger prediction capabilities</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q658123" start="4" end="17" title="Light-gas gun" label="light-gas gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851796" start="177" end="193" title="Ballistic impact" label="impact phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144223" start="195" end="208" title="hypervelocity" label="hypervelocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="245" end="258" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="263" end="272" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q589534" start="305" end="319" title="micrometeoroid" label="micrometeoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q622779" start="440" end="455" title="liquid hydrogen" label="liquid hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q428895" start="461" end="477" title="metallic hydrogen" label="a metallic state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="544" end="564" title="Air gun#Spring-piston" label="spring piston airgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="996" end="1005" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="1056" end="1062" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1066" end="1074" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q201839" start="1272" end="1284" title="rupture disk" label="rupture disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188370" start="1780" end="1800" title="Marquette University" label="Marquette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1802" end="1815" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee, WI"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2472" end="2476" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641430" start="2571" end="2575" title="High-density polyethylene" label="HDPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q181052" start="3197" end="3217" title="Ames Research Center" label="Ames Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q618540" start="3253" end="3278" title="White Sands Test Facility" label="White Sands Test Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="3352" end="3366" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863339" start="3602" end="3623" title="Arnold Air Force Base" label="Arnold Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651281" start="3631" end="3638" title="Range-G" label="Range-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q193427" start="4124" end="4130" title="airgun" label="airgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="4132" end="4139" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="4197" end="4211" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q200286" start="4675" end="4698" title="kinetic theory of gases" label="kinetic theory of gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q634965" start="4901" end="4930" title="Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution" label="Maxwell-Boltzmann distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q182453" start="5609" end="5626" title="Adiabatic process" label="adiabatic heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="6962" end="6967" title="Density" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="7425" end="7433" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567119" start="7444" end="7461" title="glass microsphere" label="glass microsphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950350" start="7641" end="7665" title="Combustion light-gas gun" label="Combustion light-gas gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288615" start="7728" end="7743" title="Ram accelerator" label="Ram accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352496" start="7840" end="7850" title="Shock tube" label="Shock tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939802" start="7922" end="7941" title="Voitenko compressor" label="Voitenko compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q284813" start="7945" end="7958" title="shaped charge" label="shaped charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7984" end="7992" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884205" start="8045" end="8081" title="Super High Altitude Research Project" label="Super High Altitude Research Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083758" start="8084" end="8093" title="Space gun" label="Space gun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228185" wikidata="Q172101" url="?curid=1228185" title="Alfonso de Portago">
<text>Alfonso Cabeza de Vaca y Leighton, 11th Marquess of Portago, GE (11 October 1928 – 12 May 1957), best known as Alfonso de Portago, was a Spanish aristocrat, racing and bobsleigh driver, jockey and pilot.

Born in London to a prominent family in the peerage of Spain, he was named after his godfather, King Alfonso XIII. His grandfather, the 9th Marquess of Portago, had been Mayor of Madrid, while his father, who was President of Puerta de Hierro and a prolific golfer, died of a heart attack while showering after a polo match. His mother, Olga Leighton, was an Irish nurse.

At age 17, Portago began displaying his flamboyant lifestyle by winning a $500 bet after flying a borrowed plane under London Tower Bridge. He twice rode the Grand National as &quot;gentleman rider&quot; and formed the first Spanish bobsleigh team with his cousins, finishing 4th in the 1956 Winter Olympics, missing the bronze medal by 0.14 seconds.

In 1953, he was introduced into the Scuderia Ferrari team, competing at the Carrera Panamericana, 1000 km Buenos Aires and several Grand Prix, including a win and second place at the 1956 Tour de France Automobile and 1956 British Grand Prix respectively.

His promising career was cut short in May 1957 after his renowned Ferrari 335 S crashed near the village of Guidizzolo when a tyre burst while driving along a dead straight road at in the 1957 running of the Mille Miglia, killing Portago, his navigator, and nine spectators. The young age of the marquess, who was 28 at the time of his death, combined with his status as a sex symbol, caused a shock amongst many. Several tributes and landmarks were named after him, most notably the &quot;Portago curve&quot; at Jarama racetrack.

The Marquess of Portago was seen by many as a true &quot;playboy&quot; of his time; &quot;a tall, handsome and wealthy Spanish aristocrat who captured everybody&#x27;s imagination&quot;. Gregor Grant famously said of him: &quot;a man like Portago appears only once in a generation, and it would probably be more accurate to say only once in a lifetime. The fellow does everything fabulously well. Never mind the driving, the steeplechasing, the bobsledding, the athletic side of things, never mind being fluent in 4 languages. (...) He could be the best bridge player in the world if he cared to try, he could certainly be a great soldier, and I suspect he could be a fine writer&quot;.

==Biography==

===Early life===

Portago was born in London, he was educated at Biarritz, in France. He became articulate in four languages, and spoke English with a distinctive British accent. Portago was heir to a respected title in Spain and a millionaire. Among his ancestors were explorer Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca. His father was Antonio Cabeza de Vaca, 10th Marquess of Portago, who died during half time at a polo match at a young age. His paternal grandfather was Vicente Cabeza de Vaca, 9th Marquess of Portago, mayor of Madrid. His mother was named Olga Leighton and was an Irish nurse. She also had a daughter named Sol, for Soledad, who married and became known as the Marchioness of Moratalla in racing circles. She died in 2017. Olga&#x27;s first husband, Frank Mackey was more than 40 years older than she was. He shot himself while terminally ill and left Olga an enormous fortune made as founder of Household Finance Corp. Portago was a first cousin of Vicente Sartorius, 4th Marquess of Mariño as well as José Luis de Vilallonga, 9th Marquess of Castellbell.

Portago was dark-haired and had freckles and blue eyes. He was 1.83 m (6 ft) tall and weighed 77 kg (170 Ibs). He famously won a bet at the age of 17 when he flew his plane beneath London Tower Bridge. He participated twice in the Grand National Steeplechase at Aintree as a &quot;gentleman jockey&quot;, although he found keeping his weight down to be a struggle.

===Race car driver===

Portago began racing sports cars in 1953 after his meeting with the Ferrari importer in the USA, Luigi Chinetti, who asked him to be his co-driver in the Carrera Panamericana. He later raced alone in a personal Ferrari Sport model at the 1954 1000 km Buenos Aires. Portago won six major races, including the Tour de France automobile race, the Grand Prix of Oporto, and the Nassau Governor&#x27;s Cup (twice). In Nassau, during the winter of 1956, Portago trailed the car ahead of him by centimeters while travelling at 240 km/h. Portago used his skill to avert careening into a crowd after the driver ahead of him touched his brakes and both cars went into a 180 m skid. Among sports car enthusiasts, Portago was known as a &quot;two-car man&quot;, because of the many burned-out brakes, clutches, transmissions, and wrecked cars for which he was responsible. He often needed several cars to finish a race.

He participated in five World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 1 July 1956. His best result was a second place at the 1956 British Grand Prix (a shared drive with Peter Collins), and scored a total of four championship points. In 1953 he raced with Chinetti in the Carrera Panamericana. During a sprint at Silverstone in 1955, Portago was thrown from his Ferrari while racing at 140 km/h after losing control on a patch of oil. He was hospitalized with a broken leg.

===Bobsleigh===


He also was a bobsleigh runner, recruiting several cousins in order to form Spain&#x27;s first bobsleigh team for the 1956 Winter Olympic Games in Cortina d&#x27;Ampezzo. He had had only two or three practice runs in Switzerland before buying a pair of sleds. With Portago steering, the two-man bob finished fourth to the surprise of the traditional teams, missing out on a medal by 0.16 seconds. He was introduced to bobsledding by an American from Beloit, Wisconsin, Edmund Nelson, whom he later teamed up with in order to win the Tour de France automobile race.

Portago also won a bronze medal in the two-man event at the 1957 FIBT World Championships in St. Moritz.

===Death===

He and his co-driver Edmund Nelson (1916-1957) were killed on 12 May 1957 in a crash during that year&#x27;s Mille Miglia, in a straight road section between Cerlongo and Guidizzolo, in the communal territory of Cavriana about 70 km from Brescia, the start and finish point of the event race. The wreck also claimed the lives of nine spectators, among them five children. Portago was apprehensive about competing in the Mille Miglia, a race he considered too dangerous, as he was concerned about the almost complete impossibility of knowing every corner (even with a navigator) and every possible road condition over 1,000 mi (1,600 km) of open public roads with very limited information on what to expect in the race. A tire blew on Portago&#x27;s third-place Ferrari 335 S causing it to spin into the crowd lining the highway. He was travelling at . The 335 hurtled over a canal on the left side of the road, then veered back across the canal, causing the deaths of nine onlookers in total. Two of the dead children were hit by a concrete highway milestone that was ripped from the ground by Portago&#x27;s car and thrown into the crowd. The bodies of Portago and Nelson were badly disfigured with Portago&#x27;s body being found underneath his own Ferrari, severed in two. A photograph dubbed &quot;The Kiss of Death&quot; shows actress Linda Christian kissing Portago at a stop just before his fatal crash.

As T.C. Browne wrote, &quot;The inevitable happened when Alfonso [...] de Portago stopped alongside the course, ran to the fence, kissed Linda Christian, ran back to his Ferrari and drove on to his destiny, killing himself, his co-driver, 10 spectators, and the Mille Miglia&quot;.

Once Portago commented, &quot;I won&#x27;t die in an accident. I&#x27;ll die of old age or be executed in some gross miscarriage of justice&quot;. Nelson countered this assertion, saying Portago would not live to be 30. According to Nelson, &quot;every time Portago comes in from a race the front of his car is wrinkled where he has been nudging people out of the way at 130 mph (210 km/h)&quot;.

==Legacy==

The Portago curve at the St. Moritz-Celerina Olympic Bobrun is named in his honor for his foundation&#x27;s efforts to renovate the lower portion of the track. A Portago curve (#9) is also shown on the Jarama motor racing circuit in Spain.

==Personal life==

In 1949, when he was only twenty, Portago married American former model Carroll McDaniel (by whom he had two children). McDaniel was several years older than Portago and they barely knew each other. She subsequently married the philanthropist Milton Petrie. One of Portago&#x27;s daughters is photographer Andrea Portago, who was on the June 1977 cover of Andy Warhol&#x27;s &quot;Interview&quot; magazine. His son, Anthony (1954–1990), was a stockbroker who married in 1973 (and divorced in 1978) Sorbonne-educated society fundraiser and costume and set designer Barbara, daughter of German nobleman Henrik von Schlubach, partner in Schlubach Exporting and Importing Company in Hamburg. His ex-wife Florence Van der Kemp (&quot;née&quot; Harris), was president of the Versailles-Claude Monet Foundation in New York and daughter of the late Rear Admiral Frederic R. Harris, of Washington and New York. Her stepfather, Gérald van der Kemp, was a curator who restored the Palace of Versailles. Barbara de Portago subsequently married, in 1984, actor and playwright Jason Harrison Grant; after their divorce she married in 1991 (divorced 1994) investment banker William James Tapert.

Supposedly, Carroll McDaniel and Alfonso de Portago were in the process of getting a divorce so he could legitimize his invalid Mexican marriage to fashion model Dorian Leigh (who had already aborted their first pregnancy in 1954 and then gave birth to their son Kim on 27 September 1955). Leigh was eleven years his senior. However, Portago was also dating actress Linda Christian, actor Tyrone Power&#x27;s ex-wife. 
== Complete Formula One World Championship results ==
(key) 
:&quot;† Indicates shared drive with Peter Collins&quot;
:&quot;* Indicates shared drive with José Froilán González&quot;

==Titles==
* 11th Marquess of Portago
** Grandee of Spain
* 13th Count of la Mejorada

== Heraldry ==
== In popular culture ==
===Film===
*Brazilian actor Gabriel Leone portrayed Portago in the 2023 biopic &quot;Ferrari&quot;.

==See also==
*Scuderia Ferrari

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

== External links ==

* The memorial at the site of the accident near Guidizzolo
* Sketch of the accident from the journal &quot;L&#x27;Automobile&quot; 19 May 1957
*Bobsleigh two-man world championship medalists since 1931</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172101" start="0" end="59" title="Alfonso de Portago" label="Alfonso Cabeza de Vaca y Leighton, 11th Marquess of Portago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="61" end="63" title="Grandee" label="GE"/>
<link wikidata="Q172101" start="111" end="129" title="Alfonso de Portago" label="Alfonso de Portago"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="168" end="177" title="bobsleigh" label="bobsleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q846750" start="186" end="192" title="jockey" label="jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554364" start="249" end="265" title="Spanish nobility" label="peerage of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="290" end="299" title="Godparent" label="godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q18363" start="306" end="318" title="Alfonso XIII of Spain" label="Alfonso XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161050" start="341" end="364" title="Vicente Cabeza de Vaca, 9th Marquess of Portago" label="9th Marquess of Portago"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078548" start="375" end="390" title="Mayor of Madrid" label="Mayor of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222977" start="431" end="447" title="Real Club de la Puerta de Hierro" label="Puerta de Hierro"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="518" end="522" title="Polo (sport)" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="697" end="716" title="Tower Bridge" label="London Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542651" start="736" end="750" title="Grand National" label="Grand National"/>
<link wikidata="Q9632" start="865" end="885" title="1956 Winter Olympics" label="1956 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="966" end="982" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044949" start="1006" end="1026" title="Carrera Panamericana" label="Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q164822" start="1028" end="1048" title="1000 km Buenos Aires" label="1000 km Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="1061" end="1071" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847992" start="1113" end="1143" title="Tour de France Automobile" label="1956 Tour de France Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q306196" start="1148" end="1171" title="1956 British Grand Prix" label="1956 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407674" start="1253" end="1266" title="Ferrari 335 S" label="Ferrari 335 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q42343" start="1295" end="1305" title="Guidizzolo" label="Guidizzolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14370281" start="1375" end="1387" title="1957 Mille Miglia" label="1957 running"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="1395" end="1407" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q330742" start="1560" end="1570" title="sex symbol" label="sex symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q172897" start="1700" end="1716" title="Circuito del Jarama" label="Jarama racetrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099032" start="1776" end="1783" title="Playboy lifestyle" label="playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606646" start="1906" end="1918" title="Gregor Grant" label="Gregor Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="2273" end="2279" title="Bridge (game)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2460" end="2466" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q132790" start="2487" end="2495" title="Biarritz" label="Biarritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2500" end="2506" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q250763" start="2701" end="2727" title="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca" label="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161050" start="2881" end="2928" title="Vicente Cabeza de Vaca y Fernández de Córdoba, Marquis of Portago" label="Vicente Cabeza de Vaca, 9th Marquess of Portago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5390732" start="3090" end="3114" title="Marquess of Moratalla" label="Marchioness of Moratalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444467" start="3179" end="3191" title="Frank Mackey" label="Frank Mackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635877" start="3325" end="3347" title="Household Finance Corp" label="Household Finance Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925200" start="3379" end="3420" title="Vicente Sartorius, 4th Marquess of Mariño" label="Vicente Sartorius, 4th Marquess of Mariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353516" start="3432" end="3484" title="José Luis de Vilallonga, 9th Marquess of Castellbell" label="José Luis de Vilallonga, 9th Marquess of Castellbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="3668" end="3687" title="Tower Bridge" label="London Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542651" start="3718" end="3745" title="Grand National Steeplechase" label="Grand National Steeplechase"/>
<link wikidata="Q174017" start="3749" end="3756" title="Aintree Racecourse" label="Aintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876144" start="3973" end="3987" title="Luigi Chinetti" label="Luigi Chinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044949" start="4030" end="4050" title="Carrera Panamericana" label="Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q164822" start="4119" end="4139" title="1000 km Buenos Aires" label="1000 km Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847992" start="4184" end="4198" title="Tour de France Automobile" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467" start="4289" end="4295" title="Nassau, Bahamas" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q306196" start="4920" end="4943" title="1956 British Grand Prix" label="1956 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171483" start="4965" end="4978" title="Peter Collins (racing driver)" label="Peter Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="5108" end="5119" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="5157" end="5164" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="5302" end="5311" title="bobsleigh" label="bobsleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9632" start="5406" end="5431" title="1956 Winter Olympic Games" label="1956 Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q41158" start="5435" end="5457" title="Cortina d&amp;#x27;Ampezzo" label="Cortina d&amp;#x27;Ampezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q816137" start="5738" end="5755" title="Beloit, Wisconsin" label="Beloit, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847992" start="5821" end="5846" title="Tour de France automobile" label="Tour de France automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q685478" start="5914" end="5943" title="FIBT World Championships 1957" label="1957 FIBT World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q68986" start="5947" end="5957" title="St. Moritz" label="St. Moritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14370281" start="6065" end="6094" title="1957 Mille Miglia" label="that year&amp;#x27;s Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42945" start="6131" end="6139" title="Cerlongo" label="Cerlongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42343" start="6144" end="6154" title="Guidizzolo" label="Guidizzolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42321" start="6185" end="6193" title="Cavriana" label="Cavriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="6211" end="6218" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407674" start="6734" end="6747" title="Ferrari 335 S" label="Ferrari 335 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q101246833" start="7275" end="7292" title="The Kiss of Death (1957)" label="The Kiss of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q236164" start="7313" end="7328" title="Linda Christian" label="Linda Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q685571" start="8103" end="8137" title="St. Moritz-Celerina Olympic Bobrun" label="St. Moritz-Celerina Olympic Bobrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q172897" start="8280" end="8307" title="Circuito Permanente del Jarama" label="Jarama motor racing circuit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8410" end="8426" title="Carroll McDaniel" label="Carroll McDaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861379" start="8581" end="8594" title="Milton Petrie" label="Milton Petrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="8694" end="8705" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="9017" end="9024" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="9308" end="9328" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610556" start="9668" end="9681" title="fashion model" label="fashion model"/>
<link wikidata="Q270426" start="9682" end="9694" title="Dorian Leigh" label="Dorian Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q309989" start="9909" end="9921" title="Tyrone Power" label="Tyrone Power"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9994" end="9997" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q171483" start="10037" end="10050" title="Peter Collins (racing driver)" label="Peter Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q171447" start="10094" end="10115" title="José Froilán González" label="José Froilán González"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000829" start="10141" end="10160" title="Marquess of Portago" label="Marquess of Portago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="10164" end="10180" title="Grandee of Spain" label="Grandee of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551665" start="10188" end="10208" title="Count of la Mejorada" label="Count of la Mejorada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25175966" start="10278" end="10291" title="Gabriel Leone" label="Gabriel Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q113043714" start="10335" end="10342" title="Ferrari (2023 film)" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="10365" end="10381" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228194" wikidata="Q1362732" url="?curid=1228194" title="South African Police Service">
<text>The South African Police Service (SAPS) is the national police force of the Republic of South Africa. Its 1,154 police stations in South Africa are divided according to the provincial borders, and a Provincial Commissioner is appointed in each province. The nine Provincial Commissioners report directly to the National Commissioner. The head office is in the Wachthuis Building in Pretoria.

The Constitution of South Africa lays down that the South African Police Service has a responsibility to prevent, combat and investigate crime, maintain public order, protect and secure the inhabitants of the Republic and their property, uphold and enforce the law, create a safe and secure environment for all people in South Africa, prevent anything that may threaten the safety or security of any community, investigate any crimes that threaten the safety or security of any community, ensure criminals are brought to justice and participate in efforts to address the causes of crime.

Amnesty International and others have expressed serious concerns about South African police brutality, including torture and extrajudicial killings.

==History==
===Colonial years===
The South African Police Service traces its origin to the Dutch Watch, a paramilitary organisation formed by settlers in the Cape Province in 1655 to protect civilians and to maintain law and order. In 1795, British officials assumed control over the Dutch Watch, and in 1825 established the Cape Constabulary (which became the Cape Town Police Force in 1840). In 1854, a police force was established in Durban which would become the Durban Borough Police, and in 1935 the Durban City Police (DCP). Act 3 of 1855 established the Frontier Armed and Mounted Police Force in the Eastern Cape, restyled as the Cape Mounted Riflemen in 1878.

===1913-1994===

The South African Police (SAP) was created after the establishment of the Union of South Africa in 1913. Four years later, the Mounted Riflemen&#x27;s Association relinquished its civilian responsibilities to the SAP as most of its riflemen left to serve in the First World War. The SAP and the military maintained a close relationship even after the SAP assumed permanent responsibility for domestic law and order in 1926. Police officials often called on the army for support in case of emergencies. During the Second World War, one SAP brigade served with the 2nd Infantry Division of the South African Army in North Africa.

When the National Party (NP) edged out its more liberal opponents in nationwide elections in 1948, the new government enacted legislation that strengthened the relationship between the police and the military. Police subsequently became heavily armed, especially when facing unruly or hostile crowds. The Police Act (No. 7) of 1958 broadened the mission of the SAP beyond conventional police functions, and allowed police to quell civil unrest and conduct counterinsurgency operations. The Police Amendment Act (No. 70) of 1965 allowed police to detain any person, receptacle, vehicle, aircraft, or premises within one mile of any national border, and to seize anything found without a warrant. This search-and-seize zone was extended to within eight miles of any border in 1979 and to the entire country in 1983.

===Post-apartheid (1994–present)===
The new Minister of Safety and Security, Sydney Mufamadi, obtained police training assistance from Zimbabwe, the United Kingdom, and Canada and proclaimed that racial tolerance and human rights would be central to police training in the future. By the end of 1995, the SAPS had incorporated the ten police agencies of the former homelands, and had reorganised at both national and provincial level.

The Investigative Psychology Unit (IPU), also referred to as Investigative Psychology Section (IPS), was founded by forensic psychologist Micki Pistorius in 1996. Elmarie Myburgh was a founding member It was then a division of the Serious and Violent Crimes Unit, later being moved to the Detective Service, and from June 2008 to the Criminal Record and Forensic Science Service (CRFSS). At that time, it comprised only three members at national head office level, led by Gerard Labuschagne.

==Organisation==
South African Police Service headquarters in located in Pretoria.
===Divisions===
, there were three Deputy National Commissioners, with each of these split into divisions as follows:
*Policing: 
**Visible Policing and Operations
**Protection and Security Services
*Crime Detection:
**Detective and Forensic Services
**Crime Intelligence
*Support Services
**Human Resource Management
**Human Resource Development
**Legal and Policy Services
**Technology Management Services

===Rank structure===
A new ranking system of the South African Police Service was adopted in April 2010. The change caused some controversy as new ranks like &quot;general&quot; and &quot;colonel&quot; have a military connotation. Furthermore, the new rank system mirrors the system used by the South African Police during the apartheid era. In 2009, Deputy Minister of Police Fikile Mbalula spoke of making the police a paramilitary force by changing the SAPS ranking system so that it would closely mirror the military ranking system. This created a significant amount of controversy from people critical of what they called the &quot;militarisation&quot; of the police.

The ranking system was amended in 2016. The role of regional police commissioner was introduced, with the rank of lieutenant general. The major and lieutenant ranks were eliminated, with lieutenants assuming the rank of captain and majors assuming the rank of lieutenant colonel.

====Current senior staff====

 the National Commissioner is Lt. Gen. Sehlahle Fannie Masemola, who was appointed on 31 March 2022. Leon Mbangwa is Chief of Staff.
====SAPS organisational profile ====



==Resources==
===Vehicles===
Through the early-1990s, the police were equipped with smoke and tear-gas dispensing vehicles, tank trucks with water cannons, vehicles that dispensed barbed wire or razor wire to cordon off areas, and a number of rotor and fixed wing aircraft for surveillance, ground force management, rapid deployment of Task Force and specialist teams to crime scenes and VIP personnel movements. The RG-12 &#x27;Nyala&#x27; is on the most commonly used armoured vehicle of the service. The Casspir Mine-Resistant Ambush Protected Vehicle is another notable vehicle used by the police. 
===Aviation===
, with the arrival of a new helicopter, the SAPS Air Wing operates a fleet of 34 aeroplanes and helicopters. The Air Wing has about 50 pilots and 300 other personnel.
====Fleet====
The SAPS Air Wing fleet consists of:

Airplanes
* 8 x Pilatus PC-6/B2-H4
* 1 x Beech King Air C90A
* 1 x Cessna 680 Citation Sovereign
* 1 x Pilatus PC-12/47
Helicopters
* 16 x Eurocopter AS350 B3
* 6 x Robinson R44
* 2 x McDonnell-Douglas 369E
* 1 x MBB Bk 117B1
===Firearms===

South African Police Service officers generally carry a Vektor Z88 9mm pistol and pepper spray. Each patrol car is usually also equipped a R5 rifle. To quell disturbances a variety of firearms are used, including BXP sub-machine gun, Musler 12 gauge shotgun (capable of firing anti-riot rubber bullets contained in standard 12 bore shotgun cartridges), as well as tear gas and pencil flares. The R1 rifle has been withdrawn from all front-line police armories since the mid-1990s, but is still used by elements of the Special Task Force. 

==Criticism and controversies==
===Administration===
Since the departure of democratic South Africa&#x27;s first National commissioner George Fivaz in January 2000, a number of successive commissioners have been unable to complete a single term in office, most implicated in and charged with misconduct.

The distribution of personnel has been controversial, with local legislators questioning why areas most in need of policing resources are being neglected. The department was criticised by the Western Cape Government for providing the lowest number personnel (adjusted for population) with a shortage of 2,392 officers, despite having the highest murder rate. This was the subject of the Khayelitsha Commission in 2012.

===Brutality and repression===

Amnesty International has expressed concerns about police brutality, including torture and extrajudicial killings, in South Africa. There has also been concern about brutal training methods for the police. According to Peter Jordi from the Wits Law Clinic &quot;[Police] Torture is spiralling out of control. It is happening everywhere.&quot; Brandon Edmonds argues that &quot;The cops prey on the poor in this country.&quot; Independent studies have confirmed that the SAPS has been used to repress peaceful marches. In April 2009, SAPS attempted to ban unFreedom Day and was implicated in support for September 2009 ANC mob that attacked the elected leadership of the shack settlement at Kennedy Road, Durban. Police officers have also been accused of excessive policing in Blikkiesdorp in Delft, Cape Town, by suppression of freedom and ordering illegal curfews.

In 2011, 630 police officers from Gauteng Province were arrested for fraud and corruption, rape and murder. An April 2012 editorial in &quot;The Times&quot; opined: &quot;It seems torture and outright violation of human rights is becoming the order of the day for some of our police officers and experts warn that the line between criminals and our law enforcement officers is &quot;blurred&quot;.&quot;

In February 2013, police in Daveyton, Gauteng were caught on video brutalising Mido Macia, a Mozambican taxi driver accused of parking illegally. Macia was handcuffed to a police van and dragged through the streets, later succumbing to his injuries. Eight police officers were arrested and later convicted of murder.

Three police officers were arrested for the controversial shooting of Nathaniel Julies, a 16 year-old boy with down syndrome, in Eldorado Park.

====Marikana massacre====

The Marikana Massacre, was a mass shooting that occurred when police broke up a gathering by striking Lonmin workers on a &#x27;koppie&#x27; (hilltop) near the Nkaneng shack settlement in Marikana on 16 August 2012. 34 miners were killed and 78 miners injured, causing anger and public outcry, fueled by reports that most of the victims were shot from behind and many shot far from police lines. It later emerged that the violence had actually started on 11 August when leaders from the National Union of Mineworkers opened fire on striking NUM members killing two. It is alleged that police did nothing in the aftermath thereby creating a situation in which workers felt that they would have to use other means to protect themselves. Between 12 and 14 August, approximately 8 more people were killed including two policemen and two security guards. It is the country&#x27;s deadliest incident between police and the civilian population since the Sharpeville Massacre of 1960, and has been referred to as a turning-point in post-1994 South Africa.

==Corruption==
On 10 September 2007 an arrest warrant was issued by the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) for National Police Commissioner Jackie Selebi (Interpol president from 2004 to 2008). On 23 September 2007, President Mbeki suspended NPA Head Vusi Pikoli, allegedly because of &quot;an irretrievable breakdown&quot; in the relationship between Pikoli and Justice Minister Brigitte Mabandla. However, journalists at the &quot;Mail and Guardian&quot; claim to have solid information supporting the widespread suspicion that President Mbeki suspended Pikoli as part of a bid to shield Police Commissioner Selebi. According to the &quot;Mail and Guardian&quot; on 5 October 2007 the NPA was investigating Selebi for corruption, fraud, racketeering and defeating the ends of justice.
Selebi was found guilty of corruption in July 2010, but not guilty of further charges of perverting the course of justice.

In February 2011 Bheki Cele was implicated in unlawful conduct and with a R500m lease agreement for the new police headquarters in Pretoria. In October 2011, President Jacob Zuma announced that Cele had been suspended pending an investigation into the agreement. After recommendation from a board of inquiry, Zuma dismissed Cele and announced that Riah Phiyega, the first female commissioner, would replace him.

In February 2018, SAPS Lieutenant-General Khomotso Phahlane, who was also former acting SAPS Commissioner, and his wife appeared in court on charges of fraud and corruption. On 30 July 2020, Phahlane was dismissed from the police after three years on suspension. The same day, he was found guilty of dishonest conduct.

On 12 July 2019, it was announced the five North West Province police officers were arrested during the week in three separate corruption cases. On 4 June 2020, six senior Gauteng police officers where among 14 people arrested on corruption charges. Two other senior officers, now retired, were arrested as well. Among the Guateng-based SAPS officers charged with corruption included three brigadiers and a retired SAPS Lieutenant General.

On 12 October 2020, Lieutenant-General Bonang Mgwenya, the country&#x27;s second-most senior police official, was arrested on charges of corruption, fraud, theft and money laundering involving about R200-million and afterwards appeared in Ridge Magistrates court. At the time of Mgwenya&#x27;s arrest, she and Phahlane were among 14 fellow officers who were charged with corruption. Mgwenya was suspended on 15 October 2020 and was dismissed from SAPS on 13 November 2020.

On 23 December 2020, four Cape Town police officers attached to the national border control unit at Cape Town International Airport were arrested for extorting money from Chinese businesses. 

On 23 December 2020, Peter Ntsime, Acting Deputy General Secretary of the South African Policing Union (SAPU), reported that Colonel Kamelash Dalip Singh, a senior SAPU policeman from the KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Anti-Corruption Unit, was arrested, and then released on bail, on a bribe charge. Ntsime criticised the arrest, stating Singh was at the forefront of arresting crooked police officers and was onto a big syndicate. Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (Hawks) spokesperson, Captain Simphiwe Mhlongo, said that undercover Hawks officers caught Singh red-handed accepting a R5,000 bribe.

On 28 December 2020, three law enforcement officers who were employed by the Emalahleni Municipality were arrested in Mpumalanga on corruption and bribery charges which involved allegations of not issuing standard fines to motorists who committed traffic violations, but instead extorting them for bribes.

In 2022, two criminal charges were lodged by the Independent Police Investigative Directorate against the National Police Commissioner Khehla Sitole for refusing to cooperate with its investigation into the murder of Charl Kinnear. Kinnear was a police intelligence officer investigating organised crime within the SAPS.

==List of former National Commissioners==











== Battle honours ==

Police units earned battle honours in both world wars and in border wars with Rhodesia.
===First World War===

===Second World War===

===Other===
== Notes ==
==References==
==See also==
* South African Police Service Occult-related Crimes Unit
* Hawks ( Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation / SAPS)
* South African Police Service Special Task Force
* Political repression in post-apartheid South Africa

==External links==

* South African Police Service
* South African Police Officers Memorial
* Directory of police stations in South Africa

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1362732" start="4" end="32" title="South African Police Service" label="South African Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362732" start="34" end="38" title="South African Police Service" label="SAPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="76" end="100" title="Republic of South Africa" label="Republic of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191093" start="173" end="191" title="Provinces of South Africa" label="provincial borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362732" start="311" end="332" title="South African Police Service" label="National Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="382" end="390" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60567" start="397" end="425" title="Constitution of South Africa" label="Constitution of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="982" end="1003" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="1067" end="1083" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="1290" end="1303" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="1493" end="1502" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="1569" end="1575" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="1741" end="1753" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304339" start="1824" end="1844" title="South African Police" label="South African Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="1894" end="1915" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2082" end="2097" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2333" end="2349" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633729" start="2383" end="2404" title="South African 2nd Infantry Division" label="2nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815399" start="2412" end="2430" title="South African Army" label="South African Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="2458" end="2472" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660048" start="3341" end="3356" title="Sydney Mufamadi" label="Sydney Mufamadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="3399" end="3407" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3413" end="3427" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3433" end="3439" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="3629" end="3638" title="bantustan" label="homelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11779520" start="3838" end="3853" title="Micki Pistorius" label="Micki Pistorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304339" start="4980" end="5000" title="South African Police" label="South African Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="5012" end="5021" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412305" start="5062" end="5076" title="Fikile Mbalula" label="Fikile Mbalula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5709" end="5733" title="Sehlahle Fannie Masemola" label="Sehlahle Fannie Masemola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770516" start="6260" end="6283" title="RG-12" label="RG-12 &amp;#x27;Nyala&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q923407" start="6350" end="6357" title="Casspir" label="Casspir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468807" start="6358" end="6397" title="MRAP" label="Mine-Resistant Ambush Protected Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q689011" start="6696" end="6714" title="Pilatus PC-6" label="Pilatus PC-6/B2-H4"/>
<link wikidata="Q665708" start="6721" end="6740" title="Beechcraft King Air" label="Beech King Air C90A"/>
<link wikidata="Q848809" start="6747" end="6776" title="Cessna 680 Citation Sovereign" label="Cessna 680 Citation Sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q685211" start="6783" end="6796" title="Pilatus PC-12" label="Pilatus PC-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q39668" start="6819" end="6838" title="Eurocopter AS350" label="Eurocopter AS350 B3"/>
<link wikidata="Q39675" start="6845" end="6857" title="Robinson R44" label="Robinson R44"/>
<link wikidata="Q848899" start="6864" end="6886" title="MD Helicopters MD 500" label="McDonnell-Douglas 369E"/>
<link wikidata="Q39893" start="6893" end="6905" title="MBB/Kawasaki BK 117" label="MBB Bk 117B1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907525" start="6993" end="6999" title="pistol" label="pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q622653" start="7004" end="7016" title="pepper spray" label="pepper spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138052" start="7061" end="7069" title="R4 assault rifle" label="R5 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468669" start="7135" end="7138" title="Milkor 9mm BXP Sub-Machine Gun" label="BXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="7286" end="7294" title="tear gas" label="tear gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492226" start="7440" end="7458" title="South African Police Service Special Task Force" label="Special Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065012" start="8154" end="8176" title="Khayelitsha Commission" label="Khayelitsha Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="8219" end="8240" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881918" start="8774" end="8787" title="unFreedom Day" label="unFreedom Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389677" start="8909" end="8929" title="Kennedy Road, Durban" label="Kennedy Road, Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926478" start="8995" end="9007" title="Blikkiesdorp" label="Blikkiesdorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614805" start="9011" end="9027" title="Delft, Cape Town" label="Delft, Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q133083" start="9120" end="9136" title="Gauteng Province" label="Gauteng Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769392" start="9227" end="9236" title="TimesLIVE" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642863" start="9519" end="9527" title="Daveyton" label="Daveyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993232" start="9570" end="9580" title="Murder of Mido Macia" label="Mido Macia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="9584" end="9594" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambican"/>
<link wikidata="Q99149382" start="9867" end="9895" title="shooting of Nathaniel Julies" label="shooting of Nathaniel Julies"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="9920" end="9933" title="down syndrome" label="down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610667" start="9938" end="9952" title="Eldorado Park, Gauteng" label="Eldorado Park."/>
<link wikidata="Q1203203" start="9985" end="10002" title="Marikana Massacre" label="Marikana Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q505917" start="10083" end="10089" title="Lonmin" label="Lonmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014271" start="10169" end="10177" title="Marikana" label="Marikana"/>
<link wikidata="Q518753" start="10928" end="10948" title="Sharpeville Massacre" label="Sharpeville Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677635" start="11172" end="11185" title="Jackie Selebi" label="Jackie Selebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="11187" end="11195" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509944" start="11465" end="11482" title="Mail and Guardian" label="Mail and Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901661" start="11960" end="11970" title="Bheki Cele" label="Bheki Cele"/>
<link wikidata="Q57282" start="12111" end="12121" title="Jacob Zuma" label="Jacob Zuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744000" start="12291" end="12303" title="Riah Phiyega" label="Riah Phiyega"/>
<link wikidata="Q133083" start="12848" end="12855" title="Gauteng" label="Gauteng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13156" end="13170" title="Bonang Mgwenya" label="Bonang Mgwenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="13617" end="13626" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565775" start="13858" end="13886" title="South African Policing Union" label="South African Policing Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125492" start="14211" end="14255" title="Hawks (South Africa)" label="Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347801" start="14468" end="14491" title="Emalahleni Local Municipality, Mpumalanga" label="Emalahleni Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965036" start="14747" end="14791" title="Independent Police Investigative Directorate" label="Independent Police Investigative Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14833" end="14846" title="Khehla Sitole" label="Khehla Sitole"/>
<link wikidata="Q110921623" start="14905" end="14928" title="murder of Charl Kinnear" label="murder of Charl Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="15173" end="15181" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15284" end="15339" title="Satanic Panic (South Africa)#SAPS Occult Related Crimes Unit" label="South African Police Service Occult-related Crimes Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125492" start="15342" end="15402" title="Hawks (South Africa)" label="Hawks ( Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation / SAPS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492226" start="15405" end="15452" title="South African Police Service Special Task Force" label="South African Police Service Special Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225105" start="15455" end="15506" title="Political repression in post-apartheid South Africa" label="Political repression in post-apartheid South Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228198" wikidata="Q173247" url="?curid=1228198" title="Alfonso Thiele">
<text>Alfonso Thiele (5 April 1920 – 15 July 1986) was an Italian and American racing driver. He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, on 4 September 1960. He scored no championship points. Most of his career was spent in sports car racing.

==World War II==
During World War II Thiele was a captain of the Office of Strategic Services of Italian anti-fascist partisans.

==Driving career==
Working as a test driver for Abarth he participated in many events and races. In 1955 he was a member of the team that completed 3,743.642 km at an average speed of 155.985 km/h at the Monza track. One week later, with journalists present and participating, the team set the 500 km, 500-mile, 1,000 km, 48-hour and 72-hour records.

==Personal life== 
During World War II Thiele was a captain of the Office of Strategic Services of Italian anti-fascist partisans. There he met Walkiria Terradura, another partisan who was later awarded the Silver Medal of Military Valour. They married and briefly lived in the United States after the war, before returning to Italy.

==Complete Formula One Grand Prix results==
(key) 
==Sports car results==
Source: 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173247" start="0" end="14" title="Alfonso Thiele" label="Alfonso Thiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="73" end="86" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="111" end="122" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="241" end="258" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="326" end="354" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q26823" start="439" end="445" title="Abarth" label="Abarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252" start="595" end="600" title="Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="810" end="838" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q88782561" start="887" end="905" title="Walkiria Terradura" label="Walkiria Terradura"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426499" start="950" end="981" title="Silver Medal of Military Valour" label="Silver Medal of Military Valour"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1123" end="1126" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228199" wikidata="Q173002" url="?curid=1228199" title="Allan McNish">
<text>Allan McNish (born 29 December 1969) is a British former racing driver, commentator, and journalist from Scotland. He is a three-time winner of the 24 Hours of Le Mans, most recently in 2013, as well as a three-time winner of the American Le Mans Series, which he last won in 2007. He won the FIA World Endurance Championship (FIA WEC) in 2013. He has also been a co-commentator and pundit for BBC Formula One coverage on TV, radio and online and was team principal of the Audi Sport ABT Schaeffler Formula E team.

==Early life==

McNish was born in Dumfries, Scotland and played football while at school. He was a fan of Nottingham Forest and also supported his local club Queen of the South. It was not until McNish began in karting that he found something at which he excelled.

==Early career==
McNish began his career in karting like fellow Dumfries and Galloway driver David Coulthard. McNish credited the start given to both of them and Dario Franchitti as being largely down to David Leslie senior and junior.

McNish and Coulthard both were recognised with a McLaren/Autosport BRDC Young Driver of the Year award having moved up to car racing. In 1988 he won the Formula Vauxhall Lotus championship and in 1989 finished runner up to David Brabham in a close fought British Formula 3 Championship. During the late 1980s McNish shared a house with teammate Mika Häkkinen.

Tipped as a future Formula One driver, he tested with both McLaren and Benetton, whilst also competing in F3000, then the recognised second tier of European motorsport, in 1990–1992. Whilst racing his first season in F3000, McNish suffered a crash at a race in Donington Park where a bystander was fatally injured. He went on to finish fourth overall in the championship that season. Concentrating on Formula One opportunities meant he appeared in F3000 only once during 1994, at Pau.

When a Formula One drive failed to materialise, he returned to F3000 in 1995 with Paul Stewart Racing (run by the son of Sir Jackie Stewart who went on to form Stewart Grand Prix). While he was arguably the fastest driver of the year, a series of mishaps saw him well beaten by Super Nova drivers Vincenzo Sospiri and Ricardo Rosset in the title race. McNish&#x27;s career appeared to stall in early 1996 after a deal to race in Formula Nippon fell through and Mark Blundell was preferred for a drive with the PacWest CART team. He also tested for Benetton during the year.

==Sports cars==

Despite devoting his career to the pursuit of a Formula One chance, McNish has become one of the world&#x27;s most highly rated sportscar drivers. His sportscar career began in 1996 with Porsche, at a time when their 911 GT1 model revolutionised sportscar racing. With the factory team he took this car to victory in the 1998 24 Hours of Le Mans, partnered by Laurent Aïello and Stephane Ortelli. He subsequently appeared for Toyota and Audi in the race, and after losing a likely victory in the dying stages of the 2007 event, scored a second triumph in 2008 with Tom Kristensen and Rinaldo Capello driving an Audi R10. He has also raced with great success for Audi in the American Le Mans Series, winning the title with Dindo Capello in 2006 and 2007, and taking four overall victories at the 12 Hours of Sebring (2004, 2006, 2009 and 2012). At the 2011 Le Mans McNish destroyed the car in a spectacular crash early in the race and ended the race for Audi No. 3. And again at the 2012 Le Mans, McNish made a driving error and lost a first place by crashing the Audi No. 2 car a few hours before the finish. He also codrove the No. 8 Starworks Motorsport Riley-Ford to a second-place finish at the 2012 24 Hours of Daytona.

In the 2000 American Le Mans Series season McNish set a track record for the full circuit configuration at Sears Point International Raceway.

==Formula One==

McNish finally found an opening into Formula One in 2001, when the newly formed Toyota F1 team required a development driver. Given his link with Toyota through sportscars he was an obvious choice for this role, and after impressing in testing he was hired to race for the 2002 season. He did not score any points during the season&#x27;s 17 races, and he and teammate Mika Salo were replaced with a new line-up of Olivier Panis and Cristiano da Matta for 2003. Salo had scored points for the team on their debut in Melbourne and McNish had very nearly done the same in the Malaysian Grand Prix, only for a pit lane mistake by the team to cost him the result. Both drivers were told of their replacement before Da Matta was announced, and ITV&#x27;s Martin Brundle commented that &quot;replacing Salo and McNish with Panis and A.N. Other&quot; was not, in his view, a step forward.

McNish had a dramatic accident at the 130R corner while practising for Toyota&#x27;s home race the Japanese Grand Prix at Suzuka, but escaped serious injury. This led to the corner being reprofiled the following year.

==After Formula One==
In 2003 he was a test driver for Renault F1, also doing a little TV work for ITV, but the next year he returned to his successful sports car racing career, winning the 12 Hours of Sebring, combining this in 2005 with a venture into the highly competitive DTM (German Touring Car Championship), where he competed against the likes of former Formula One drivers Mika Häkkinen and Jean Alesi. He also won sportscar driver of the year awards from &quot;Autosport&quot; and &quot;Le Mans&quot; magazines and the (Jackie) Stewart Medal Award for services to Scottish motor sport. He was made the president of the Scottish Motor Racing Club at their annual prize giving and dinner in 2007, succeeding Stewart.

In 2006, he continued racing with the Audi factory team and was part of the driving line-up which won the 12 Hours of Sebring in the new Audi R10 TDI diesel, setting pole position and breaking the lap record. In 2008, McNish won the 24 Hours of Le Mans for Audi alongside Tom Kristensen and Rinaldo Capello. It was his first win at la Sarthe since . McNish won the 2013 24 Hours of Le Mans as well with Tom Kristensen and Loïc Duval. In 2011 McNish suffered a catastrophic crash at the Le Mans race, one which left his car virtually disintegrated. However McNish walked away from the vehicle unharmed thanks largely due to the safety improvements that had been made in recent years.

In 2013, McNish became a world champion as he won the 2013 FIA World Endurance Championship alongside Kristensen and Duval.

Since Formula One has introduced the drivers&#x27; representative on the stewards panel at all Grands Prix, McNish has featured as the drivers&#x27; representative twice in the 2011 season, in Monaco and most recently in Hungary and on both occasions he has penalised the McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton for various transgressions. He has also appeared in a Scania video test driving their new R 730 V8.

On 17 December 2013, McNish announced his retirement from Audi Sport and from racing full-time. He has not ruled out racing individual events in the future. After retiring he took on a role with Audi Sport, including liaising between the team&#x27;s drivers and engineers, between the team and motorsport organisers, and driver development. He is also manager of racing driver Harry Tincknell. He also works for BBC Sport as a commentator and pundit for their Formula One coverage. McNish became team principal for Audi&#x27;s Formula E team, starting for the 2017–18 season, following Audi&#x27;s official take over of the Abt Sportsline run entry.

McNish is two-time winner of the Segrave Trophy (2009/2014), was awarded the BRDC Gold Star in 2014, and won the BARC Gold Medal in 2015.

==Other formulae==
As well as those above, McNish has also raced in the following racing series:
* Karting
* Formula Ford
* Vauxhall Lotus
* British Formula 3
* North American GT
* FIA GT

==Personal life==

He lives in Monaco with his wife Kelly and their two children. Prior to his marriage, McNish&#x27;s stag party in Dumfries was attended by Dario and Marino Franchitti and included watching a Queen of the South football match.
He speaks English and French.

==Racing record==

===Complete International Formula 3000 results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete American Le Mans Series results===
===Complete 12 Hours of Sebring results===
===Complete Formula One results===
(key)

 Driver did not finish the Grand Prix, but was classified as he completed over 90% of the race distance.

===Complete DTM results===
(key)
===Complete Le Mans Series results===

===Complete FIA World Endurance Championship results===
==References==
==External links==

* Allan McNish&#x27;s official website
* Allan McNish&#x27;s official blog
*Profile – by FIA GT Championship official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173002" start="0" end="12" title="Allan McNish" label="Allan McNish"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="148" end="167" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815235" start="186" end="190" title="2013 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q465450" start="230" end="253" title="American Le Mans Series" label="American Le Mans Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q294476" start="276" end="280" title="2007 American Le Mans Series season" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q945048" start="293" end="325" title="FIA World Endurance Championship" label="FIA World Endurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2953915" start="339" end="343" title="2013 FIA World Endurance Championship season" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="383" end="389" title="pundit" label="pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q202468" start="473" end="498" title="Abt Sportsline" label="Audi Sport ABT Schaeffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q319565" start="499" end="508" title="Formula E" label="Formula E"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="551" end="559" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="581" end="589" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="623" end="640" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q854890" start="675" end="693" title="Queen of the South F.C." label="Queen of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q192420" start="728" end="735" title="Kart racing" label="karting"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="847" end="868" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q172832" start="876" end="891" title="David Coulthard" label="David Coulthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q388732" start="945" end="961" title="Dario Franchitti" label="Dario Franchitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175203" start="987" end="999" title="David Leslie (racing driver)" label="David Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q173001" start="1243" end="1256" title="David Brabham" label="David Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q918187" start="1275" end="1305" title="British Formula 3 Championship" label="British Formula 3 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172842" start="1365" end="1378" title="Mika Häkkinen" label="Mika Häkkinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="1440" end="1447" title="McLaren (racing)" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q171329" start="1452" end="1460" title="Benetton Formula" label="Benetton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="1988" end="2006" title="Sir Jackie Stewart" label="Sir Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q173066" start="2027" end="2045" title="Stewart Grand Prix" label="Stewart Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q368799" start="2164" end="2180" title="Vincenzo Sospiri" label="Vincenzo Sospiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q171431" start="2185" end="2199" title="Ricardo Rosset" label="Ricardo Rosset"/>
<link wikidata="Q171553" start="2328" end="2341" title="Mark Blundell" label="Mark Blundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347246" start="2377" end="2384" title="PacWest Racing" label="PacWest"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751410" start="2385" end="2389" title="Champ Car" label="CART"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="2646" end="2653" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328962" start="2676" end="2683" title="Porsche 911 GT1" label="911 GT1"/>
<link wikidata="Q216528" start="2780" end="2804" title="1998 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1998 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q713137" start="2819" end="2833" title="Laurent Aïello" label="Laurent Aïello"/>
<link wikidata="Q944809" start="2838" end="2854" title="Stephane Ortelli" label="Stephane Ortelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q216560" start="2975" end="2979" title="2007 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q216562" start="3014" end="3018" title="2008 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q438117" start="3024" end="3038" title="Tom Kristensen (racing driver)" label="Tom Kristensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674902" start="3043" end="3058" title="Rinaldo Capello" label="Rinaldo Capello"/>
<link wikidata="Q758770" start="3070" end="3078" title="Audi R10" label="Audi R10"/>
<link wikidata="Q465450" start="3133" end="3156" title="American Le Mans Series" label="American Le Mans Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="3254" end="3273" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q251970" start="3275" end="3279" title="2004 12 Hours of Sebring" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q978193" start="3281" end="3285" title="2006 12 Hours of Sebring" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613086" start="3287" end="3291" title="2009 12 Hours of Sebring" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q255472" start="3296" end="3300" title="2012 12 Hours of Sebring" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q652223" start="3594" end="3614" title="Starworks Motorsport" label="Starworks Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624548" start="3658" end="3682" title="2012 24 Hours of Daytona" label="2012 24 Hours of Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q294461" start="3692" end="3727" title="2000 American Le Mans Series season" label="2000 American Le Mans Series season"/>
<link wikidata="Q112563" start="3792" end="3825" title="Sears Point International Raceway" label="Sears Point International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962777" start="3925" end="3934" title="Toyota Racing (Formula One team)" label="Toyota F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q173094" start="4214" end="4223" title="Mika Salo" label="Mika Salo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172018" start="4260" end="4273" title="Olivier Panis" label="Olivier Panis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172995" start="4278" end="4296" title="Cristiano da Matta" label="Cristiano da Matta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082" start="4419" end="4439" title="Malaysian Grand Prix" label="Malaysian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172854" start="4595" end="4609" title="Martin Brundle" label="Martin Brundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174170" start="4850" end="4856" title="Suzuka Circuit" label="Suzuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="5002" end="5012" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="5137" end="5156" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q172842" start="5329" end="5342" title="Mika Häkkinen" label="Mika Häkkinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172777" start="5347" end="5357" title="Jean Alesi" label="Jean Alesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691793" start="5711" end="5715" title="Audi Sport Team Joest" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q978193" start="5779" end="5798" title="2006 12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q758770" start="5810" end="5822" title="Audi R10 TDI" label="Audi R10 TDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q216562" start="5906" end="5925" title="2008 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q438117" start="5945" end="5959" title="Tom Kristensen (racing driver)" label="Tom Kristensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674902" start="5964" end="5979" title="Rinaldo Capello" label="Rinaldo Capello"/>
<link wikidata="Q174090" start="6005" end="6014" title="Circuit de la Sarthe" label="la Sarthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815235" start="6038" end="6062" title="2013 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2013 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872734" start="6095" end="6105" title="Loïc Duval" label="Loïc Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2953915" start="6411" end="6448" title="2013 FIA World Endurance Championship season" label="2013 FIA World Endurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171383" start="6675" end="6681" title="2011 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q665909" start="6703" end="6710" title="2011 Hungarian Grand Prix" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219960" start="6838" end="6844" title="Scania AB" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q23071118" start="6874" end="6879" title="Scania R-series" label="R 730"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448596" start="7262" end="7277" title="Harry Tincknell" label="Harry Tincknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q552359" start="7297" end="7306" title="BBC Sport" label="BBC Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q319565" start="7412" end="7421" title="Formula E" label="Formula E"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446312" start="7569" end="7583" title="Segrave Trophy" label="Segrave Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437649" start="7784" end="7796" title="Formula Ford" label="Formula Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q918187" start="7816" end="7833" title="British Formula 3 Championship" label="British Formula 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q732857" start="7856" end="7862" title="FIA GT" label="FIA GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="7895" end="7901" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q388732" start="8022" end="8027" title="Dario Franchitti" label="Dario"/>
<link wikidata="Q731751" start="8032" end="8049" title="Marino Franchitti" label="Marino Franchitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q854890" start="8074" end="8092" title="Queen of the South F.C." label="Queen of the South"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8210" end="8213" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8475" end="8478" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8615" end="8618" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228201" wikidata="Q173452" url="?curid=1228201" title="Allen Berg">
<text>Allen Bernard Berg (born August 1, 1961) is a Canadian former racing driver who raced for the Osella team in Formula One.

==Racing career==
Berg was born in Vancouver, British Columbia. He began in karting in 1978 and switched to cars when he was 20, into Formula Atlantic. In 1982 he won the prestigious Tasman Formula Pacific Series in Australia and New Zealand and entered the British Formula 3 series in 1983. However, his timing was bad since he had to compete against Ayrton Senna and Martin Brundle. He won one race (one which Senna and Brundle opted out of to compete for European F3 points and outright race win) and ended up fifth in the series. The following year he was runner-up in the British F3 series to Johnny Dumfries with eight second places. At the end of the season he tested for Arrows and Tyrrell and held discussions with Spirit and RAM Racing but neither led to a drive in Formula 1.

In 1985 he returned to Canada to seek funding for Formula One.

In 1986 he managed to buy a seat in the Osella F1 team midway through the season, taking the seat vacated by Christian Danner, who had left to join the Arrows team to replace Marc Surer. Surer suffered career-ending injuries in the 1986 ADAC Hessen-Rallye between the Belgian and Canadian Grands Prix. Berg took part in nine races before his sponsorship ran out and he missed the Italian Grand Prix; further sponsorship did at least mean he was able to see out the season. He had advanced discussions with several F1 teams to continue in F1 in 1987, including Larrousse, but, with the cancellation of the Canadian Grand Prix that season, he could not raise enough sponsorship and was unable to secure a drive.

Berg has remained involved in motor sport as a professional driver, team owner, series administrator, driving coach and instructor. He has competed in sportscar racing and the Trans-Am Series. He spent a season driving a privateer BMW M3 in the Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft in 1991, before enjoying success on the Mexican racing scene, winning the Mexican Formula 2 championship in 1993. He also won the Indy Lights Panamericana title in 2001 as a driver-owner, before retiring from driving.

He currently operates Allen Berg Racing Schools primarily in Monterey, California, based at WeatherTech Raceway Laguna Seca. Allen Berg Racing Schools provides a race driving experience in formula racing cars for people with little to no experience. The school also provides instructional programs for up-and-coming drivers to work their way into driving professionally. Multiple graduates of the school have gone on to drive race cars for a career.

==Racing record==
===Complete British Formula Three Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One results===
(key)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==External links==
*Profile on F1 Rejects
*F1 Rejects interview with Allen Berg
*Allen Berg Racing Schools</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173452" start="0" end="18" title="Allen Berg" label="Allen Bernard Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="62" end="75" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q171506" start="94" end="100" title="Osella" label="Osella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="109" end="120" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="158" end="167" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="169" end="185" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192420" start="199" end="206" title="karting" label="karting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437624" start="257" end="273" title="Formula Atlantic" label="Formula Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748352" start="313" end="328" title="Formula Pacific" label="Formula Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="339" end="348" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="353" end="364" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="389" end="398" title="Formula 3" label="Formula 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="475" end="487" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172854" start="492" end="506" title="Martin Brundle" label="Martin Brundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171722" start="721" end="736" title="Johnny Dumfries" label="Johnny Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q174176" start="802" end="808" title="Arrows Grand Prix International" label="Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="813" end="820" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173088" start="847" end="853" title="Spirit Racing" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173104" start="858" end="868" title="RAM Racing" label="RAM Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="961" end="972" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q57551" start="1084" end="1100" title="Christian Danner" label="Christian Danner"/>
<link wikidata="Q171505" start="1150" end="1160" title="Marc Surer" label="Marc Surer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172958" start="1535" end="1544" title="Larrousse" label="Larrousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965" start="1580" end="1599" title="Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canadian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="1837" end="1853" title="sportscar racing" label="sportscar racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q935518" start="1862" end="1877" title="Trans-Am Series" label="Trans-Am Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301433" start="1907" end="1916" title="Privateer (motorsport)" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q796579" start="1917" end="1923" title="BMW M3" label="BMW M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994800" start="1931" end="1965" title="Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft" label="Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590001" start="2040" end="2057" title="Mexican formula 2 champions" label="Mexican Formula 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062688" start="2096" end="2107" title="Indy Lights" label="Indy Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="2246" end="2266" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423481" start="2277" end="2308" title="WeatherTech Raceway Laguna Seca" label="WeatherTech Raceway Laguna Seca"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2713" end="2716" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2845" end="2848" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228204" wikidata="Q172450" url="?curid=1228204" title="André Guelfi">
<text>André Guelfi (6 May 1919 – 28 June 2016) was a French racing driver. He was born in Mazagan, Morocco. He participated in one Formula One World Championship race, on 19 October 1958. He also participated in several non-championship Formula One races. At the time of his death he was the oldest living Formula One driver and had been since the death of Robert La Caze on 1 July 2015.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172450" start="0" end="12" title="André Guelfi" label="André Guelfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q219583" start="84" end="91" title="Mazagan" label="Mazagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="125" end="136" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172447" start="351" end="365" title="Robert La Caze" label="Robert La Caze"/>
<link wikidata="" start="436" end="439" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228206" wikidata="Q3242068" url="?curid=1228206" title="Taqwa">
<text>Taqwa ( &quot; / &quot;) is an Islamic term for being conscious and cognizant of God, of truth, &quot;piety, fear of God.&quot; It is often found in the Quran. Those who practice &quot;taqwa&quot; — in the words of Ibn Abbas, &quot;believers who avoid shirk with Allah and who work in His obedience&quot; — are called muttaqin ( &quot;&quot;).

== Quran==
According to Erik Ohlander, the word &quot;taqwa&quot; is used in the Qur&#x27;an over 100 times. According to the &quot;Oxford Dictionary of Islam&quot;, the word &quot;taqwa&quot; and its derivatives appear &quot;more than 250 times&quot; in the Qur&#x27;an.

The imperative form of taqwa is found in the phrase &quot;Ittaqullah&quot; (&quot;fear God&quot; or &quot;be aware of Allah&quot;), which is in a number of verses.

===Benefits of Taqwa in the Quran===
The Quran says there are benefits of taqwa. Sura at-Talaq Q.65:2-3 says that God will give Muttaqin solutions to their problems.
According to Sura al-Anfal Q.8:29, to Muttaqin, God will give them &quot;&quot; or conscientious intellect by which they can differentiate between right and wrong.
==Hadith==




==Definitions==

The word “Taqwã” is derived from the verb waqã (), which literally means to preserve, protect, safeguard, shield, etc. The Arabic word taqwa means &quot;forbearance, fear and abstinence.&quot;

Some descriptions of the term from Islamic sources include:
*&quot;God consciousness ... piousness, fear of Allah, love for Allah, and self restraint&quot;.
*&quot;God-consciousness or God-fearing piety&quot;, &quot;virtue&quot;, &quot;wariness&quot;.
*Fear of Allah, &quot;being careful, knowing your place in the cosmos&quot;. &quot;Proof&quot; of Taqwa is the &quot;experience of awe&quot; of God, which &quot;inspires a person to be on guard against wrong action&quot; and eager to do the things which please Allah.
*literally &quot;to protect&quot;. In general, to protect yourself &quot;from the Wrath of Allah&quot; by not &quot;indulging in things that Allah forbids&quot;.
*&quot;a high state of heart, which keeps one conscious of Allah&#x27;s presence and His Knowledge.&quot; Taqwa motivates the person who possesses it &quot;to perform righteous deeds&quot; and avoid forbidden activities.
*According to Erik Ohlander, in Quranic Arabic, &quot;taqwa&quot; refers to fear of God in terms of protecting oneself from displeasing God.

==Theological interpretation==
According to Tafsir ibn Kathir, the root meaning of taqwa is to avoid what one dislikes. It was reported that Umar bin Khattab asked Ubayy ibn Ka&#x27;b about Taqwa. Ubayy said, &quot;Have you ever walked on a path that has thorns on it?&quot; Umar said, &quot;Yes.&quot; Ubayy asked, &quot;What did you do then?&quot; to which Umar replied, &quot;I rolled up my sleeves and struggled.&quot; Ubayy said, &quot;That is taqwa, to protect oneself from sin through life&#x27;s dangerous journey so that one can successfully complete the journey unscathed by sin.&quot;

== Fiqh==
In at least one popular work of &quot;fiqh&quot; (Islamic jurisprudence), the &quot;Book of Taqwa&quot;, (i.e. the section on taqwa) deals with &quot;knowledge of what is Haraam (forbidden), Makruh (discouraged) and doubtful&quot; in an assortment of matters beyond &quot;the pillars of Islam&quot;. These include: foods, dress, things having to do with sex (&quot;private matters&quot;), kinds of sporting contests, music, gossip, bad mouthing, bad company, beard trimming, etc.

==Sufism==
Taqwa is an important concept in Sufism.

The 10th-century Sufi scholar Al-Qushayri, in his &quot;Epistle&quot; (&quot;Al-Risala al-Qushayriyya&quot;), writes about three parts of &quot;taqwa&quot;: &quot;full trust in God with respect to what has not been granted to him; full satisfaction with what has been granted to him; and full patience with respect to what has eluded him.&quot;

In Sufism, taqwa has several degrees. The first degree or rank is that of the common people. This rank shuns anything associated with God. In other words, the common people participate in taqwa by simply avoiding shirk. The second degree or rank of taqwa are the elect who shun sins. The final rank is that of the prophets who avoid attributing acts to anyone other than God — &quot;in other words, their fear comes to them from Him and is [directed] to Him.&quot; The highest rank are those who distance themselves from everything that separates them from God, for one of the main goals in Sufism is to get closer to God, because in Sufi thought the state of being separate from God is a privation equivalent to the torments of hell.

The master-disciple relationship is one of great importance within Sufi practice. Taqwa is greatly valued within this relationship. God-fearing piety is seen as great religious devotion because it allows for &quot;unhesitating obedience for the order&#x27;s superior.&quot; In other words, if one can blindly follow his master, then he should be able to blindly follow God. Taqwa then leads to a lack of questioning authority, for the disciple submits to those with greater power than him. This submission reminds the disciple of God&#x27;s power making the disciple a more devout worshipper of God.

== See also ==
* Tawakkul

==References==
* 

==External links==
* Canonical definition of those who have Taqwa in The Qur&#x27;an Sura 2 Signs 2-5 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="102" end="107" title="piety" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="117" end="120" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q423600" start="215" end="224" title="Ibn Abbas" label="Ibn Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q901150" start="252" end="257" title="Shirk (Islam)" label="shirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="263" end="268" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="622" end="637" title="Imperative mood#Hebrew and Arabic" label="imperative form"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979679" start="676" end="686" title="Ittaqullah" label="Ittaqullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q231975" start="869" end="877" title="at-Talaq" label="at-Talaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="897" end="900" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539031" start="911" end="919" title="Muttaqin" label="Muttaqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219720" start="967" end="975" title="al-Anfal" label="al-Anfal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088356" start="2428" end="2445" title="Tafsir ibn Kathir" label="Tafsir ibn Kathir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="2525" end="2541" title="Umar bin Khattab" label="Umar bin Khattab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743400" start="2548" end="2567" title="Ubayy ibn Ka&amp;#x27;b" label="Ubayy ibn Ka&amp;#x27;b"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="3029" end="3033" title="fiqh" label="fiqh"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="3162" end="3168" title="Haraam" label="Haraam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133558" start="3182" end="3188" title="Makruh" label="Makruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="3516" end="3522" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="3542" end="3546" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115259" start="3555" end="3566" title="Al-Qushayri" label="Al-Qushayri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931108" start="3602" end="3626" title="Al-Risala al-Qushayriyya" label="Al-Risala al-Qushayriyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q58418" start="4600" end="4604" title="Jahannam" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350606" start="5225" end="5233" title="Tawakkul" label="Tawakkul"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228207" wikidata="Q172814" url="?curid=1228207" title="André Milhoux">
<text>André Milhoux (; born 9 December 1928) is a former racing driver from Belgium. He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, the 1956 German Grand Prix on 5 August 1956, but had to retire after 15 laps due to an engine failure. He scored no championship points.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172814" start="0" end="13" title="André Milhoux" label="André Milhoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="51" end="64" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="70" end="77" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="102" end="113" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q296373" start="149" end="171" title="1956 German Grand Prix" label="1956 German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="336" end="339" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228208" wikidata="Q172119" url="?curid=1228208" title="André Pilette">
<text>André Théodore Pilette (6 October 1918 – 27 December 1993), son of former Indy 500 participant Théodore Pilette, was a racing driver from Belgium. He participated in 14 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 17 June 1951. He scored 2 championship points. His son Teddy Pilette also became a racing driver, although his F1 career in the mid-1970s was much briefer.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
:&quot;* Indicates Shared Drive with Élie Bayol

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172119" start="0" end="22" title="André Pilette" label="André Théodore Pilette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799866" start="95" end="111" title="Théodore Pilette" label="Théodore Pilette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="119" end="132" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="138" end="145" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="169" end="180" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172136" start="280" end="293" title="Teddy Pilette" label="Teddy Pilette"/>
<link wikidata="" start="435" end="438" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q172036" start="477" end="487" title="Élie Bayol" label="Élie Bayol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228209" wikidata="Q160881" url="?curid=1228209" title="Grille (artillery)">
<text>The 15 cm sIG 33 (Sf) 38(t), also known as  (German: &quot;cricket&quot;) was a series of self-propelled artillery vehicles used by Nazi Germany during World War II. The series was based on the Czech Panzer 38(t) tank chassis and used a 15 cm sIG 33 infantry gun.

==Development==
The original order for 200 units of the , was to be based on the new 38(t) Ausf. M chassis that BMM (&quot;Böhmisch-Mährische Maschinenfabrik&quot;) was developing, however, delays caused production to start on the 38(t) Ausf. H chassis.

=== H===
The first variant of the was based on the Panzer 38(t) Ausf. H chassis, which had its engine in the rear. Instead of a turret, the vehicle had a low-slung superstructure and fighting compartment. The (heavy infantry gun) was mounted in the front of this armored compartment. Being built on a tank chassis, its hull armour was at the front and its superstructure armour was at the front.

A total of 200 (including one prototype) were produced in the BMM (erstwhile ČKD Praga) factory in Prague from February to June 1943, and 10 more units were built in November 1943. The official designation was (Sd.Kfz. 138/1).

===. K===
The second variant was very similar to the Marder III Ausf M, using the same modified Panzer 38(t) chassis which was specifically re-designed for self-propelled mounts. The engine was relocated to the center of the vehicle behind an extended sloped glacis plate, both permitting the gun to be mounted at the rear and better protecting the crew. The fighting compartment at the rear of the vehicle was somewhat smaller and higher than in the previous version. Because there was no engine in the rear, the fighting compartment could be lowered down to the bottom floor level where the engine used to be, which decreased crew exposure and visibility. The main gun was also the 33.

From December 1943 to September 1944, a total of 162 vehicles were produced. Further 17 vehicles were built in 1945 for an overall production of 179. The official designation was 15 cm 33/1 auf 38(t) (Sf) . M (Sd.Kfz. 138/1)

=== Ammunition carrier ===
As the had limited ammunition storage, a dedicated variant of the . K was built as (Sd.Kfz. 138/1). It carried ammunition racks instead of the main gun, but could be converted back to normal configuration in the field by mounting the gun onto it. Production totaled 102 vehicles.

==Combat history==
Both versions were intended to take service in the Companies within the regiments, inside Panzer and Divisions, in their heavy infantry gun units. Each detachment had six available.

== Surviving vehicles ==
* A . K is in storage at the U.S. Army Artillery Museum at Fort Sill, US.
* A 38(t) is on display at the U.S. Army Artillery Museum at Fort Sill, US.

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===

== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160881" start="4" end="27" title="Grille (artillery)" label="15 cm sIG 33 (Sf) 38(t)"/>
<link wikidata="Q160881" start="43" end="43" title="Grille (artillery)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="59" end="66" title="cricket (insect)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="90" end="114" title="self-propelled artillery" label="self-propelled artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="132" end="144" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="152" end="164" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505574" start="194" end="199" title="Czechoslovak Army" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q152915" start="200" end="212" title="Panzer 38(t)" label="Panzer 38(t)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81469" start="237" end="249" title="15 cm sIG 33" label="15 cm sIG 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q336811" start="994" end="997" title="ČKD" label="ČKD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1016" end="1022" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1198" end="1215" title="Marder_III#Marder_III_Ausf._M,_Sd.Kfz._138" label="Marder III Ausf M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779157" start="2477" end="2483" title="Panzer Division" label="Panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542690" start="2508" end="2522" title="heavy infantry" label="heavy infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="2624" end="2650" title="U.S. Army Artillery Museum" label="U.S. Army Artillery Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="2654" end="2667" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill, US"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="2700" end="2726" title="U.S. Army Artillery Museum" label="U.S. Army Artillery Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="2730" end="2743" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill, US"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228210" wikidata="Q172463" url="?curid=1228210" title="André Simon (racing driver)">
<text>André Constant Simon (5 January 1920 – 11 July 2012) was a racing driver from France. He participated in Formula One from to , competing in a total of 12 World Championship races but scoring no championship points.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
:* Indicates shared drive with Giuseppe Farina
:† Indicates shared drive with Ottorino Volonterio

==References==
==External links==
*Profile at grandprix.com
*Profile at &quot;Motor Sport&quot; magazine database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172463" start="0" end="20" title="André Simon (racing driver)" label="André Constant Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="59" end="72" title="auto racing" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="105" end="116" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="" start="269" end="272" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040" start="305" end="320" title="Giuseppe Farina" label="Giuseppe Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q115693" start="352" end="371" title="Ottorino Volonterio" label="Ottorino Volonterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866340" start="445" end="468" title="Motor Sport (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Motor Sport&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228211" wikidata="Q6247391" url="?curid=1228211" title="John McAulay">
<text>Sergeant John McAulay, (27 December 1888 – 14 January 1956) was a Scottish policeman, soldier and recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.

==Early life==

He was born in Kinghorn in Fife on 27 December 1888 the son of John McAulay and his wife Isabella. The family moved to 4 Gillespie Crescent in Plean (near Falkirk) and he was educated at Plean Primary School. He left school around 1901 and began working as a coal-miner. Being both tall and strong he left the pits to join the police force in 1911 and was based in Glasgow. At the onset of the First World War he was one of the first volunteers and joined the Scots Guards on 9 September 1914.

==Details==
He was 28 years old, and a sergeant in the 1st Battalion, Scots Guards, British Army during the First World War when the following deed took place at the Battle of Cambrai for which he was awarded the VC.

After the war he resumed his career in the Glasgow Police, serving in the Maryhill district, rising to the rank of Inspector before retiring in 1948.

He died at the age of 67at home, 915 Aikenhead Road, Burnside, Glasgow on 14 January 1956 and is buried in New Eastwood Cemetery in Glasgow (section L-VII lair 139.

==Family==
He was married to Catherine Thomson (1890-1963).

==Freemasonry==
He was Initiated into Freemasonry in Lodge Greyfriars No.1221, (Glasgow, Scotland) on 13 May 1924.

==Medal==
His Victoria Cross is displayed at The Guards Regimental Headquarters (Scots Guards RHQ), London.

==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==
*Location of grave and VC medal &quot;(Glasgow)&quot;
*News Item &quot;(photo)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6247391" start="9" end="21" title="John McAulay" label="John McAulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="115" end="129" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="223" end="235" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010266" start="276" end="284" title="Kinghorn" label="Kinghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="288" end="292" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011227" start="404" end="409" title="Plean" label="Plean"/>
<link wikidata="Q623687" start="416" end="423" title="Falkirk" label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="626" end="633" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="655" end="670" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="795" end="803" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="826" end="838" title="Scots Guards" label="Scots Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="840" end="852" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="864" end="879" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q654374" start="922" end="939" title="Battle of Cambrai (1917)" label="Battle of Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123696" start="1017" end="1031" title="Glasgow Police" label="Glasgow Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781187" start="1048" end="1056" title="Maryhill" label="Maryhill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228212" wikidata="Q122373" url="?curid=1228212" title="Andrea Chiesa">
<text>Andrea Chiesa (born 6 May 1964) is a former Formula One driver from Switzerland. He participated in 10 Grands Prix, debuting on 1 March 1992.

==Career==
Chiesa began racing in 1980 with karts, and continued to cars in 1985, competing in Italian Formula 3 and Formula 3000. In 1992, he progressed to Formula One and raced with the Fondmetal team. However, he qualified for only three grands prix out of ten, and scored no championship points after retiring from each race. After the German GP, the team replaced him with Eric van de Poele. After Formula One, Chiesa returned to kart racing and touring cars for several years.

He currently drives GT cars. In 2007, he raced for Speedy Racing in a Spyker C8 GT2 car in LeMans Series. In April 2009, racing squad Swiss Team announced they would be fielding a Maserati Quattroporte in the Italian Superstars touring car series with Chiesa as a driver.

==Racing record==

===Complete International Formula 3000 results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races
in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One results===
(key)
===American Open Wheel===

====CART====
===24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==External links==
*Profile on F1 Rejects</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122373" start="0" end="13" title="Andrea Chiesa" label="Andrea Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="44" end="55" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="68" end="79" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="246" end="255" title="Formula 3" label="Formula 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q744289" start="260" end="272" title="International Formula 3000" label="Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q173473" start="331" end="340" title="Fondmetal" label="Fondmetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q296972" start="483" end="492" title="1992 German Grand Prix" label="German GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q171737" start="521" end="538" title="Eric van de Poele" label="Eric van de Poele"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245261" start="594" end="606" title="touring cars" label="touring cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q744620" start="647" end="649" title="Grand tourer" label="GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536463" start="697" end="706" title="Spyker C8" label="Spyker C8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132565" start="807" end="828" title="Maserati Quattroporte" label="Maserati Quattroporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365403" start="844" end="854" title="Superstars Series" label="Superstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245261" start="855" end="866" title="touring cars" label="touring car"/>
<link wikidata="" start="970" end="973" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1102" end="1105" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228216" wikidata="Q397485" url="?curid=1228216" title="Wilkinson">
<text>Wilkinson or Wilkinsons may refer to:

== Businesses and brands ==
* Wilko, formerly Wilkinson Hardware, a British retail chain
* Wilkinson Sword, a British manufacturer of razor blades, formerly swords, motorbikes and other products
** Wilkinson TMC, their touring motorcycle model built 1911 to 1916
* Wilkinson plc, a British firm of chandelier manufacturers and repairers

== People ==
* Wilkinson (surname), including a list of people
* Wilkinson (musician), an English musician
* Wilkinson baronets, a British hereditary title
* The Wilkinsons, a Canadian country music trio
** &quot;The Wilkinsons&quot; (TV series)

== Places ==
* Wilkinson County, Georgia, U.S.
* Wilkinson, Illinois, U.S.
* Wilkinson, Indiana, U.S.
* Wilkinson, Minnesota, U.S.
** Wilkinson Township, Cass County, Minnesota, the wider area
* Wilkinson, Mississippi, U.S.
** Wilkinson County, Mississippi, the wider county
* Wilkinson, West Virginia, U.S.
* Wilkinson, Wisconsin, U.S.
* Wilkinson Lake, in Minnesota, U.S.
* Wilkinson River, in New Zealand&#x27;s South Island

== Other uses ==
* Wilkinson, a type of analog-to-digital converter
* Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, a NASA spacecraft 2001–2010
* &quot;Wilkinson&quot;, a GWR 3031 Class rail locomotive, 1895–1914

== See also ==

* Wilkinson Creek (disambiguation)
* &quot;Wilkinson v. United States&quot;, a law case heard by the US Supreme Court
* Wilkinson&#x27;s catalyst, a chemical catalyst
* Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial, in numerical analysis
* Wilkinson power divider, an RF signal splitter with special properties</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397485" start="0" end="9" title="Wilkinson" label="Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q397485" start="13" end="23" title="Wilkinson" label="Wilkinsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002536" start="69" end="74" title="Wilko" label="Wilko"/>
<link wikidata="Q653630" start="130" end="145" title="Wilkinson Sword" label="Wilkinson Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002549" start="237" end="250" title="Wilkinson TMC" label="Wilkinson TMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815562" start="304" end="317" title="Wilkinson plc" label="Wilkinson plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q347929" start="392" end="411" title="Wilkinson (surname)" label="Wilkinson (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139979" start="442" end="462" title="Wilkinson (musician)" label="Wilkinson (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002550" start="486" end="504" title="Wilkinson baronets" label="Wilkinson baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774973" start="535" end="549" title="The Wilkinsons" label="The Wilkinsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774974" start="584" end="622" title="The Wilkinsons (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Wilkinsons&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q486317" start="639" end="664" title="Wilkinson County, Georgia" label="Wilkinson County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002531" start="673" end="692" title="Wilkinson, Illinois" label="Wilkinson, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992335" start="701" end="719" title="Wilkinson, Indiana" label="Wilkinson, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988381" start="728" end="748" title="Wilkinson, Minnesota" label="Wilkinson, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919203" start="758" end="800" title="Wilkinson Township, Cass County, Minnesota" label="Wilkinson Township, Cass County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903480" start="819" end="841" title="Wilkinson, Mississippi" label="Wilkinson, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q486513" start="851" end="880" title="Wilkinson County, Mississippi" label="Wilkinson County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714393" start="901" end="925" title="Wilkinson, West Virginia" label="Wilkinson, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887151" start="934" end="954" title="Wilkinson, Wisconsin" label="Wilkinson, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197342" start="963" end="977" title="Wilkinson Lake" label="Wilkinson Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002548" start="1000" end="1015" title="Wilkinson River" label="Wilkinson River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1093" end="1120" title="analog-to-digital converter#Wilkinson" label="analog-to-digital converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="1123" end="1159" title="Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe" label="Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514927" start="1216" end="1230" title="GWR 3031 Class" label="GWR 3031 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q22158108" start="1277" end="1309" title="Wilkinson Creek (disambiguation)" label="Wilkinson Creek (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002554" start="1318" end="1344" title="Wilkinson v. United States" label="Wilkinson v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q414182" start="1395" end="1420" title="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s catalyst" label="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613931" start="1444" end="1471" title="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s polynomial" label="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q265565" start="1497" end="1520" title="Wilkinson power divider" label="Wilkinson power divider"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228217" wikidata="Q172220" url="?curid=1228217" title="Antonio Creus">
<text>Antonio Creus i Rubín de Celis (28 October 1924 – 19 February 1996) was a motorcycle racer and racing driver from Spain. He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, the 1960 Argentine Grand Prix on 7 February 1960, driving a privately entered Maserati 250F. He retired with electrical problems and exhaustion, and scored no championship points.

He died in his native Madrid in 1996.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172220" start="0" end="30" title="Antonio Creus" label="Antonio Creus i Rubín de Celis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="74" end="84" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="95" end="108" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="114" end="119" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="144" end="155" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q12455" start="191" end="216" title="1960 Argentine Grand Prix" label="1960 Argentine Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173741" start="265" end="278" title="Maserati 250F" label="Maserati 250F"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="390" end="396" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="" start="460" end="463" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228218" wikidata="Q172281" url="?curid=1228218" title="Arthur Legat">
<text>Arthur Legat (; 1 November 1898 – 23 February 1960) was a Belgian racing driver. He participated in two Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 22 June 1952. He scored no championship points.

Legat won the Grand Prix des Frontières at Chimay in 1931 and 1932 with a Bugatti.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172281" start="0" end="12" title="Arthur Legat" label="Arthur Legat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="66" end="79" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="104" end="115" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q95380" start="252" end="258" title="Chimay" label="Chimay"/>
<link wikidata="Q27401" start="283" end="290" title="Bugatti" label="Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="" start="346" end="349" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228219" wikidata="Q173562" url="?curid=1228219" title="Arthur Owen (racing driver)">
<text>Arthur William Owen (23 March 1915 in Lambeth, London – 27 April 2002 in Vilamoura, Portugal) was a British racing driver from England. He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, the 1960 Italian Grand Prix, driving a privately entered 2.2-litre Cooper. He crashed on the first lap of the race at the South Corner, due to brake failure. He retired with suspension damage and scored no championship points.

On 17 October 1955 Arthur Owen, Jim Russell and William Knight drove a &#x27;bobtail&#x27; Cooper sports car at the Autodrome de Montlhéry to set thirteen international speed and distance records in Class G on this banked track. Owen went on to set further records at Monza in Italy.

On 5 September 1959, driving a Cooper-Climax, Owen made fastest time of the day at the Brighton Speed Trials. In 1962, Owen won the British Hill Climb Championship at the wheel of a Cooper-Climax T53, prepared by fellow-competitor Patsy Burt&#x27;s PMB Garages team. Arthur Owen competed in the 1962 Macau Grand Prix in a Cooper single-seater, qualifying on pole position but crashing early in the race. He finished third in the first Japanese Grand Prix, held at Suzuka on 3 and 4 May 1963, driving a Lotus 23 sports car.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
==References==
==Books==

*&quot;The Racing Coopers&quot;, by Arthur Owen, Cassell, 1959, 243 Pages.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173562" start="0" end="19" title="Arthur Owen (racing driver)" label="Arthur William Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148349" start="38" end="45" title="Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="47" end="53" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683168" start="73" end="82" title="Vilamoura" label="Vilamoura"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="84" end="92" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="108" end="121" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="127" end="134" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="159" end="170" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q331305" start="206" end="229" title="1960 Italian Grand Prix" label="1960 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="269" end="275" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q735277" start="546" end="568" title="Autodrome de Montlhéry" label="Autodrome de Montlhéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967723" start="802" end="823" title="Brighton Speed Trials" label="Brighton Speed Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953927" start="847" end="878" title="British Hill Climb Championship" label="British Hill Climb Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015097" start="946" end="956" title="Patsy Burt" label="Patsy Burt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346003" start="1015" end="1031" title="Macau Grand Prix" label="Macau Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q693548" start="1217" end="1225" title="Lotus 23" label="Lotus 23"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1292" end="1295" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228222" wikidata="Q172816" url="?curid=1228222" title="Basil van Rooyen">
<text>Basil van Rooyen (19 April 1939 – 14 September 2023) was a South African racing driver, race car developer, inventor, and engineer. His career comprised racing a motorcycle, Anglia, Lotus Cortina, Mustang, Alfa Romeo, Capri Perana Chevy Can-am, Fiat/Ferrari saloon cars, sports cars, single seaters and Formula 1.

==Participation==
Puch 250. He started racing motorcycles in 1957 with the 24 hour race at Grand Central track, a narrow race track near Johannesburg. At the time he was 18 years old, having just gotten his license.

==Sprint racing==
Ford Anglia 105E. Home modifications and some imported parts brought many class wins and overall places in 1961 and 1962 on the newly inaugurated Kyalami Racetrack. Upgraded to a Cortina 1200cc in 1963.

In 1964, Ford Motor Company SA donated two Lotus Cortinas to the most successful SA Ford racers. (1 to van Rooyen and Superformance, a performance shop where he was Managing Director, to race in the new countrywide SA Saloon Car Championship and 1 to Willie Meissner, talented ex-GSM Dart engineer, of Meissner Motors and driver Koos Swanepoel, who raced an Anglia 1500). 
BvR car at first could not keep up and Swanepoel won the 1964 SA Saloon Car Championship.

In 1965, van Rooyen&#x27;s development skills surpassed Meissner, his nemesis, and he was faster and won all or nearly all the races.

SA Saloon Car Championship racing became so popular with race fans that in 1966 Ford SA donated the new Ford Mustang V8s to the same pair. 
BvR car was consistently faster and he won all the races to become 1966 and 1967 SA Saloon car champion.
In 1968 Alfa Romeo, had imported an Auto Delta Alfa GTA but it was not fast enough, so they persuaded van Rooyen to develop. (He had been racing Alfa GTVs since 1966 in the Onyx Production Car Series, additional events at the Kyalami venue.) Van Rooyen developed a short stroke 2000cc engine which soon lapped faster than his Mustang and started competing very successfully against Meissner’s and Ford SA&#x27;s new Escorts with 1800cc and 2000cc 4v engines.

Arnold Chatz took over later on, when van Rooyen became involved in Single Seater Racing. He had been persuaded to race the older ex John Love Cooper Climax against world champions in the 1968 South African Grand Prix.
Enjoyed single seaters debut so much that he imported a newer Brabham to enter in the rest of the SA events for the balance of the 1968 year, then a 1968 MacLaren for the 1969 year. Managed 3 F1 wins by the time he participated in the 1969 SA Grand Prix.
Later in the year had serious accident on the Kyalami straight while tire testing that destroyed the car, and needed time to recuperate.

It seems van Rooyen so impressed the Grand Prix F1 teams with his 1969 Kyalami Grand Prix driving that he was offered a F1 engagement by Ken Tyrrell to immediately join his team as a 2nd driver behind team leader Jackie Stewart. Due to his injuries from the Kyalami crash this was no longer possible.

In 1970, continued racing in Onyx Production Car Series and won the Onyx Production Car Championship in an Alfa GTV.
During 1971 Paddy Driver offered van Rooyen his older F5000 single seater to try out, to see if he still had the racer&#x27;s heart, and van Rooyen finished 3rd and 1st in F5000 behind two F1 cars, satisfying himself.

New regulations were introduced in 1971 for the Transvaal Production Car Championship. The car to beat was the Ford Capri Perana V8 (a special SA vehicle made by Basil Green Motors). Van Rooyen purchased one of these and was soon able to beat the factory car regularly.

This special edition SA car gave van Rooyen an idea!
He made a proposal to General Motors to market a vehicle similar to the Basil Green Ford Capri V8. Developed their Vauxhall Firenza, using a 302 cid Camaro V8 engine and running gear. 100 vehicles would have to be built by GM (SA), which van Rooyen convinced them to do, and were sold locally to make this car, dubbed Chev Can-am, race eligible.
Two race vehicles became awesome racing saloons, set the first saloon 100 mph lap record, won its introductory race, and continued with easy wins as competitors were frightened away. 
These Can-ams are quite popular with Collectors today.
1977 took him to Australia to compete at the well known Sandown 500 and Bathurst 1000 events, in a local GM Holden V8 Torana against the Ford V8s. He made 4th place in the Sandown with a dated model A9X. The SL5000 he was sharing with British Saloon Car Champion Gerry Marshall at Bathurst retired with a broken seat.

In 1979, race organizers introduced a new racing formula, allowing any engine/chassis from one make to be combined. Fiat SA was interested. This required fabricating a space frame vehicle with fibre-glass panels to look like a Fiat 131, mated with a turbo charged 2.5 litre Ferrari v6 600 bhp power unit. This car quickly proved one of the fastest saloon cars in the type of racing, but shortly after the debut Fiat decided, pressured by sanctions against SA, to pull out of the country. The car was sold off, but still raced by other drivers. The formula was shortlived.

==Endurance racing==
As well as the abovementioned sprint races, van Rooyen participated in the Annual Kyalami 9 hour endurance races and the Springbok 3 hour series enduros nearly every year, sharing drives with local drivers Arnold Chatz, Eddie Keizan, Dave Charlton, Chappie Wicks, George Santana, Brian Davies, Geoff Mortimer, Colin Burford, Antonio Prixinho, Peter Gough, and overseas owner/drivers Nanni Galli, Christine Becker, Tony Dean.
Best result was a 2nd place with Tony Dean driving a Ferrari Dino in the 1968 Kyalami 9 hour.

Mazda SA brought their competition Mazda RX100 Saloon from Japan with factory support team to the 1971 Springbok Endurance Series, van Rooyen and Gough as drivers. Engine performance was impressive, but van Rooyen was so disappointed with the handling that he phoned the SA factory boss for an OK to make alterations. So, just 2 days before the race, the front suspension was removed, parts and brackets cut, welded, bent etc, then re-assembled - to the horror of the Japanese mechanics! (Thereafter it lapped - the text says! - up to 4 seconds faster??)
==Inventor==

* Automatic swimming pool cleaners always skipped certain areas during their cleaning cycle. Invented the Twister, to be added to the suction line, which was patented and so successful that royalties still come in.
* After witnessing serious F1 accidents caused by throttles jamming wide open, invented a special device to be fitted to the brake hydraulics, cutting power to the ignition when a great excess of brake pressure was applied.
* Well ahead of his time, before it even occurred to the top world F1 teams, he invented and fabricated a successful automatically spring activated rear wing drag reduction setup, which was affixed to the high wing of his F1 vehicle, reducing the angle of attack. The high wing configuration was banned by the FIA soon after, due to wing mount breakage accidents.
* Developing the CITS two stroke power unit, presently still being perfected. One of the most promising new internal combustion ideas, offering reduced fuel consumption, eliminating mixing oil with fuel, meeting global smog emissions regulations, improved torque and power at all rpms, better power per unit weight, over other two-stroke and 4 stroke units.

==Participation in F1 Grand Prix racing==
Van Rooyen participated in two Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 1 January 1968. He retired from both, scoring no championship points.

==Personal life and death==
In later life, Van Rooyen was diagnosed with mesothelioma, caused by asbestos. He died in New South Wales, Australia on 14 September 2023, at the age of 84.
==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap.)

† Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.

===Complete Bathurst 1000 results===
==References==
==Sources==
* Photos of van Rooyen and various racing cars
* Profile at www.grandprix.com
* Book publication: Kyalami a reflection on the history pp 396-400 
* Springbok Series by Greg Mills Book on An Era of Sports and Saloon Car Racing in Southern Africa
* compendium of articles by SA Journalists 
* The CITS - Crankcase Independent Two-Stroke Engine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172816" start="0" end="16" title="Basil van Rooyen" label="Basil van Rooyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="73" end="86" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117241" start="333" end="341" title="Puch 250 SGS" label="Puch 250"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133667" start="550" end="566" title="Ford Anglia" label="Ford Anglia 105E"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="763" end="784" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077026" start="797" end="810" title="Lotus Cortina" label="Lotus Cortina"/>
<link wikidata="Q739622" start="4335" end="4341" title="Holden Torana" label="Torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="7454" end="7465" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077603" start="7654" end="7666" title="mesothelioma" label="mesothelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="7678" end="7686" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="7699" end="7714" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7840" end="7843" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7901" end="7904" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228224" wikidata="Q172658" url="?curid=1228224" title="Ben Pon">
<text>Bernardus Marinus &quot;Ben&quot; Pon (9 December 1936 – 30 September 2019) was a Dutch vintner and Olympian and motor racing driver. He competed in one Formula One race, the 1962 Dutch Grand Prix, but had a far longer career in sports car racing, before turning his back on the track to concentrate on the wine trade. He also represented the Netherlands in clay pigeon shooting at the 1972 Summer Olympics, finishing 31st in the skeet event.

==Life==
His father, Ben Pon, Sr., was an importer of Volkswagen Beetles into the United States, and is considered to be the &quot;father&quot; of the Volkswagen Type 2 due to his initial interest and input into the project.

Ben Pon was a personal friend of Formula One driver Carel Godin de Beaufort. It was de Beaufort&#x27;s own Ecurie Maarsbergen privateer team that provided a Porsche 787 for him to race at Zandvoort, in his home Grand Prix on 20 May 1962. He failed to finish the race due to an accident, which flipped his car over, throwing Pon out of the cockpit and into a shrubbery. In response, Pon vowed never again to race single-seaters, and in the years that followed he remained true to his word, while achieving many successes in sports car racing also driving a Porsche. Pon retired from professional sports car racing in 1965.

After his retirement in the sports arena, Pon turned his attention to the wine trade. He was known for his Bernardus Winery in Carmel Valley, California, and owned the oldest wine negotiating business in the Netherlands.
==Racing record==

===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
== References ==
== External links ==
* Bernadus Winery website
* Profile on F1 Rejects 
* Biography of Bernadus Pon
* Who&#x27;s Who of Volkswagen</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172658" start="0" end="37" title="Ben Pon" label="Bernardus Marinus &amp;quot;Ben&amp;quot; Pon"/>
<link wikidata="Q897317" start="88" end="95" title="vintner" label="vintner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="100" end="108" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="113" end="125" title="motor racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="153" end="164" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q423724" start="175" end="196" title="1962 Dutch Grand Prix" label="1962 Dutch Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="229" end="246" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="307" end="311" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130059" start="358" end="369" title="clay pigeon shooting" label="clay pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="386" end="406" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500724" start="430" end="441" title="Shooting at the 1972 Summer Olympics – Mixed skeet" label="skeet event"/>
<link wikidata="Q816583" start="465" end="477" title="Ben Pon, Sr." label="Ben Pon, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="498" end="515" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="595" end="612" title="Volkswagen Type 2" label="Volkswagen Type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q171963" start="722" end="745" title="Carel Godin de Beaufort" label="Carel Godin de Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082197" start="777" end="795" title="Ecurie Maarsbergen" label="Ecurie Maarsbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q946645" start="827" end="838" title="Porsche 787" label="Porsche 787"/>
<link wikidata="Q423724" start="858" end="867" title="1962 Dutch Grand Prix" label="Zandvoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="1193" end="1210" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q63929540" start="1226" end="1233" title="Porsche in motorsport" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1400" end="1416" title="Bernardus Winery" label="Bernardus Winery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49785301" start="1420" end="1445" title="Carmel Valley, California" label="Carmel Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1631" end="1634" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228225" wikidata="Q171988" url="?curid=1228225" title="Beppe Gabbiani">
<text>Giuseppe &quot;Beppe&quot; Gabbiani (born 2 January 1957) is an Italian racing driver. He participated in 17 World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 1 October 1978, and scored no championship points. He also participated in one non-Championship Formula One race.

In Formula 2, he won the 1983 Eifelrennen.

In sports car racing, he finished third in the 2003 1000km Spa.
==Racing record==

===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key) 
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete International Formula 3000 results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
==References==
*Profile at grandprix.com

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171988" start="0" end="35" title="Beppe Gabbiani" label="Giuseppe &amp;quot;Beppe&amp;quot; Gabbiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="72" end="85" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="128" end="139" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="283" end="292" title="Formula 2" label="Formula 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q240895" start="310" end="321" title="Eifelrennen" label="Eifelrennen"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="327" end="344" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164848" start="376" end="386" title="1000km Spa" label="1000km Spa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="465" end="468" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="615" end="618" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="715" end="718" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228226" wikidata="Q172805" url="?curid=1228226" title="Bernard Collomb">
<text>Bernard Marie François Alexandre Collomb-Clerc (7 October 1930 – 19 September 2011) was a Formula One driver from France. He participated in six World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 2 July 1961, scoring no championship points. He almost always drove self-prepared cars, and first raced Coopers, switching to Lotuses in 1963. His best Formula One result was fourth at Vienna in a non-Championship race in 1961, at the wheel of a Cooper-Climax.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
===Non-Championship results===
(key)
==References==

*&quot;The Grand Prix Who&#x27;s Who&quot;, Steve Small, 1996</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172805" start="0" end="46" title="Bernard Collomb" label="Bernard Marie François Alexandre Collomb-Clerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="90" end="101" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="293" end="300" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Coopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="315" end="322" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="374" end="380" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="" start="504" end="507" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="541" end="544" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228229" wikidata="Q172531" url="?curid=1228229" title="Bertil Roos">
<text>Bertil Ingemar Roos (12 October 1943 – 31 March 2016) was a Swedish racing driver from Gothenburg. He participated in a single Formula One Grand Prix, his home race in 1974, from which he retired with transmission failure.

==Career==
Despite enjoying early promise in winning the US Formula Super Vee title in 1973, and also doing well in Formula 2 in Europe and Formula Atlantic in Canada, Roos only received one shot at Formula One. He and his team, Shadow, did not get on particularly well, and ultimately the team chose to work with Tom Pryce instead. Roos went back to the US and Canada, where he continued racing.

He was the senior driving instructor for the Fred Opert racing school in Pennsylvania, USA near Pocono Raceway, a business that he later purchased.

Still racing in the 1980s, Roos was a two-time Can-Am champion in the 2 liter and under category.

Roos died at Pocono Medical Center, East Stroudsburg Pennsylvania, on 31 March 2016.

==Racing record==

===US Formula Super Vee===
===SCCA National Championship Runoffs===

=== Complete Formula One results ===
(key)
== References ==
==External links==
*Obituary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172531" start="0" end="19" title="Bertil Roos" label="Bertil Ingemar Roos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="68" end="81" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="87" end="97" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="127" end="138" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077595" start="284" end="301" title="Formula Super Vee" label="Formula Super Vee"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="340" end="349" title="Formula 2" label="Formula 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437624" start="364" end="380" title="Formula Atlantic" label="Formula Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="384" end="390" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q173879" start="453" end="459" title="Shadow Racing Cars" label="Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172835" start="538" end="547" title="Tom Pryce" label="Tom Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q84308932" start="667" end="677" title="Fred Opert" label="Fred Opert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="678" end="691" title="racing school" label="racing school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813430" start="718" end="732" title="Pocono Raceway" label="Pocono Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032055" start="818" end="824" title="Can-Am" label="Can-Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="923" end="935" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1082" end="1085" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228231" wikidata="Q172641" url="?curid=1228231" title="Bill Aston">
<text>William Simpson Aston (29 March 1900 – 4 March 1974) was a British racing driver who participated in three World Championship Grands Prix, in 1952 when the championship was run to Formula Two rules, for his own team Aston Butterworth.

==Career==
Prior to taking part in World Championship Grand Prix racing, Aston was a test pilot and motorcycle racer. He turned to four-wheel racing with a Cooper-JAP in Formula Three and later graduated into Formula Two. He came close to winning a heat race at Chimay in 1951, driving an Cooper, but his car failed on the last lap. In the same year he set a world speed record at Montlhéry in the streamlined Cooper, fitted with a V-twin J.A.P. motor.

For 1952 he teamed up with Archie Butterworth to build the Aston Butterworth, a car that raced quite well, but was unfortunately very unreliable. He entered the car in the British Grand Prix and qualified 30th and last. However, he was unable to start the race. He then entered the 1952 German Grand Prix, but his car failed on the second lap. At the Italian Grand Prix he failed to make it through qualifying. Aston raced on into his 60s, with a Mini and a Jaguar, before he retired.

==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)

† Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.

* Car over 1000cc - Not eligible for points.

==See also==
*Robin Montgomerie-Charrington

==References==
== External links ==
*Bill Aston profile at The 500 Owners Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172641" start="0" end="21" title="Bill Aston" label="William Simpson Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="67" end="80" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="180" end="191" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q173485" start="216" end="233" title="Aston Butterworth" label="Aston Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="336" end="346" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="392" end="398" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="399" end="402" title="J. A. Prestwich Industries Ltd" label="JAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="406" end="419" title="Formula Three" label="Formula Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="445" end="456" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299007" start="498" end="504" title="Grand Prix des Frontières" label="Chimay"/>
<link wikidata="Q735277" start="617" end="626" title="Autodrome de Linas-Montlhéry" label="Montlhéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q173712" start="675" end="681" title="J. A. Prestwich Industries" label="J.A.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q4786635" start="717" end="735" title="Archie Butterworth" label="Archie Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q173485" start="749" end="766" title="Aston Butterworth" label="Aston Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q173072" start="862" end="880" title="1952 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173042" start="972" end="994" title="1952 German Grand Prix" label="1952 German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173023" start="1041" end="1059" title="1952 Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="1137" end="1141" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="1148" end="1154" title="Jaguar (car)" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1250" end="1253" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1311" end="1314" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q172369" start="1525" end="1554" title="Robin Montgomerie-Charrington" label="Robin Montgomerie-Charrington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228233" wikidata="Q172649" url="?curid=1228233" title="Bill Brack">
<text>William Brack (born 26 December 1935) is a Canadian former racing driver. Brack raced in Formula One and the Atlantic Championship.

Born in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Brack originally became involved in auto racing in the early 1960s, in the form of ice-racing Minis (using a company car) in Huntsville, Ontario. He went on to purchase Gordon Brown&#x27;s own racing Mini (Gord Brown being another Mini racer as well as dealer of British cars at Glendale Suburban Motors in Brampton.)

Brack subsequently became a Formula One driver who raced for the Lotus and BRM teams. After Formula One he was successful in Atlantic Championship in the mid-1970s, having won the Canadian Formula Atlantic Championships in three successive years (1973, 1974, 1975) before retiring from racing to open a Daimler Chrysler dealership (Downtown Chrysler) near the Canadian National Exhibition in Toronto. He is not related to the Swedish race car driver Kenny Bräck.

==Complete Formula One results==
(key)
==References==

*Profile at grandprix.com

==External links==
*Interview at Canadianracer.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172649" start="0" end="13" title="Bill Brack" label="William Brack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="59" end="72" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="89" end="100" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q756319" start="109" end="130" title="Atlantic Championship" label="Atlantic Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="141" end="148" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024091" start="292" end="311" title="Huntsville, Ontario" label="Huntsville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="514" end="525" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="551" end="556" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173012" start="561" end="564" title="BRM" label="BRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q756319" start="611" end="632" title="Atlantic Championship" label="Atlantic Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="789" end="805" title="DaimlerChrysler" label="Daimler Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q715605" start="936" end="947" title="Kenny Bräck" label="Kenny Bräck"/>
<link wikidata="" start="984" end="987" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228235" wikidata="Q172559" url="?curid=1228235" title="Bill Whitehouse">
<text>William James Whitehouse (1 April 1909 in Plumstead – 14 July 1957 at Reims) was a British racing driver from England.

Bill started racing in a Cooper 500 in 1949 in 500 cc Car Club National races (later Formula 3). Several wins and top placings followed and through this he became friends with fellow car dealer Bernie Ecclestone. He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, on 17 July 1954. He retired from the race with fuel system problems, and scored no World Championship points. He also competed in several non-Championship Formula One races.
Bill was the owner of Westmount Garage in Blendon, Bexley, Kent. This Garage was later the base for the Gemini Formula Junior Team.
He was killed in a Formula Two crash at the Reims Circuit driving a works car, loaned after his privately entered Cooper T39 had engine failure. Later in that race the American Herbert MacKay-Fraser was also killed.
==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
==References==
==External links==
*Bill Whitehouse profile at The 500 Owners Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172559" start="0" end="24" title="Bill Whitehouse" label="William James Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q946533" start="42" end="51" title="Plumstead" label="Plumstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q171574" start="70" end="75" title="Reims-Gueux" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="91" end="104" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="205" end="214" title="Formula 3" label="Formula 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q172724" start="314" end="331" title="Bernie Ecclestone" label="Bernie Ecclestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="356" end="367" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="724" end="735" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q171574" start="749" end="762" title="Reims-Gueux" label="Reims Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="819" end="825" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q172434" start="882" end="903" title="Herbert MacKay-Fraser" label="Herbert MacKay-Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="" start="974" end="977" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228236" wikidata="Q172496" url="?curid=1228236" title="Bob Bondurant">
<text>Robert Lewis Bondurant (April 27, 1933 – November 12, 2021) was an American racecar driver who raced for the Shelby American, Ferrari, and Eagle teams. Bondurant was one of the most famous drivers to emerge from the Southern California road racing scene in the 1950s, and achieved success in North America and in Europe. His Bob Bondurant School of High Performance Driving has been responsible for training generations of American racing drivers.

==Career==
Bondurant was born in Evanston, Illinois. During his teens, Bondurant raced an Indian motorcycle on dirt ovals. In 1956 he switched to sports car racing with a Morgan and started to attract attention when he won the West Coast &quot;B&quot; production Championship, in a Chevrolet Corvette winning 18 out of 20 races.

Santa Barbara Chevrolet dealer Shelly Washburn hired Bondurant in 1961 to drive his #614 1959 Corvette. Some of the best Corvette racing duels were between him and David McDonald on the West Coast during the early 1960s. At the L.A. Times Grand Prix in October 1962, Bondurant drove Washburn&#x27;s new 1963 Corvette Z06 Stingray. Between 1961 and 1963, he won 30 out of 32 races in Washburn&#x27;s Corvettes.

In 1963, he became a member of Carroll Shelby&#x27;s Ford Cobra team, winning his first race at the Continental Divide Raceway in Colorado, followed by an overall win at the LA Times Grand Prix GT race at Riverside in October 1963. For the 1964 FIA season after finishing 2nd in GT at Sebring, Bondurant was in Europe racing the new 289 FIA Cobras at the Targa Florio, Spa, and Nurburgring. His best-known victory was winning the GT class at Le Mans 24 Hours in 1964 in Shelby&#x27;s new Cobra Daytona Coupe with Dan Gurney co-driving. In 1965 Bondurant won the FIA Manufacturers&#x27; World Championship for Shelby American and Ford, winning seven out of ten races against the class dominating Ferrari 250 GTOs in Europe. In the same year he drove a works Ferrari Formula 1 car during the United States Grand Prix at Watkins Glen, and handled a Lotus 33 for Reg Parnell at the following Mexican race.

In 1966, Bondurant served as a technical consultant for John Frankenheimer&#x27;s film &quot;Grand Prix&quot; and trained the film&#x27;s lead actor James Garner to drive Formula cars in the race sequences. Bondurant was one of two drivers (alongside Graham Hill) to help extricate Jackie Stewart from his fuel-leaking wrecked car during the 1966 Belgian Grand Prix, the incident that led to Stewart&#x27;s crusade for motor racing safety. Bondurant also drove BRMs in five Grands Prix for Team Chamaco Collect, finishing 4th at Monaco. He finished the Formula One season in North America in two races, driving an Eagle for Dan Gurney&#x27;s Anglo American Racers.

For 1967, he drove in the CanAm series and in a Corvette L88 Coupe at Le Mans. At Le Mans he led the GT class until a wrist pin failed putting the car out in the early morning. Later that month while driving a McLaren, at Watkins Glen, the steering arm broke at 150 mph approaching the Loop-Chute section of Watkins Glen (the current Turn 5, but without the bus stop, which was installed in 1992). Bondurant sustained serious rib, leg, foot and, most seriously, back injuries in the subsequent accident in which his car flipped eight times. Doctors told him he would likely never walk again, but through courage and hard work he overcame his injuries.

While recuperating, Bondurant drafted an idea for a high performance driving school borrowing from the experiences he had while training James Garner for &quot;Grand Prix&quot;. The Bob Bondurant School of High Performance Driving opened in early 1968 at Orange County International Raceway then moved to Ontario and then to Sonoma, where he was an important figure in the track&#x27;s development. Nissan Motor Company (under Datsun name in the U.S.) was Bondurant&#x27;s sponsoring partner in his school from its beginning, and continued in that role at the Sonoma Raceway driving school.

In the June 1969 run of the grueling offroad Baja 500 race, Bondurant with co-driver Tony Murphy took first place in the passenger car class driving an SC/Rambler for James Garner&#x27;s &quot;American International Racers&quot; team that was sponsored by American Motors Corporation (AMC). 

Bondurant had four NASCAR starts, all at Riverside International Raceway, with his highest finish of 18th in 1981.

Following the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake he moved the driving school to Phoenix, Arizona, where he enjoyed close ties to General Motors and Goodyear Tires.

Bondurant was a driving instructor to actors James Garner, Paul Newman, Clint Eastwood, Robert Wagner, Tim Allen, Tom Cruise, and Nicolas Cage.

==Awards==
*Bondurant was inducted in the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 2003. 
*He was inducted in the West Coast Stock Car Hall of Fame in 2014.

==Death==
Bondurant died in Paradise Valley, Arizona, on November 12, 2021, at the age of 88. He is survived by his wife Pat.

A statement on his death reads, in part, &quot;Bondurant is the only American to bring home the World Championship trophy back to the U.S. while racing for Carroll Shelby. He won his class at Le Mans and has been inducted into ten motorsports halls of fame. Bondurant Racing School was founded in 1968 and has graduated celebrities for car movies like James Garner, Paul Newman, Tom Cruise, Nicolas Cage, and Christian Bale, along with over 500,000 graduates from around the world. His legacy will remain with us forever.&quot;

==Racing record==
===SCCA National Championship Runoffs===

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Formula One Non-Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==External links==

* Bondurant Racing School
* Bondurant Kart Racing School
* Bondurant Driving &amp; Racing School Programs
* The Bondurant Methodology
*Bob Bondurant America&#x27;s uncrowned World Driving Champion (2007, Editions Cotty; )
*Bob Bondurant Des Cobra à la Formule1 la meme passion (2008, Editions Cotty; )</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172496" start="0" end="22" title="Bob Bondurant" label="Robert Lewis Bondurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="76" end="90" title="racecar driver" label="racecar driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045210" start="109" end="124" title="Shelby American" label="Shelby American"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="126" end="133" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q173450" start="139" end="144" title="Anglo American Racers" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="216" end="235" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931872" start="325" end="373" title="Bob Bondurant School of High Performance Driving" label="Bob Bondurant School of High Performance Driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q462799" start="482" end="500" title="Evanston, Illinois" label="Evanston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091034" start="539" end="545" title="Indian (motorcycle)" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="595" end="612" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165625" start="620" end="626" title="Morgan Motor Company" label="Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="731" end="749" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q354043" start="1221" end="1235" title="Carroll Shelby" label="Carroll Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1243" end="1247" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q289168" start="1248" end="1253" title="AC Cobra" label="Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172871" start="1395" end="1404" title="Riverside International Raceway" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="1545" end="1557" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="1632" end="1648" title="Le Mans 24 Hours" label="Le Mans 24 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="1703" end="1713" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1819" end="1823" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1947" end="1954" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q595598" start="1980" end="2004" title="1965 United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="2008" end="2020" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="2036" end="2041" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173578" start="2042" end="2044" title="Lotus 33" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307836" start="2049" end="2060" title="Reg Parnell Racing" label="Reg Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q338564" start="2078" end="2090" title="1965 Mexican Grand Prix" label="Mexican race"/>
<link wikidata="Q262820" start="2149" end="2167" title="John Frankenheimer" label="John Frankenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534298" start="2186" end="2196" title="Grand Prix (1966 film)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q108510" start="2242" end="2254" title="James Garner" label="James Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128" start="2344" end="2355" title="Graham Hill" label="Graham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="2375" end="2389" title="Jackie Stewart" label="Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q20898" start="2435" end="2458" title="1966 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1966 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173012" start="2554" end="2557" title="BRM" label="BRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q280105" start="2622" end="2628" title="1966 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173450" start="2735" end="2756" title="Anglo American Racers" label="Anglo American Racers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032055" start="2785" end="2790" title="Can-Am Challenge Cup" label="CanAm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351854" start="2969" end="2976" title="McLaren Cars" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931872" start="3594" end="3642" title="Bob Bondurant School of High Performance Driving" label="Bob Bondurant School of High Performance Driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099574" start="3667" end="3702" title="Orange County International Raceway" label="Orange County International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663312" start="3717" end="3724" title="Ontario Motor Speedway" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q112563" start="3737" end="3743" title="Sonoma Raceway" label="Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="3811" end="3817" title="Nissan Motors" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="3839" end="3845" title="Datsun" label="Datsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q112563" start="3972" end="3986" title="Sonoma Raceway" label="Sonoma Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848783" start="4049" end="4057" title="Baja 500" label="Baja 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507706" start="4156" end="4166" title="Rambler American" label="SC/Rambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q108510" start="4171" end="4183" title="James Garner" label="James Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="4260" end="4287" title="American Motors Corporation" label="American Motors Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="4316" end="4322" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q172871" start="4338" end="4369" title="Riverside International Raceway" label="Riverside International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053476" start="4427" end="4454" title="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake" label="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="4486" end="4493" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="4495" end="4502" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="4535" end="4549" title="General Motors Corporation" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="4554" end="4568" title="Goodyear Tires" label="Goodyear Tires"/>
<link wikidata="Q108510" start="4616" end="4628" title="James Garner" label="James Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="4630" end="4641" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="4643" end="4657" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q310493" start="4659" end="4672" title="Robert Wagner" label="Robert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q208408" start="4674" end="4683" title="Tim Allen" label="Tim Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="4685" end="4695" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="4701" end="4713" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949998" start="4758" end="4793" title="Motorsports Hall of Fame of America" label="Motorsports Hall of Fame of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984834" start="4828" end="4861" title="West Coast Stock Car Hall of Fame" label="West Coast Stock Car Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5643" end="5646" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5692" end="5695" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228238" wikidata="Q171886" url="?curid=1228238" title="Bob Evans (racing driver)">
<text>Robert Neville Anthony Evans (born 11 June 1947) is a British former racing driver from England. He participated in 12 World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 1 March 1975. He scored no championship points. He also competed in numerous non-Championship Formula One races.

Evans followed the usual route through to Formula One, via Formula Ford, Formula 3 and Formula 5000, winning the 1974 Rothmans 5000 European Championship. After a season with the struggling BRM team in 1975, Evans tested and occasionally raced for Lotus the following year. He subsequently drove a Brabham for RAM in the 1976 British Grand Prix, before he moved to the Aurora F1 Championship in the late 1970s.

==Racing record==

===Complete European F5000 Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
===Complete World Sportscar Championship results===
(key)

;Footnotes:
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Complete Formula One Non-Championship results===
(key)
===Complete Shellsport International Series results===
(key)
===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key)
===Complete British Formula One Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
===24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==External links==
*Profile at grandprix.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171886" start="0" end="28" title="Bob Evans (racing driver)" label="Robert Neville Anthony Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="138" end="149" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437649" start="348" end="360" title="Formula Ford" label="Formula Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="362" end="371" title="Formula 3" label="Formula 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q767942" start="376" end="388" title="Formula 5000" label="Formula 5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805452" start="402" end="442" title="1974 Rothmans 5000 European Championship" label="1974 Rothmans 5000 European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q173012" start="479" end="482" title="BRM" label="BRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="537" end="542" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="587" end="594" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q173104" start="599" end="602" title="RAM Racing" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q171633" start="610" end="633" title="1976 British Grand Prix" label="1976 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172812" start="658" end="680" title="British Formula One Championship" label="Aurora F1 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="" start="772" end="775" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="921" end="924" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="994" end="997" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1052" end="1055" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1113" end="1116" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1176" end="1179" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1238" end="1241" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228241" wikidata="Q6247814" url="?curid=1228241" title="John McGovern (VC)">
<text>John McGovern VC (16 May 1825 – 22 November 1888) (Also known as McGOWAN) was born in the parish of Templeport in Tullyhaw, County Cavan, Ireland, was an Irish recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.

==Details==
He was 32 years old, and a private in the 1st Bengal European Fusiliers (later The Royal Munster Fusiliers), Bengal Army during the Indian Mutiny when the following deed took place on 23 June 1857 at Delhi, India for which he was awarded the VC:
==Further information==
McGovern emigrated to Canada and died in Hamilton, Ontario, in November 1888.

==The medal==
His Victoria Cross is displayed at the National Army Museum &quot;(Chelsea, England)&quot;.

==References==

*&quot;The Register of the Victoria Cross&quot; (1981, 1988 and 1997)
*&quot;Ireland&#x27;s VCs&quot; (Dept of Economic Development, 1995)
*&quot;Monuments to Courage&quot; (David Harvey, 1999)
*&quot;Irish Winners of the Victoria Cross&quot; (Richard Doherty &amp; David Truesdale, 2000)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6247814" start="0" end="13" title="John McGovern (VC)" label="John McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="14" end="16" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974550" start="114" end="122" title="Tullyhaw" label="Tullyhaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q187402" start="124" end="136" title="County Cavan" label="County Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="154" end="159" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="177" end="191" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="294" end="301" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="306" end="318" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="367" end="374" title="private (rank)" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546365" start="382" end="411" title="1st Bengal European Fusiliers" label="1st Bengal European Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374505" start="423" end="446" title="Royal Munster Fusiliers" label="Royal Munster Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083685" start="449" end="460" title="Bengal Army" label="Bengal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="472" end="485" title="Indian Mutiny" label="Indian Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="540" end="545" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="547" end="552" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="651" end="668" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q731616" start="742" end="762" title="National Army Museum" label="National Army Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="770" end="777" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760066" start="819" end="853" title="The Register of the Victoria Cross" label="The Register of the Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574533" start="889" end="907" title="Ireland&amp;#x27;s VCs" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s VCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264386" start="958" end="978" title="Monuments to Courage" label="Monuments to Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574533" start="1013" end="1048" title="Irish Winners of the Victoria Cross" label="Irish Winners of the Victoria Cross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228242" wikidata="Q172325" url="?curid=1228242" title="Bob Gerard">
<text>Frederick Roberts Gerard (19 January 1914 – 26 January 1990) was a racing driver and businessman from England. He participated in numerous top-level motor racing events on either side of World War II, including eight World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, scoring no championship points.

==Early career==
Bob Gerard was born in 1914 in Leicester into a family well acquainted with mechanical transport. His family&#x27;s business was Parr&#x27;s Ltd., initially a bicycle manufacturer who, like many others such as Triumph, moved into the newly evolving motor vehicle market at the turn of the 20th century. Parr&#x27;s, though, was far from a high-performance firm, concentrating mostly on haulage.

However, as daily transport his father favoured the sporting Riley brand, and it was with a Riley Nine that Bob Gerard made his first foray into motorsport in the 1933 MCC Land&#x27;s End trial. Success came immediately, and in this first event Gerard not only completed the demanding course (in itself a significant achievement) but did so in sufficient style to earn himself a Premier Award. This despite him being severely near-sighted.

Throughout the remainder of the 1930s Gerard continued to compete in trials and sprint races, and after purchasing a 1½ litre Riley Sprite he also began to participate in circuit racing. Early club races at his East Midlands home circuit Donington Park continued his success, with Gerard taking two victories over cars with much larger engines, as well as ninth in the prestigious Donington TT race. In between running the family business, Gerard continued to compete at Donington as often as he could, driving in the Nuffield Trophy in 1938 and 1939, although without success. With war looming, in 1939 he also took the little Riley down to the Brooklands circuit in Surrey. At that year&#x27;s Opening Meeting he took a highly creditable third place, and won a Campbell circuit handicap race later in the year.

==Post-war racing career==
Towards the end of the war Gerard purchased his first true racing car, paying Reg Parnell £1000 for ERA R4A. Using his engineering background and immaculate attention to detail, and by cannibalising sister car R6B for spares, Gerard managed to get R4A running in time for the Cockfosters demonstration in mid-1945. At the same run Gerard&#x27;s wife, Joan, also demonstrated the old Riley Sprite.

Prior to the 1946 season Gerard decided to equip himself with a more potent mount. While both Bob and Joan Gerard continued to use R4A for a string of hillclimbing and sprint victories, newly purchased ERA R14B was rebuilt and modified for circuit racing. Gerard&#x27;s major changes to the pre-war design were to fit a preselector gearbox and to change the Zoller-type supercharger for a smaller, but more efficient Murray-Jamieson design. He also later changed the car&#x27;s outward appearance, switching the old-fashioned upright radiator to one with a far more raked cowl, lowering the bonnet line to accommodate this.

Over the next five years Bob Gerard used R14B to great effect. He scored three consecutive victories in the Empire Trophy and two victories in the Jersey Road Race between 1947 and 1949, as well as regularly finishing in the top ten in many international standard events. In the first British Grand Prix, in 1948, Gerard drove the decade-old R14B to third place, beaten only by the brand new works&#x27; Maserati 4CLT/48s of Italian greats Luigi Villoresi and Alberto Ascari. The following year he went one better, taking second, again to a Maserati, this time driven by Swiss ace Toulo de Graffenried. His two wins and a Grand Prix second placing, along with seventh in the 1949 International Trophy race at Silverstone, earned Gerard the British Racing Drivers&#x27; Club&#x27;s prestigious Gold Star award for 1949.

Gerard continued to campaign R14B for the first year of the new FIA World Championship in . Despite the ever-increasing age gap between his car and the majority of the rest of the field, Bob Gerard&#x27;s meticulous preparation of his cars, and his emphasis on increasing their reliability, meant that he often finished a race much higher in the placings than expected.

At the very first World Championship event, the 1950 British Grand Prix, the Gerard-R14B pairing only narrowly missed out on the points, finishing in sixth place, despite having started as low as 13th on the grid. He also finished in sixth in R4A at the Monaco event later in the season, this time from 16th at the start.

However, the rapid evolution of racing machinery, inspired by the rewards offered from the Championship, meant that for Gerard would have to abandon his old ERA in favour of something more modern. Retaining a degree of patriotism, Gerard bought a Cooper T23-Bristol, which he would continue to use for both Championship and non-Championship races until when he upgraded to the new, mid-engined T43 chassis.

While he only twice finished in the top ten in Championship races in his Coopers – in 1954 and in his final Championship event at the 1957 British Grand Prix – Gerard remained a force in UK national level race events. During the 1950s he won many races, at most British circuits, and was a widely respected competitor.

Bob Gerard&#x27;s achievements were honoured by the owners of the Mallory Park track, in his native Leicestershire, when they named the circuit&#x27;s most prominent bend &quot;Gerard&#x27;s&quot;. Gerard himself continued to race into the 1960s, in a Turner sports car, and used his preparation expertise for the benefit of other drivers by acting as entrant for many promising newcomers right into the 1980s.

==Death==
Gerard died in 1990, one week after his 76th birthday, in South Croxton, Leicestershire.

==Career results==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)

† Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*Bob Gerard profile at The 500 Owners Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172325" start="0" end="24" title="Bob Gerard" label="Frederick Roberts Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="67" end="80" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="187" end="199" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="236" end="247" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="342" end="351" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140388" start="521" end="528" title="Triumph Motor Company" label="Triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="697" end="704" title="Logistics" label="haulage"/>
<link wikidata="Q747594" start="768" end="773" title="Riley (motorcar)" label="Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238415" start="799" end="809" title="Riley Nine" label="Riley Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918129" start="875" end="878" title="Motor Cycling Club" label="MCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128228" start="895" end="900" title="Classic Trials" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="1133" end="1145" title="near-sighted" label="near-sighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153100" start="1274" end="1286" title="Riley Sprite" label="Riley Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47994" start="1359" end="1372" title="East Midlands" label="East Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q173202" start="1386" end="1400" title="Donington Park" label="Donington Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1666" end="1681" title="Nuffield Trophy" label="Nuffield Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="1794" end="1804" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="1816" end="1822" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q172057" start="2067" end="2078" title="Reg Parnell" label="Reg Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172153" start="2089" end="2092" title="English Racing Automobiles" label="ERA"/>
<link wikidata="Q149680" start="2265" end="2276" title="Cockfosters" label="Cockfosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q820141" start="2538" end="2550" title="hillclimbing" label="hillclimbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349351" start="2707" end="2726" title="preselector gearbox" label="preselector gearbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="2757" end="2769" title="supercharger" label="supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="3159" end="3165" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019" start="3297" end="3315" title="British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095542" start="3320" end="3324" title="1948 British Grand Prix" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549417" start="3416" end="3432" title="Maserati 4CLT/48" label="Maserati 4CLT/48"/>
<link wikidata="Q171514" start="3452" end="3467" title="Luigi Villoresi" label="Luigi Villoresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086" start="3472" end="3486" title="Alberto Ascari" label="Alberto Ascari"/>
<link wikidata="Q115778" start="3593" end="3613" title="Toulo de Graffenried" label="Toulo de Graffenried"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068647" start="3687" end="3712" title="I BRDC International Trophy" label="1949 International Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="3721" end="3732" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925750" start="3752" end="3785" title="British Racing Drivers&amp;#x27; Club" label="British Racing Drivers&amp;#x27; Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3805" end="3814" title="BRDC Gold Star" label="Gold Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q173075" start="4251" end="4274" title="1950 British Grand Prix" label="1950 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173051" start="4457" end="4469" title="1950 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco event"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="4773" end="4779" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129818" start="4780" end="4783" title="Cooper T23" label="T23"/>
<link wikidata="Q27392" start="4784" end="4791" title="Bristol Cars" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093045" start="4908" end="4919" title="RMR layout" label="mid-engined"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129825" start="4920" end="4923" title="Cooper T43" label="T43"/>
<link wikidata="Q306112" start="5020" end="5024" title="1954 British Grand Prix" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q283763" start="5068" end="5091" title="1957 British Grand Prix" label="1957 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583363" start="5320" end="5332" title="Mallory Park" label="Mallory Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461355" start="5506" end="5512" title="Turner (car company)" label="Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971313" start="5734" end="5747" title="South Croxton" label="South Croxton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5841" end="5844" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5902" end="5905" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228243" wikidata="Q172794" url="?curid=1228243" title="Bob Said">
<text>Boris Said Jr. (May 5, 1932 in New York City – March 24, 2002 in Seattle), better known as Bob Said, was an American racing driver from the United States. The son of a Syrian father and a Russian mother, he grew up in Greenwich, Connecticut, and attended Deerfield Academy and Princeton. He discovered sports car racing during his first year at Princeton.

==Career==
In 1951, after doing well in local races and hill climbs, he left Princeton to pursue a racing career. His first race cars were a MG TD and a Jaguar XK120. In March 1953, he made his debut at Sebring 12 Hours, driving a Frazer Nash Mille Miglia to 14th-place finish. Said was the first American to win a road race in Europe after World War II, when he won a sports car race at Rouen-Les-Essarts, driving an OSCA MT4. Later that season, he notched another win at the Anerley Trophy at Crystal Palace circuit.

In 1954, Said switched to a Ferrari 500 Mondial Scaglietti, placing 3rd at Circuito di Senigallia; 2nd at Trullo d’Oro; and 9th at Syracuse Circuit.

On February 21, 1955, Said set a new post-World War II speed record on the Daytona Beach and Road Course, driving a 1954 Ferrari Formula One Grand Prix car, with a two-way average speed of 170.538 mph. He also made one NASCAR start, the 1959 Daytona 500, driving a Chevrolet, where he was credited with 50th after dropping out on lap 42 due to transmission failure. He participated in the first Formula One United States Grand Prix at Sebring on December 12, 1959. He spun off on the first lap and scored no World Championship points.

Said was also a bobsled racer, competing in the Olympics twice, 1968 in Grenoble and in 1972 at Sapporo, Japan achieving a best result of tenth. The 1968 games were notable as he competed against another racing driver-come-bobsledder, Robin Widdows.

Later he was the executive producer of a documentary entitled &quot;The Mystery of the Sphinx&quot;.

His son, Boris Said III, is a retired NASCAR driver and road course ringer.

==Motorsports career results==

===Complete Formula One results===
===NASCAR===
() (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. &quot;Italics&quot; – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)

====Grand National Series====
==References==
==External links==
*Bob Said biography at Grandprix.com
*&quot;Mystery of the Sphynx&quot; at IMDB</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172794" start="0" end="14" title="Bob Said" label="Boris Said Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="31" end="44" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="65" end="72" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172794" start="91" end="99" title="Bob Said" label="Bob Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="117" end="130" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303849" start="168" end="174" title="Syrian Americans" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140588" start="188" end="195" title="Russian Americans" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="218" end="240" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250893" start="255" end="272" title="Deerfield Academy" label="Deerfield Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="277" end="286" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q820141" start="413" end="424" title="Hillclimbing" label="hill climbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543959" start="498" end="503" title="MG T-type" label="MG TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422337" start="510" end="522" title="Jaguar XK120" label="Jaguar XK120"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="560" end="576" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="Sebring 12 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="698" end="710" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q173138" start="745" end="762" title="Rouen-Les-Essarts" label="Rouen-Les-Essarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17778460" start="775" end="783" title="OSCA MT4" label="OSCA MT4"/>
<link wikidata="Q849197" start="852" end="874" title="Crystal Palace circuit" label="Crystal Palace circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126922" start="905" end="924" title="Ferrari 500 Mondial" label="Ferrari 500 Mondial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045326" start="925" end="935" title="Carrozzeria Scaglietti" label="Scaglietti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16883666" start="1082" end="1094" title="speed record" label="speed record"/>
<link wikidata="Q743656" start="1102" end="1131" title="Daytona Beach and Road Course" label="Daytona Beach and Road Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1148" end="1155" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1156" end="1167" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="1168" end="1178" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="1246" end="1252" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569610" start="1264" end="1280" title="1959 Daytona 500" label="1959 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="1292" end="1301" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1422" end="1433" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q9209" start="1434" end="1458" title="United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172883" start="1462" end="1469" title="Sebring International Raceway" label="Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="1579" end="1586" title="bobsled" label="bobsled"/>
<link wikidata="Q9642" start="1627" end="1631" title="1968 Winter Olympics" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="1635" end="1643" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q9646" start="1651" end="1655" title="1972 Winter Olympics" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="1659" end="1666" title="Sapporo" label="Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1668" end="1673" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172427" start="1798" end="1811" title="Robin Widdows" label="Robin Widdows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948902" start="1882" end="1907" title="The Mystery of the Sphinx" label="The Mystery of the Sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335992" start="1925" end="1935" title="Boris Said" label="Boris Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="1954" end="1960" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938106" start="1972" end="1990" title="road course ringer" label="road course ringer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228245" wikidata="Q172051" url="?curid=1228245" title="Boy Hayje">
<text>Johan Gerard&quot;Boy&quot;Hayje (born 3 May 1949) is a former racing driver from the Netherlands. He participated in seven Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 29 August 1976. He scored no championship points.

After time spent racing saloon cars and winning the Dutch Formula Ford championship, Hayje raced in Formula 5000 and Formula 3. He drove a privately entered Penske in his home grand prix in 1976, before a difficult period in Formula One the following year driving a March for RAM Racing.

Once his Formula One career was over, Hayje raced in the European Renault 5 Turbo championship.

==Racing record==

===Complete European F5000 Championship results===
(key)
===Complete Formula One results===
(key)
===Complete World Sportscar Championship results===
(key)

;Footnotes:
===Complete Shellsport International Series results===
(key)
===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key)
===Complete British Formula One Championship results===
(key)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==External links==

*Profile at grandprix.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172051" start="0" end="12" title="Boy Hayje" label="Johan Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172051" start="18" end="21" title="Boy Hayje" label="Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172051" start="27" end="32" title="Boy Hayje" label="Hayje"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="63" end="76" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="86" end="97" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="124" end="135" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437649" start="270" end="282" title="Formula Ford" label="Formula Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q767942" start="312" end="324" title="Formula 5000" label="Formula 5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="329" end="338" title="Formula 3" label="Formula 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q174144" start="369" end="375" title="Penske Racing" label="Penske"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="478" end="483" title="March Engineering" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="Q173104" start="488" end="498" title="RAM Racing" label="RAM Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299603" start="567" end="582" title="Renault 5 Turbo" label="Renault 5 Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="669" end="672" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="710" end="713" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="768" end="771" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="842" end="845" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="905" end="908" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="967" end="970" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228247" wikidata="Q172518" url="?curid=1228247" title="Brausch Niemann">
<text>Ambraüsus &quot;Brausch&quot; Niemann (born 7 January 1939) is a former racing driver from South Africa. He participated in 2 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix in 1963 and 1965, both in his home country, driving a privately entered Lotus. He managed to qualify for the first of these, finishing 14th and scoring no championship points.

After success in Formula Junior in the mid-1960s, Niemann switched to enduro motor cycle racing, winning the South African championship in 1979.

==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key) 
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)

† Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.

==References==
*&quot;The Grand Prix Who&#x27;s Who&quot;, Steve Small, 1996</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172518" start="0" end="37" title="Brausch Niemann" label="Ambraüsus &amp;quot;Brausch&amp;quot; Niemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="72" end="85" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="91" end="103" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="126" end="137" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="241" end="246" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437637" start="363" end="377" title="Formula Junior" label="Formula Junior"/>
<link wikidata="" start="566" end="569" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="628" end="631" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228248" wikidata="Q172054" url="?curid=1228248" title="Brian Naylor (racing driver)">
<text>John Brian Naylor (24 March 1923 – 8 August 1989) was a British racing driver from England. He participated in seven Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 3 August 1958. He scored no championship points.

The son of a wealthy Stockport motor dealer, Naylor financed the building of his own Cooper-based JBW car, which he raced in several grands prix, although the car was out of its depth at that level.

He finished 42nd in the 1961 Daytona 500 becoming the first European driver to compete in NASCAR.

==Motorsports career results==
(key)

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
=== NASCAR Grand National Series ===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172054" start="0" end="17" title="Brian Naylor (racing driver)" label="John Brian Naylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="64" end="77" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="117" end="128" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="308" end="314" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267645" start="321" end="324" title="JBW" label="JBW"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570316" start="447" end="463" title="1961 Daytona 500" label="1961 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="513" end="519" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="" start="554" end="557" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228249" wikidata="Q171746" url="?curid=1228249" title="Brian Redman">
<text>Brian Herman Thomas Redman (born 9 March 1937) is a British retired racing driver.

Racing for Carl Haas and Jim Hall&#x27;s Chaparral Cars, Brian Redman won the 1974, &#x27;75 and &#x27;76 SCCA Formula 5000 series and has raced in nearly every category of racing, including Formula One. 
The Englishman began racing in 1959 and collected his first of four Manufacturers Championships in 1968, driving a Ford GT40 with Belgian Jacky Ickx for John Wyer Automotive Engineering. Redman 
also won the 1970/71 South African Springbok series and the IMSA Camel GTP Championship in 1981 driving a Lola T600. Brian is considered to be one of the greatest endurance racers in the history
of the sport. In addition to his four victories at Spa-Francorchamps, Brian has overall wins in the 1970 Targa Florio, the Watkins Glen 6 Hours, the 12 Hours of Sebring twice, the Nurburgring 1000 Ks twice, 
Brands Hatch 6 Hours twice, Osterrechring 1000 Ks twice, Monza 1000 Ks twice, Kyalami 9 Hours twice, has been a two-time winner at the 24 Hours of Daytona and holds two class victories at Le Mans.

He is currently a regular at the Monterey Historic Automobile Races at Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca.

==Career==

Redman raced F1 for McLaren, Shadow, Cooper, Williams
He participated in 15 World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 1 January 1968. He achieved one podium in the 1968 Spanish Grand Prix, finishing third in a Cooper-BRM behind Graham Hill in a Lotus-Ford and Denny Hulme in a McLaren-Ford. He then had an accident at the Belgian Grand Prix at Spa-Francorchamps, crashing his Cooper-BRM when the suspension broke at the Les Coombes corner; he survived with a badly broken arm. He scored a total of 8 championship points in his career, with two 5th places in 1972, at the Monaco Grand Prix and the German Grand Prix driving a Yardley McLaren.

He achieved spectacular success in sports-car racing, particularly in 1968 as a John Wyer Gulf driver, in 1969 and 1970 as a Porsche works driver and in 1972 with the Ferrari 312 PB; Winning at Spa Francorchamps 1000 Ks 5 times, the Nurburgring 1000 Ks 3 times, Daytona 24 Hours 2 times, Sebring twice, Watkins Glen 6 Hours, Osterreichring twice, Monza 1000 Ks twice, the Targa Florio, Brands Hatch 6 Hours twice etc. 
In 1973, Redman started racing in the USA full-time and won the SCCA/USAC Formula 5000 Championship three times in a row from 1974 to 1976 driving a Jim Hall/Carl Haas Lola T330/332C against considerable opposition, including Mario Andretti and Al Unser, Jody Scheckter, Jackie Oliver, Alan Jones, David Hobbs, Brett Lunger, Sam Posey, &quot;Vern&quot; Schuppan et al. Redman was employed at Haas&#x27;s business office in Highland Park, Illinois, where he also lived for a time. At the end of 1976 the SCCA announced new rules. The F5000 single-seaters had to use full-width bodywork and the new series would be called Can-Am. On the first day of practice for the first race of the new season, at Circuit Mont-Tremblant, Canada the new car took off at 160 mph went 40 feet in the air and turned over, landing upside down. Redman suffered a broken neck (C1), fractured shoulder and sternum, plus bruising of the brain. The ambulance blew a tire on the way to hospital. Redman was declared dead. It took him 9 months to recover and he returned to racing on a spectacular note by winning the 12 Hours of Sebring in 1978 driving a Porsche 935. He continued driving for Dick Barbour Racing through 1979 and 1980. In 1981, driving the brand new Lolas T600 IMSA GTP car he won the first race at Laguna Seca and went on to win the IMSA Camel GTP championship. His last year of professional racing was at the age of 52, driving for the works Aston Martin team in the 1989 World Sports Prototype Championship. He later co-managed the Redman Bright racing team.

Redman has now taken out his 61st racing licence, lives in Florida and is active in historic racing.

==Legacy==
*Road America hosts The WeatherTech International Challenge with Brian Redman for vintage/historic cars, one of the largest and most prestigious vintage racing events in the US
*Redman is inducted in the following Halls of Fame: Daytona International Hall of Fame, Sebring Hall of Fame, Talladega Hall of Fame, Motor Sport Hall of Fame (UK), Long Beach Pavement of Fame.

==Racing record==

===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap.)

† Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.

===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key)
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Non-Championship Formula One results===
(key)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Porsche experience&quot; interview of Brian Redman
*&quot;Targa 66 club&quot; started by Brian Redman</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171746" start="0" end="26" title="Brian Redman" label="Brian Herman Thomas Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="68" end="81" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360670" start="1118" end="1152" title="Monterey Historic Automobile Races" label="Monterey Historic Automobile Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423481" start="1156" end="1181" title="Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca" label="Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca"/>
<link wikidata="Q171835" start="1362" end="1385" title="1968 Spanish Grand Prix" label="1968 Spanish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901" start="1520" end="1538" title="1968 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172851" start="1542" end="1559" title="Circuit de Spa-Francorchamps" label="Spa-Francorchamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q171952" start="1769" end="1786" title="1972 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171843" start="1795" end="1812" title="1972 German Grand Prix" label="German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157793" start="2324" end="2359" title="SCCA/USAC Formula 5000 Championship" label="SCCA/USAC Formula 5000 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172282" start="2409" end="2417" title="Jim Hall (racing driver)" label="Jim Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q584699" start="2418" end="2427" title="Carl Haas" label="Carl Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668861" start="2428" end="2442" title="Lola T332" label="Lola T330/332C"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="2486" end="2500" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q368039" start="2505" end="2513" title="Al Unser" label="Al Unser"/>
<link wikidata="Q576671" start="2683" end="2706" title="Highland Park, Illinois" label="Highland Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032055" start="2880" end="2886" title="Can-Am" label="Can-Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q172873" start="2958" end="2980" title="Circuit Mont-Tremblant" label="Circuit Mont-Tremblant"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="3350" end="3369" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q945563" start="3388" end="3399" title="Porsche 935" label="Porsche 935"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="3694" end="3706" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954099" start="3719" end="3759" title="1989 World Sports Prototype Championship" label="1989 World Sports Prototype Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738483" start="3785" end="3798" title="Redman Bright" label="Redman Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q648512" start="3927" end="3939" title="Road America" label="Road America"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4373" end="4376" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4573" end="4576" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4633" end="4636" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4682" end="4685" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228251" wikidata="Q172443" url="?curid=1228251" title="Bruce Halford">
<text>Bruce Henley Halford (18 May 1931 – 2 December 2001) was a British racing driver from England. He was born in Hampton-in-Arden (then in Warwickshire) and educated at Blundell&#x27;s School

Halford drove in Formula One from to , participating in nine World Championship Grands Prix and numerous non-Championship races.

He died in Churston Ferrers, Devon. Halford&#x27;s obituary in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; described him as &quot;one of the last of the 1950s&#x27; select band of private-entrant owner-drivers from the heyday of the classical front-engined Grand Prix car.&quot;

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172443" start="0" end="20" title="Bruce Halford" label="Bruce Henley Halford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="67" end="80" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612062" start="110" end="126" title="Hampton-in-Arden" label="Hampton-in-Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="136" end="148" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930752" start="166" end="188" title="Blundell&amp;#x27;s School" label="Blundell&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="207" end="218" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q15210345" start="331" end="347" title="Churston Ferrers" label="Churston Ferrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="349" end="354" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="641" end="644" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228253" wikidata="Q173693" url="?curid=1228253" title="Bruce Johnstone (racing driver)">
<text>William Bruce Gordon Johnstone (30 January 1937 – 3 March 2022) was a South African racing driver. He participated in one Formula One (F1) World Championship Grand Prix, on 29 December 1962. He scored no championship points. He also competed in the F1 non-championship 1962 Oulton Park Gold Cup where he finished fourth and in the South African Formula 1 Championship.

Johnstone died on 3 March 2022, at the age of 85.

== Complete Formula One World Championship results ==
(key) 
==References==

*Profile at grandprix.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173693" start="0" end="30" title="Bruce Johnstone (racing driver)" label="William Bruce Gordon Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="84" end="97" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="122" end="133" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511737" start="269" end="294" title="1962 International Gold Cup" label="1962 Oulton Park Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="" start="476" end="479" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228256" wikidata="Q172111" url="?curid=1228256" title="Carlos Menditeguy">
<text>Carlos Alberto Menditéguy (10 August 1914 – 27 April 1973) was a racing driver and polo player from Buenos Aires, Argentina. He entered 11 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, achieving one podium, and scoring a total of nine championship points.

In polo he reached the highest possible handicap of 10. He was an all round sportsman and became a scratch golf player in under two years as the result of a bet with some friends.

Menditeguy died on April 27, 1973, and was buried in La Recoleta Cemetery in Buenos Aires.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
===Non-Championship Formula One results===
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172111" start="0" end="25" title="Carlos Menditeguy" label="Carlos Alberto Menditéguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="65" end="78" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="83" end="87" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="100" end="112" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="114" end="123" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="139" end="150" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q831322" start="489" end="509" title="La Recoleta Cemetery" label="La Recoleta Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="" start="581" end="584" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="630" end="633" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228258" wikidata="Q172138" url="?curid=1228258" title="Cesare Perdisa">
<text>Cesare Perdisa (21 October 1932 – 10 May 1998) was an Italian racing driver and agricultural journalist, who competed in Formula One at eight Grands Prix from and .

Born and raised in Bologna, Perdisa was the son of , an agronomist and faculty dean from the University of Bologna, and editor of local agricultural magazine &quot;&quot;. Perdisa participated in eight Formula One Grands Prix, debuting at the 1955 Monaco Grand Prix with Maserati, finishing third alongside Jean Behra. He achieved a further podium with Maserati at the 1956 Belgian Grand Prix alongside Stirling Moss. He competed for Ferrari at the 1957 Argentine Grand Prix, driving a Lancia D50.

Upon retiring from motor racing, Perdisa took over &quot;Terra e Vita&quot; alongside his brother Sergio, published by Rizzoli until its sale.

==Racing career==
Cesare Perdisa was born on 21 October 1931 in Bologna, Emilia-Romagna, Italy. His father, , was an agronomist from Ravenna and the editor of one of Italy&#x27;s most popular magazines on agriculture, &quot;&quot;; he was also a professor and faculty dean at the University of Bologna, founder of the publishing house , and was appointed a Knight of the Order of Merit for Labour in 1976. Perdisa&#x27;s older brother, Sergio, was to follow his father footsteps and join a publishing house specialized in books on farming but Cesare was more interested in a racing career. His Formula One debut was at the 1955 Monaco Grand Prix where he finished third on a Maserati behind Maurice Trintignant in a Ferrari and Eugenio Castellotti in a Lancia. Castellotti and Perdisa were significantly younger than the majority of the drivers around at the time, and forged a friendship that would last until Castellotti&#x27;s death in 1957.

During the course of his brief racing career, possibly due to his young age, Perdisa was often asked to give his car to his more experienced teammates when they encountered troubles. This happened, for example, on the 11th lap of the 1956 Belgian Grand Prix, when Stirling Moss lost the right rear wheel of his Maserati. Moss brought his car to a stop and ran a quarter of a mile back to the pits where he took over Perdisa&#x27;s Maserati, which he drove to the finish.

In January 1957 at the Argentine Grand Prix Perdisa gave his Ferrari to Wolfgang von Trips first and then to Peter Collins in an attempt to stop Juan-Manuel Fangio&#x27;s dominance on his Maserati. Despite their best efforts, the trio couldn&#x27;t keep up with Fangio and finished sixth. In March 1957 Perdisa was set to participate to the 12 Hours of Sebring but he withdrew his entry after he learned of the death of his teammate Eugenio Castellotti at the Modena Autodrome. Castellotti succumbed to his injuries after crashing a Ferrari he was testing for the event. Although Perdisa initially declared his decision to be of a temporary nature, his inability to overcome the shock for the loss of Castellotti eventually brought him to permanently retire from racing.

==Life after racing==
A few months after his retirement, Perdisa hit the news again in September 1957 when he rushed Juan Manuel Fangio and his wife, Andrea, to a hospital in Bologna. The couple had been thrown from their 2.5 litre Lancia Aurelia while trying to avoid a truck entering the highway. Travelling at close to 100 mph, Fangio&#x27;s car had smashed into a utility pole, although he and his wife only sustained minor injuries.

Following their father&#x27;s retirement in the mid-1960s, Perdisa and his brother Sergio continued to edit &quot;&quot;. The magazine, initially published by Rizzoli, was eventually purchased by Calderini Agricole, the largest agricultural company in Italy, and switch its focus on farming regulations and technological development.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 

:&quot;* Indicates shared drive with Jean Behra&quot;
:&quot;† Indicates shared drive with Stirling Moss&quot;
:&quot;‡ Indicates shared drive with Peter Collins and Wolfgang von Trips&quot;

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172138" start="0" end="14" title="Cesare Perdisa" label="Cesare Perdisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="62" end="75" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q396188" start="80" end="103" title="agricultural journalist" label="agricultural journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="121" end="132" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q179371" start="142" end="153" title="Formula One Grands Prix" label="Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="185" end="192" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781198" start="222" end="232" title="agronomist" label="agronomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="245" end="249" title="Dean (education)" label="dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="259" end="280" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q179371" start="368" end="391" title="Formula One Grands Prix" label="Formula One Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q417694" start="409" end="431" title="1955 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1955 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="437" end="445" title="Maserati in motorsport" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q172250" start="473" end="483" title="Jean Behra" label="Jean Behra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20878" start="535" end="558" title="1956 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1956 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="569" end="582" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="600" end="607" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q12452" start="615" end="640" title="1957 Argentine Grand Prix" label="1957 Argentine Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173634" start="652" end="662" title="Lancia D50" label="Lancia D50"/>
<link wikidata="Q732185" start="784" end="791" title="Angelo Rizzoli" label="Rizzoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="873" end="880" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781198" start="926" end="936" title="agronomist" label="agronomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="942" end="949" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="1077" end="1081" title="Dean (education)" label="dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="1089" end="1110" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="1127" end="1143" title="publishing house" label="publishing house"/>
<link wikidata="Q629291" start="1166" end="1205" title="Order of Merit for Labour" label="Knight of the Order of Merit for Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q417694" start="1432" end="1454" title="1955 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1955 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q35962" start="1484" end="1492" title="Maserati" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q171438" start="1500" end="1519" title="Maurice Trintignant" label="Maurice Trintignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1525" end="1532" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q171933" start="1537" end="1556" title="Eugenio Castellotti" label="Eugenio Castellotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="1562" end="1568" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20878" start="1989" end="2012" title="1956 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1956 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="2019" end="2032" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="2066" end="2074" title="Maserati in motorsport" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q57451" start="2299" end="2317" title="Wolfgang von Trips" label="Wolfgang von Trips"/>
<link wikidata="Q171483" start="2336" end="2349" title="Peter Collins (racing driver)" label="Peter Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="2568" end="2587" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q171933" start="2660" end="2679" title="Eugenio Castellotti" label="Eugenio Castellotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q739305" start="2687" end="2703" title="Modena Autodrome" label="Modena Autodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="2760" end="2767" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="3116" end="3134" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801839" start="3231" end="3245" title="Lancia Aurelia" label="Lancia Aurelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q732185" start="3597" end="3604" title="Angelo Rizzoli" label="Rizzoli"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3826" end="3829" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q172250" start="3870" end="3880" title="Jean Behra" label="Jean Behra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="3924" end="3937" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q171483" start="3981" end="3994" title="Peter Collins (racing driver)" label="Peter Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q57451" start="3999" end="4017" title="Wolfgang von Trips" label="Wolfgang von Trips"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228260" wikidata="Q173382" url="?curid=1228260" title="Charles de Tornaco">
<text>Baron Charles Victor Raymond André Evance de Tornaco (; 7 June 1927 – 18 September 1953) was a racing driver from Belgium. He participated in 4 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 22 June 1952. He scored no championship points.

De Tornaco was the co-founder of Ecurie Belgique, which later became Ecurie Francorchamps, and most of his racing career was with this team, driving Ferraris. In practice for the 1953 Modena Grand Prix, de Tornaco rolled his car and suffered serious head and neck injuries. There were no adequate medical facilities present, and he died on his way to hospital in a private saloon car.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
===Non-Championship Formula One results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173382" start="6" end="52" title="Charles de Tornaco" label="Charles Victor Raymond André Evance de Tornaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="95" end="108" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="114" end="121" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="144" end="155" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="282" end="297" title="Ecurie Belgique" label="Ecurie Belgique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579084" start="318" end="338" title="Ecurie Francorchamps" label="Ecurie Francorchamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="398" end="406" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferraris"/>
<link wikidata="Q113540851" start="428" end="450" title="1953 Modena Grand Prix" label="1953 Modena Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="688" end="691" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="737" end="740" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228261" wikidata="Q172538" url="?curid=1228261" title="Charles Pozzi">
<text>Charles Pozzi (27 August 1909 – 28 February 2001) was a French racing driver who participated in one World Championship Formula One race in 1950, the year of its inception.

==Racing career==
Born Carlo Alberto Pozzi in Paris, France of Italian parentage, he became known as Charles, the French translation of his name. He was working as an automobile broker and his career as a racing driver only began when he was already 37 years old. Later in life, as the official French importer of Ferrari and Maserati automobiles, his name was to appear on many racing cars.

In 1946, he competed, with his Delahaye 135CS, in several races including the Grand Prix of Bourgogne – Dijon where he finished in fourth position and the Le Mans Grand Prix, raced on the Nantes race track this year, where he finished in fifth position, driving a Delahaye.

In 1949, he won the Comminges sports car Grand Prix, in Saint-Gaudens, with a Delahaye 145 (chassis N° 48775), equipped with a 4.5-litre six-cylinder Delahaye 175 engine.


== Major achievements ==

&quot;Note: 35th Grand Prix de L&#x27;ACF results shared with Louis Rosier as co-driver&quot;

* 1947, raced at:
** Grand Prix of Pau,
** Grand Prix Automobile of Marseille,
** Circuit des Remparts in Angoulême,
** Grand Prix du Comminges in Saint-Gaudens.
* 1948, raced at:
** Grand Prix des Nations in Genève,
** DNF at Grand Prix du Comminges in Saint-Gaudens (Talbot).
* 1949, raced at Grand Prix Automobile of Pau,
* 1952, won the 12 Hours of Casablanca, Morocco
* 1953, won :
** the first position of the 12H of Hyères in the 2L category and at the third overall position,
** the second position of the 12H of Reims in the 2L category and the 6th position in the overall ranking. For these two events, he raced on the Ferrari 166MM Berlinetta Vignale which belong to his teammate François Picard.
** the third position at the 12 Hours of Agadir Morocco with a Lancia Aurelia
* 1954, finished :
** the 12 hours of Hyères in 2nd position with a Ferrari 500 Mondial,
** the 12 hours of Reims in 9th position with the same car.
** the hillclimb de Planfoy.

== Pozzi&#x27;s business ==
After his retirement from racing, he founded Charles Pozzi S.A., the official importer of Ferrari and Maserati motor vehicles in France. In 2003, the company was acquired by the Ferrari company. Ferrari dark blue paint &quot;Blu Pozzi&quot; was named in honour of Charles Pozzi.

Pozzi died in 2001 in Levallois-Perret, a suburb in western Paris.
==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
:&quot;* Indicates Shared Drive with Louis Rosier

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172538" start="0" end="13" title="Charles Pozzi" label="Charles Pozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="63" end="76" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="120" end="131" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="220" end="233" title="Paris, France" label="Paris, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="488" end="495" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35962" start="500" end="508" title="Maserati" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q783891" start="598" end="606" title="Delahaye" label="Delahaye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="645" end="676" title="Grand Prix of Dijon" label="Grand Prix of Bourgogne – Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="722" end="740" title="Le Mans Grand Prix" label="Le Mans Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q783891" start="831" end="839" title="Delahaye" label="Delahaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092875" start="862" end="893" title="Grand Prix du Comminges" label="Comminges sports car Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q209777" start="898" end="911" title="Saint-Gaudens, Haute-Garonne" label="Saint-Gaudens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021434" start="920" end="932" title="Delahaye 145" label="Delahaye 145"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140973" start="992" end="1004" title="Delahaye 175" label="Delahaye 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q173078" start="1103" end="1115" title="Louis Rosier" label="Louis Rosier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092875" start="1256" end="1279" title="Grand Prix du Comminges" label="Grand Prix du Comminges"/>
<link wikidata="Q18016301" start="1319" end="1341" title="Circuit des Nations" label="Grand Prix des Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092875" start="1363" end="1386" title="Grand Prix du Comminges" label="Grand Prix du Comminges"/>
<link wikidata="Q85719638" start="1477" end="1499" title="12 Hours of Casablanca" label="12 Hours of Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1501" end="1508" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192574" start="1559" end="1565" title="Hyères" label="Hyères"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="1885" end="1891" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1892" end="1899" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="1907" end="1913" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="2307" end="2314" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q166640" start="2431" end="2447" title="Levallois-Perret" label="Levallois-Perret"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2529" end="2532" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q173078" start="2571" end="2583" title="Louis Rosier" label="Louis Rosier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228262" wikidata="Q1368673" url="?curid=1228262" title="Essen Motor Show">
<text>The Essen Motor Show is an auto show held annually in the city of Essen, Germany. It has been described as &quot;the showcase event of the year for the tuning community&quot; and as the German version of the annual SEMA auto show in Las Vegas. As contrasted with the Frankfurt Auto Show, the Essen show is smaller and is focused on car tuning and racing interests.

Essen Motor Show was the world&#x27;s biggest car tuning fair before SEMA.

== History ==
The Essen Motor Show took place for the first time in 1968 under the alternative name, &#x27;International Sports and Racing Car Exhibition Essen&#x27;. The event was organised by car enthusiast Wolfgang Schoeller, who acts as the coordinator for the event today.

== See also ==
* North American International Auto Show
* Tokyo Auto Salon

== References ==
===Notes===
===Sources===
* Aron Norris, &quot;RollHard Event Coverage&quot;, &quot;Rollhard.co.uk&quot;.
* David Thomas, &quot;European version of SEMA something to see&quot;, &quot;Autoblog&quot;, 29 November 2004.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1368673" start="4" end="20" title="Essen Motor Show" label="Essen Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156329" start="27" end="36" title="auto show" label="auto show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="66" end="71" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389710" start="215" end="219" title="SEMA (association)" label="SEMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="233" end="242" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q57583" start="267" end="286" title="Frankfurt Auto Show" label="Frankfurt Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q753025" start="332" end="342" title="car tuning" label="car tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052785" start="738" end="776" title="North American International Auto Show" label="North American International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855265" start="779" end="795" title="Tokyo Auto Salon" label="Tokyo Auto Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288564" start="991" end="1011" title="Autoblog.com" label="&amp;quot;Autoblog&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228263" wikidata="Q172103" url="?curid=1228263" title="Chris Bristow">
<text>Christopher William Bristow (2 December 1937 – 19 June 1960) was a British Formula One driver. Bristow was the son of a garage owner from London, and was unmarried. Bristow was called the &quot;wild man of British club racing&quot;, as he had spun or had collisions on almost every racetrack on which he had raced. He started four Formula One World Championship races and scored no championship points.

In his first Grand Prix in a Formula One car, the 1960 Monaco Grand Prix, Bristow recorded a joint-third qualifying time, although he was given the fourth starting spot. He retired on lap 17 due to gearbox issues. Bristow then out-qualified his British Racing Partnership team-mates at the Dutch GP, starting in 7th place, although he was forced to retire again in the opening laps due to an engine issue.

He was killed during the 1960 Belgian Grand Prix at the very fast Spa-Francorchamps circuit, in warm, dry, sunny conditions. Bristow wrecked his Yeoman Credit Racing Cooper T51 at the Burnenville corner on lap twenty while fighting to stay in front of the Ferrari of Willy Mairesse. At 22, Bristow was the youngest-ever driver to die in a Formula One World Championship event.

Bristow and Alan Stacey died in close proximity and within a few minutes of one another. They both crashed at Burnenville, the same extended fast right-hand bend at which Stirling Moss had been severely injured the previous day. Cars regularly sped through the Burnenville corner at 120 miles per hour. There was a four-foot embankment there and barbed wire in the meadow about ten feet back from the road. Bristow&#x27;s Cooper hit the bank and rolled over; he was hurled into the barbed wire, which decapitated him. As the crash occurred on the inside of the corner, his body continued back onto the track, where it sat for the rest of the Grand Prix. His and Stacey&#x27;s accidents would cause many drivers, including future two-time World Champion Jim Clark, to develop a life-long dislike of the track.

With regard to Bristow&#x27;s unruly driving style, a friend of his said after the accident, &quot;We all knew this was going to happen. It does no good to say now, but Chris simply did not have the experience to drive that way in Grand Prix racing.&quot;

Several decades after his death, British Racing Partnership team-boss Ken Gregory called Bristow &quot;the early Schumacher of his day&quot;, saying &quot;he [almost certainly] would have been a potential world champion&quot;. However, former team-mate and mentor Stirling Moss called this statement &quot;extremely over-generous&quot;, saying Bristow was &quot;probably like a Jean Alesi, if as quick&quot;.

The winner of the annual Autosport BRDC Award for promising young British drivers is also presented with the Chris Bristow Trophy.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
===Non-championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position)
(Races in italics indicate fastest lap)
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172103" start="0" end="27" title="Chris Bristow" label="Christopher William Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="75" end="86" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="433" end="444" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q417837" start="454" end="476" title="1960 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1960 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172148" start="649" end="675" title="British Racing Partnership" label="British Racing Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q423570" start="694" end="702" title="1960 Dutch Grand Prix" label="Dutch GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q20884" start="836" end="859" title="1960 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1960 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172851" start="877" end="894" title="Spa-Francorchamps" label="Spa-Francorchamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052439" start="956" end="976" title="Yeoman Credit Racing" label="Yeoman Credit Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="977" end="987" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper T51"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1067" end="1074" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q171881" start="1078" end="1092" title="Willy Mairesse" label="Willy Mairesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1150" end="1180" title="Formula One World Championship" label="Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171980" start="1201" end="1212" title="Alan Stacey" label="Alan Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="1360" end="1373" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q172863" start="1927" end="1941" title="List of Formula One World Drivers&amp;#x27; Champions" label="World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137" start="1942" end="1951" title="Jim Clark" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q172148" start="2289" end="2315" title="British Racing Partnership" label="British Racing Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q9671" start="2369" end="2379" title="Michael Schumacher" label="Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="2520" end="2533" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q172777" start="2634" end="2644" title="Jean Alesi" label="Jean Alesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q772242" start="2691" end="2711" title="Autosport BRDC Award" label="Autosport BRDC Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2851" end="2854" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2888" end="2891" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228265" wikidata="Q5106292" url="?curid=1228265" title="Chris Craft">
<text>Chris Craft may refer to:
* Chris Craft (racing driver) (1939–2021), British motor racing driver
* Chris-Craft Boats, the original American boat manufacturer established in the 19th century
* Chris-Craft Corporation, the current American boat manufacturer established in 2000
* Chris-Craft Industries, a former manufacturing and broadcasting company and co-owner of the defunct UPN television network
* &quot;Crisscraft&quot;, 1975 jazz album by saxophonist Sonny Criss

==See also==
* Christine Craft (born 1944), attorney, radio talk show host, television news anchor
* Christopher C. Kraft Jr. (1924–2019), former NASA engineer and manager</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5106292" start="0" end="11" title="Chris Craft" label="Chris Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q172309" start="28" end="55" title="Chris Craft (racing driver)" label="Chris Craft (racing driver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105652" start="99" end="116" title="Chris-Craft Boats" label="Chris-Craft Boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q186904" start="192" end="215" title="Chris-Craft Corporation" label="Chris-Craft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105654" start="278" end="300" title="Chris-Craft Industries" label="Chris-Craft Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952746" start="409" end="419" title="Crisscraft" label="Crisscraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110979" start="486" end="501" title="Christine Craft" label="Christine Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q735104" start="572" end="596" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr." label="Christopher C. Kraft Jr."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228267" wikidata="Q515506" url="?curid=1228267" title="Chris Irwin">
<text>Christopher Frank Stuart Irwin (born 27 June 1942 in Wandsworth, London) is a British former racing driver. He participated in 10 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 16 July 1966. He scored two championship points.

Irwin&#x27;s career was ended prematurely by an accident he sustained when driving a Ford P68 sports prototype during practice for the 1968 1000km Nürburgring endurance race. He lost control of the notoriously twitchy car at the Flugplatz, the P68 flipping end over end after landing on its tail following a jump. He suffered severe head injuries but eventually recovered. However, it prevented him from racing again.

Irwin is still alive and reasonably well, but his whereabouts are largely unknown as he stays out of the public eye and away from motor racing events. In 2006 it was reported that he had become re-acquainted with a racing rival from the 1960s after a chance meeting in London, and that he sometimes still suffers flashbacks to his accident. Irwin was reported, however, to be in generally good condition.

In a rare appearance at a race meeting, Irwin attended the Thruxton Circuit&#x27;s 40th anniversary celebrations in April 2008. A three-quarter page interview and a current photograph of him posing with old 1960s rivals and a Formula 2 car appeared in the June 2008 issue of &quot;Motor Sport&quot; magazine. He is currently living in rural Rutland in the UK.

==Racing record==

===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Non-Championship Formula One results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position)
(Races in italics indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Tasman Series results===
===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
==References==
==Sources==
*Profile at www.grandprix.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q515506" start="0" end="30" title="Chris Irwin" label="Christopher Frank Stuart Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166359" start="53" end="63" title="Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="93" end="106" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="130" end="141" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="321" end="325" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436945" start="326" end="329" title="Ford P68" label="P68"/>
<link wikidata="Q972011" start="330" end="346" title="sports prototype" label="sports prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q164885" start="376" end="394" title="1000km Nürburgring" label="1000km Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="465" end="474" title="Nürburgring#Nordschleife map" label="Flugplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="562" end="582" title="traumatic brain injury" label="severe head injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465788" start="1120" end="1136" title="Thruxton Circuit" label="Thruxton Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866340" start="1336" end="1368" title="Motor Sport (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Motor Sport&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23107" start="1402" end="1409" title="Rutland" label="Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1497" end="1500" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1648" end="1651" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1697" end="1700" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228273" wikidata="Q7792509" url="?curid=1228273" title="Thomas Monaghan (VC)">
<text>Thomas Monaghan VC (; 18 April 1833 – 10 November 1895) was a British recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces, during the Indian Mutiny

Monaghan was born at Abergavenny, Monmouthshire. At 25 years of age, Monaghan was a trumpeter in the 2nd Dragoon Guards (Queen&#x27;s Bays), British Army during the Indian Mutiny

Monaghan and the Dragoon (Charles Anderson) were both awarded the Victoria Cross for their bravery. Monaghan eventually achieved the rank of sergeant-trumpeter. His grave is at Woolwich cemetery, London and his Victoria Cross is displayed at the Queen&#x27;s Dragoon Guards Regimental Museum at Cardiff Castle, Wales.

==References==
==External links==

*Location of grave and VC medal &quot;(S.E. London)&quot;
*Thomas Monaghan&#x27;s grave at Victoria Cross website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7792509" start="0" end="15" title="Thomas Monaghan (VC)" label="Thomas Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="16" end="18" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="87" end="101" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="204" end="211" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="216" end="228" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="248" end="261" title="Indian Mutiny" label="Indian Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q609161" start="284" end="295" title="Abergavenny" label="Abergavenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245075" start="297" end="310" title="Monmouthshire (historic)" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847816" start="347" end="356" title="Trumpeter (rank)" label="trumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058184" start="364" end="402" title="2nd Dragoon Guards (Queen&amp;#x27;s Bays)" label="2nd Dragoon Guards (Queen&amp;#x27;s Bays)"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="404" end="416" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075118" start="469" end="485" title="Charles Anderson (VC)" label="Charles Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847805" start="584" end="602" title="trumpet major" label="sergeant-trumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073285" start="620" end="637" title="Woolwich cemetery" label="Woolwich cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="639" end="645" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035742" start="738" end="752" title="Cardiff Castle" label="Cardiff Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="754" end="759" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228276" wikidata="Q172790" url="?curid=1228276" title="Christian Goethals">
<text>Christian Roger Xavier Marie Joseph Ghislain Goethals (4 August 1928 – 26 February 2003) was a racing driver from Belgium. Goethals competed as an amateur in sports car races, driving a Porsche Spyder during the 1950s. His best results were a second-place finish with his brother in the 1956 1500cc class event in Reims, and a win in the same class the following year at Forez. Goethals acquired a Cooper-Climax and entered it in the Formula Two class of the 1958 German Grand Prix, but retired from the race. He did not participate in another Formula One Grand Prix, and returned to sports cars, with notable finishes in 1960 of fifth in the Buenos Aires 1000 km and second in the GP de Spa. He retired from racing later in the season. He established a racing team called &quot;Écurie Éperon d&#x27;Or&quot; to participate in the 1958 German Grand Prix where he raced in a Cooper T43.
Goethals was the youngest child of René Goethals (1876-1928), a nobleman and mayor of Heule near Kortrijk in Belgium and of Jeanne Mols (1884-1968). He was married to Julie Opsomer.

==Biography in the Literature==
* Steve SMALL, &quot;Grand Prix Who is Who&quot;, Travel Publishing, London 1999, .
* Humbert DE MARNIX DE SAINTE ALDEGONDE, &quot;État présent de la noblesse belge&quot;, Annuaire 2007, Brussel, 2007 &quot;(in French)&quot;
* Short biography in Grand Prix Insider

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172790" start="0" end="53" title="Christian Goethals" label="Christian Roger Xavier Marie Joseph Ghislain Goethals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="95" end="108" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="158" end="174" title="sports car racing" label="sports car races"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134282" start="186" end="200" title="Porsche Spyder" label="Porsche Spyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="314" end="319" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437284" start="371" end="376" title="Forez" label="Forez"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="398" end="404" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q173016" start="405" end="411" title="Coventry Climax" label="Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="434" end="445" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q296426" start="459" end="481" title="1958 German Grand Prix" label="1958 German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q296426" start="831" end="853" title="1958 German Grand Prix" label="1958 German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110823" start="972" end="977" title="Heule" label="Heule"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="983" end="991" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="995" end="1002" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1420" end="1423" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228277" wikidata="Q172276" url="?curid=1228277" title="Chuck Daigh">
<text>Charles George Daigh (November 29, 1923 – April 29, 2008) was an American racing car driver. He broke into Grand Prix racing through Lance Reventlow&#x27;s Scarab team, by virtue of being one of the resident engineers. Born in Long Beach, California, he participated in six World Championship Formula One races, debuting on May 29, 1960, and scoring no championship points. He also participated in one non-Championship Formula One race.

Following the 1960 season, Chuck Daigh went on to contest races in the International Formula league in Europe, driving the previous year&#x27;s front-engined Scarab car. He finished eighth at Goodwood while contesting the Lavant Cup and finished seventh in an attempt at the International Trophy. He later crashed out of the British Empire Trophy at Silverstone.

He was also a successful sportscar driver in America, winning the 1959 Sebring endurance classic and also trying to qualify twice for the Indianapolis 500, but without success. He also won the 1958 United States Sports Car Grand Prix at Riverside, California, driving a Scarab. This event is largely credited with launching professional sports car racing in the United States.

He died in a hospital in Newport Beach, California, after a brief battle with heart and respiratory problems.

==Racing record==

===Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap.)
===24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==External links==
*Profile on Historic Racing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172276" start="0" end="20" title="Chuck Daigh" label="Charles George Daigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="107" end="124" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172592" start="133" end="148" title="Lance Reventlow" label="Lance Reventlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="227" end="249" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="293" end="304" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="541" end="547" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783689" start="596" end="602" title="Scarab (constructor)" label="Scarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q173704" start="713" end="733" title="BRDC International Trophy" label="International Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="788" end="799" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="873" end="880" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="940" end="956" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="1205" end="1230" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1356" end="1359" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1417" end="1420" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228278" wikidata="Q173281" url="?curid=1228278" title="Clemar Bucci">
<text>Clemar Bucci (4 September 1920 – 12 January 2011) was an Argentine racing driver. He participated in five World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 17 July 1954 and several non-Championship Formula One races. He scored no championship points. He was born in Zenón Pereyra and died in Buenos Aires.

Bucci was also a car designer; he designed a prototype of a grand tourer called Dogo SS-2000.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
:&quot;* Indicates shared drive with Harry Schell and Carlos Menditeguy

==References==
==External links==
*Clemar Bucci Racing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173281" start="0" end="12" title="Clemar Bucci" label="Clemar Bucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="57" end="66" title="Argentina" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="67" end="80" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="125" end="136" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="285" title="Zenón Pereyra" label="Zenón Pereyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="298" end="310" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812372" start="393" end="405" title="Dogo SS-2000" label="Dogo SS-2000"/>
<link wikidata="" start="461" end="464" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q171561" start="503" end="515" title="Harry Schell" label="Harry Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172111" start="520" end="537" title="Carlos Menditeguy" label="Carlos Menditeguy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228279" wikidata="Q4836473" url="?curid=1228279" title="BR Standard Class 4 2-6-0">
<text>The BR Standard Class 4 2-6-0 is a class of steam locomotive designed by Robert Riddles for British Railways (BR). 115 locomotives were built to this standard.

==Design and construction==
The class was designed at the ex-LNER works at Doncaster which was also responsible for building 70 of the 115-strong class. The remaining 45 were built at Horwich. None were built at Derby Works although it was intended that 20 would be built there, Doncaster in fact took them on.

The last in the series, No.76114, was also the final steam engine to be constructed at the &#x27;Plant&#x27; (as Doncaster works was known). 76099 was last steam locomotive to be built at Horwich and in fact, was the last of the class to be completed, just after 76114 at Doncaster. The Standard Four Mogul was essentially a standardised version of the LMS Ivatt Class 4, and was primarily intended for freight use.

Although a BR Standard, the 4 2-6-0 class did not have the same design of wheels as the Swindon-built 82XXX and 77XXX Class 3 engines which also had driving wheels, yet all three locomotive classes share the same cylinder casting.

The cylinder covers of engines built early in the programme of construction were fitted with &quot;screw-in&quot; type pressure relief valves. From September 1955 revised cylinder covers were introduced for renewals incorporating &quot;bolt-on&quot; type pressure relief valves. Rectangular type coupling rods rather than the original fluted type, were fitted to 76035 onwards.

==Operation==
With its diameter driving wheels this sixth of the BR standard designs was clearly biased towards freight working. An axle-loading of only meant its route availability was virtually unrestricted. Batches were allocated to every BR region except the Western.

===Eastern Region===

The Eastern Region divided its 15 between two London depots. Five went to Stratford on the ex-Great Eastern section, and the remainder to the one-time Great Central depot at Neasden. Made redundant by dieselisation the Stratford engines were transferred to the Southern and arrived at Brighton. The Neasden engines also in due course departed the capital, in this case for Chester and ex-Cambrian Railways territory. One Eastern locomotive was 76034 which was fitted with a tablet catcher for running over the M&amp;GN lines in East Anglia.

===London Midland Region===

Apart from a pair allocated to Leicester, most of the London Midland Region&#x27;s batch of 15 spent their working lives in the Liverpool, Manchester and Preston areas. Some were allocated to the Nottingham area, and took over the working of the afternoon 16:45 fish train ex Grimsby from 4F 0-6-0s.
===North Eastern Region===

At first the North Eastern Region scattered its 13-strong allocation far and wide: Darlington, Gateshead, Hull, Sunderland and York. Later all were concentrated at either Kirkby Stephen or West Auckland to work over the Stainmore route whose viaducts had severe weight restrictions. Like their small cousins the 2MT 2-6-0 class the Moguls were ideal for working the line. They worked coal trains as well as passenger services and were a regular choice for excursions from Tyneside to the Lancashire coast resorts.
===Scottish Region===
Thirty-five units were allocated to the Scottish Region, used on the Waverley Line between Carlisle and Hawick. Others appeared on the &#x27;Port Road&#x27; from Dumfries to Stranraer. The Scottish examples were mainly concentrated in Ayrshire and around Glasgow, and at one time Corkerhill depot was home to ten of the class. Five units were based in Aberdeen and three went to Thornton in Fife.

===Southern Region===

The Southern moguls (originally 37) were also concentrated in one area around Eastleigh, Southampton and Bournemouth. They were used between Portsmouth, Salisbury and Cardiff, Reading to Redhill, Brighton to Bournemouth and over the Swanage branch. Their most celebrated duty was the London Waterloo to Lymington boat train. However this had nothing to do with the engines&#x27; capabilities; it was simply that among tender engines only a or could fit on the turntable at Brockenhurst. In the last few years of steam operation on the &#x27;Southern&#x27; a few examples were allocated to Guildford shed before moving on to Feltham shed in south-west London.

All 17 locomotives equipped with the BR1B high-sided tender were allocated to the Southern Region. The BR1B tender had a higher axle load than the locomotives.

== Withdrawal ==
==Accidents and incidents==
*On 23 September 1954, locomotive No. 76017 was hauling a freight train that overran signals and was derailed by trap points at station, Hampshire.
*In December 1957, locomotive No. 76016 was hauling a freight train that overran signals and was derailed by trap points at station, Hampshire.
*On 12 February 1960, locomotive No. 76026 was hauling a freight train that overran signals and was derailed by trap points at Whitchurch Town station.

==Preservation==
Four engines have survived into preservation, all four built at Horwich Works and rescued from Woodham Brothers scrapyard at Barry Island. Three members of the class have steamed so far in preservation but 76077 has yet to do so and is at present undergoing restoration from scrapyard condition. As of September 2023, no members of the class are mainline certified. All three engines that have run in preservation have been on the main line, but only two have hauled railtours, 76079 and 76084. On 13 October 2022, 76017 was moved by rail from its home at the Watercress Line to the Bluebell Railway.

76079&#x27;s main career on the main line was when it was owned by Ian Riley in Bury, Lancashire, but it was eventually sold to the NYMR. After completion of its most recent overhaul in 2014 it once again had a mainline certificate but was restricted between Battersby and Whitby on the Esk Valley Line. 76084 meanwhile, was certified to operate over the national network hauling railtours alongside passenger runs along the Bittern Line and the Esk Valley Line.

==Models==
The erstwhile Kitmaster company produced an unpowered polystyrene injection moulded model kit for 00 gauge. In late 1962, the Kitmaster brand was sold by its parent company (Rosebud Dolls) to Airfix, who transferred the moulding tools to their own factory; they re-introduced some of the former Kitmaster range, including this locomotive. In time, the moulding tools passed on to Dapol who have also produced the model kit.

Bachmann produces a ready-to-run model in both OO and as part of their Graham Farish range for British N gauge.

==Sound==
*76079 Between Egton and Grosmont
*76079 departing from Grosmont

==Footnotes==
==Bibliography==
*&quot;A Detailed History of BR Standard Steam Locomotives&quot;, - Vol 2 - The 4-6-0 and 2-6-0 Classes. RCTS 

==Further reading==

==External links==
*Southern E-group photo gallery
*Website for the restoration and preservation of the &quot;Forgotten Standard&quot; 76077
*Website of preserved loco 76084</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4836473" start="4" end="29" title="BR Standard Class 4 2-6-0" label="BR Standard Class 4 2-6-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="44" end="60" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349285" start="73" end="87" title="Robert Riddles" label="Robert Riddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="92" end="108" title="British Railways" label="British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092839" start="219" end="226" title="London and North Eastern Railway" label="ex-LNER"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295523" start="236" end="245" title="Doncaster Works" label="Doncaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5907056" start="345" end="352" title="Horwich Works" label="Horwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261524" start="373" end="384" title="Derby Works" label="Derby Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459108" start="826" end="843" title="LMS Ivatt Class 4" label="LMS Ivatt Class 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836472" start="992" end="997" title="BR Standard Class 3 2-6-2T" label="82XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836471" start="1002" end="1007" title="BR Standard Class 3 2-6-0" label="77XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988225" start="1764" end="1771" title="Western Region of British Railways" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330408" start="1800" end="1814" title="Eastern Region of British Railways" label="Eastern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842471" start="2306" end="2320" title="Midland and Great Northern Joint Railway" label="M&amp;amp;GN lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670591" start="2421" end="2442" title="London Midland Region of British Railways" label="London Midland Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459098" start="2656" end="2665" title="LMS Fowler Class 4F" label="4F 0-6-0s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055281" start="2708" end="2728" title="North Eastern Region of British Railways" label="North Eastern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836467" start="3007" end="3022" title="BR Standard Class 2 2-6-0" label="2MT 2-6-0 class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437933" start="3271" end="3286" title="Scottish Region of British Railways" label="Scottish Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975427" start="3300" end="3313" title="Waverley Line" label="Waverley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570387" start="3656" end="3664" title="Southern Region of British Railways" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="3936" end="3951" title="London Waterloo station" label="London Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858971" start="3955" end="3964" title="Lymington Branch Line" label="Lymington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718982" start="3965" end="3975" title="boat train" label="boat train"/>
<link wikidata="Q730493" start="4112" end="4121" title="Turntable (rail)" label="turntable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057561" start="4125" end="4137" title="Brockenhurst railway station" label="Brockenhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="4655" end="4664" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5907056" start="5044" end="5057" title="Horwich Works" label="Horwich Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032700" start="5075" end="5091" title="Woodham Brothers" label="Woodham Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770146" start="5105" end="5117" title="Barry Island" label="Barry Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187535" start="5540" end="5555" title="Watercress Line" label="Watercress Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187487" start="5563" end="5579" title="Bluebell Railway" label="Bluebell Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q47822" start="5662" end="5678" title="Bury, Lancashire" label="Bury, Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869743" start="5841" end="5850" title="Battersby" label="Battersby"/>
<link wikidata="Q852778" start="5855" end="5861" title="Whitby" label="Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397986" start="5869" end="5884" title="Esk Valley Line" label="Esk Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q276629" start="6007" end="6019" title="Bittern Line" label="Bittern Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368100" start="6071" end="6080" title="Kitmaster" label="Kitmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q408697" start="6249" end="6255" title="Airfix" label="Airfix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221788" start="6437" end="6442" title="Dapol" label="Dapol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838890" start="6482" end="6490" title="Bachmann Branchline" label="Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807761" start="6529" end="6531" title="OO gauge" label="OO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592814" start="6553" end="6566" title="Graham Farish" label="Graham Farish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970507" start="6577" end="6592" title="British N gauge" label="British N gauge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6606" end="6638" title=":image:76079 Between Egton and Grosmont.ogg" label="76079 Between Egton and Grosmont"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6640" end="6669" title=":Image:76079 departing from Grosmont.ogg" label="76079 departing from Grosmont"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228280" wikidata="Q172489" url="?curid=1228280" title="Clemente Biondetti">
<text>Clemente Biondetti (18 October 1898 – 24 February 1955) was an Italian auto racing driver. Born into a working-class family, Biondetti raced motorcycles before turning to automobiles where he had greater success.

==Biography==
Born in Buddusò, Sardinia, into a working-class family, Biondetti began his racing career in motorcycles in 1923 but in 1927 turned to automobiles. He was nicknamed &quot;The Wolf of Tuscany&quot;. By 1931 his performance earned him a spot in Grand Prix motor racing with the Maserati factory team.
His success racing on circuits was minimal, but he was one of the best in tough endurance events. Driving an Alfa Romeo 8C 2900b, Clemente Biondetti won the 1938 Mille Miglia for sports cars and at the Coppa Ciano finished second in the voiturette class then third in the main event. In 1939, he won the Coppa Acerbo voiturette class and took second place at the Swiss Grand Prix. His racing career came to a halt following the outbreak of World War II in 1940. By the time he was able to resume racing after the war, he was already 49 years old. Nevertheless, he dominated Italian endurance racing, driving to victory in the Mille Miglia for three straight years from 1947 through 1949 and the Targa Florio in 1948 and 1949. He won more Mille Miglias than any other driver in history.

Clemente Biondetti participated in one Formula One World Championship event, the 1950 Italian Grand Prix. Driving a self-built Ferrari-Jaguar hybrid car, engine problems forced him out of the race thus he failed to score any championship points. Biondetti loved racing cars and continued to compete in sports car and endurance events, earning a second-place finish in a Ferrari at the 12 Hours of Pescara in 1952 against much younger drivers. After suffering from cancer for a number of years, he was forced to retire in 1954. He succumbed to cancer on 24 February 1955 in Florence. As a result, he became the first Formula One World Championship driver to die of natural causes.
==Major victories==
*Coppa Acerbo 1939
*Mille Miglia 1938, 1947, 1948, 1949
*Targa Florio 1948, 1949

==Racing record==

===Complete European Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Post WWII Grandes Épreuves results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete Mille Miglia results===
===Complete Targa Florio results===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172489" start="0" end="18" title="Clemente Biondetti" label="Clemente Biondetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="71" end="82" title="auto racing" label="auto racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q340675" start="236" end="243" title="Buddusò" label="Buddusò"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="245" end="253" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="471" end="494" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="504" end="512" title="Maserati in motorsport" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q173886" start="636" end="646" title="Alfa Romeo in motorsport" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472912" start="647" end="655" title="Alfa Romeo 8C" label="8C 2900b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="689" end="701" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="706" end="716" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610072" start="729" end="740" title="Coppa Ciano" label="Coppa Ciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131293" start="831" end="843" title="Coppa Acerbo" label="Coppa Acerbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9225" start="890" end="906" title="Swiss Grand Prix" label="Swiss Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="967" end="979" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="1222" end="1234" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1353" end="1364" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173025" start="1395" end="1418" title="1950 Italian Grand Prix" label="1950 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="1441" end="1448" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="1449" end="1455" title="Jaguar (car)" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="1778" end="1784" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1887" end="1895" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131293" start="2015" end="2027" title="Coppa Acerbo" label="Coppa Acerbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="2034" end="2046" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="2071" end="2083" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2161" end="2164" title=":Template:EC driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2298" end="2301" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2448" end="2451" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228281" wikidata="Q172065" url="?curid=1228281" title="Consalvo Sanesi">
<text>Consalvo Sanesi (28 March 1911, in Terranuova Bracciolini, Arezzo – 28 July 1998, in Milan) was best known as the Alfa Romeo works&#x27; test driver in the period following World War II, but he also competed in races with the Alfa Romeo Tipo 158/159 cars in the period before the Formula One World Championship came into being. He competed in five Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 3 September 1950. Although, on his day, his experience with the cars meant that he was often one of the fastest men on the racetrack, somehow this rarely translated into good results. He scored only 3 championship points. He found some success driving in sports car racing, continuing into the mid-1960s.

On the 1953 Mille Miglia he posted the fastest stage average speed, , beating greats such as Nino Farina and Juan Manuel Fangio, but on this occasion his car let him down and he failed to finish. A year later he won his class in the Carrera Panamericana.

Sanesi entered an Alfa Romeo in the November 1954 Pan American race in Mexico. In the European touring car class of the event he led at one juncture with a total time of 8 hours, 29 minutes, and 24 seconds. He was overtaken by fellow Italian and Alfa Romeo drivers, Sergio Mantovani and Mario Della Favera. A couple of days later Sanesi established a 17-minute lead in his car, with the Alfa Romeo marque sweeping the first five positions of the European touring car division.

He gave up front line racing following a near-death accident during the 1964 12 Hours of Sebring race, when following a crash his Alfa Romeo Giulia TZ burst into flames. Only the prompt and courageous actions of Jocko Maggiacomo, a fellow driver watching at the trackside who dived into the flames and pulled Sanesi clear, saved his life. Sanesi was paired with driver Roberto Bussinello in the event.

Maggiacomo received a Gentleman of the Road award in November 1964 for his effort in rescuing Sanesi. The commendation was presented by the Milan Automobile Club.
==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172065" start="0" end="15" title="Consalvo Sanesi" label="Consalvo Sanesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q52104" start="35" end="57" title="Terranuova Bracciolini" label="Terranuova Bracciolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378" start="59" end="65" title="Arezzo" label="Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="85" end="90" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173886" start="114" end="124" title="Alfa Romeo in motorsport" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="173" end="185" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="226" end="236" title="Alfa Romeo#Motorsport" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="280" end="310" title="Formula One" label="Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="659" end="676" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="722" end="734" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040" start="803" end="814" title="Nino Farina" label="Nino Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="819" end="837" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044949" start="943" end="963" title="Carrera Panamericana" label="Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1037" end="1043" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q172124" start="1232" end="1248" title="Sergio Mantovani" label="Sergio Mantovani"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="1364" end="1370" title="marque" label="marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="1521" end="1540" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301895" start="1574" end="1594" title="Alfa Romeo Giulia TZ" label="Alfa Romeo Giulia TZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207589" start="1656" end="1672" title="Jocko Maggiacomo" label="Jocko Maggiacomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172499" start="1813" end="1831" title="Roberto Bussinello" label="Roberto Bussinello"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2063" end="2066" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228285" wikidata="Q172023" url="?curid=1228285" title="Cuth Harrison">
<text>Thomas Cuthbert Harrison (6 July 1906 – 21 January 1981) was a British racing driver from England. He was born in Ecclesall, Sheffield, and also died in Sheffield. He participated in three World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 13 May 1950. He scored no championship points. He founded the T.C.Harrison Ford dealership.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==
* &quot;The Grand Prix Who&#x27;s Who&quot;, Steve Small, 1995.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172023" start="0" end="24" title="Cuth Harrison" label="Thomas Cuthbert Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="71" end="84" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332213" start="114" end="123" title="Ecclesall" label="Ecclesall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="125" end="134" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="208" end="219" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="" start="391" end="394" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228286" wikidata="Q172315" url="?curid=1228286" title="Damien Magee">
<text>Damien Magee (born 17 November 1945) is a British former racing driver from Northern Ireland. He participated in two Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 8 June 1975. He scored no championship points.

His only World Championship Grand Prix start came in 1975 when he replaced Arturo Merzario at Williams at short notice for the Swedish Grand Prix. The following year he tried to qualify a RAM-entered Brabham at the 1976 French Grand Prix, but missed out.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==Complete Formula One Non-Championship results==
(key)
==Sources==
*Profile at grandprix.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172315" start="0" end="12" title="Damien Magee" label="Damien Magee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="57" end="70" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="76" end="92" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="117" end="128" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q171518" start="296" end="311" title="Arturo Merzario" label="Arturo Merzario"/>
<link wikidata="Q173225" start="315" end="323" title="Frank Williams Racing Cars" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q171823" start="348" end="366" title="1975 Swedish Grand Prix" label="Swedish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173104" start="409" end="412" title="RAM Racing" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="421" end="428" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q171904" start="436" end="458" title="1976 French Grand Prix" label="1976 French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="530" end="533" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="586" end="589" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228288" wikidata="Q172322" url="?curid=1228288" title="Danny Ongais">
<text>Danny Ongais (May 21, 1942 – February 26, 2022) was an American racing driver.

Ongais was the only Hawaiian born driver to compete in the Indianapolis 500. He competed professionally in motorcycle, sports car, CART, IndyCar, Formula One, and drag racing. A fearless figure on the racing circuit, Ongais was nicknamed &quot;On-the-Gas&quot; and &quot;The Flyin&#x27; Hawaiian.&quot; He is the only driver to have won the NHRA U.S. Nationals and the 24 Hours of Daytona.

In the 1960s he won multiple drag racing championships and was named one of the National Hot Rod Association’s Top 50 Drivers for 1951-2000. In the 1970s he moved to competing in sports cars and Indy cars, winning races in both types, including the 24 Hours of Daytona in 1979 and several Indy car races in 1977 and 1978. He also raced in Formula One from 1977-78, in six Grands Prix, recording a best result of seventh. 

He was known as a fast and daring driver, but he experienced multiple crashes in his career, some resulting in injury. At the 1981 Indianapolis 500, he was involved in a near-fatal accident that caused him to miss almost a year of racing.

In 1996, at the age of 54, after nine years away from racing, he served as the substitute driver in the Indianapolis 500 for Scott Brayton, who had died in a crash before the race. Starting last, Ongais finished 7th in what was his final 500.

He was inducted into the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 2000 and the Hawaii Sports Hall of Fame in 2001.

==Early life and career==
Almost every source references Ongais having been born in Kahului, Hawaii, on May 21, 1942 of Puerto Rican immigrant grandparents although the documentary &quot;On the Gas&quot; claims that he was born in 1939 citing the 1940 US Census as a reference. When he was aged 14, he tested out motorbike racing with some success. In the late 1950s, Ongais enlisted in the United States Army as a paratrooper stationed in Europe. He was later discharged and returned to Hawaii for motor racing. Ongais became the Hawaiian motorcycle champion in 1960 and was in the top three positions in the expert class from 1960 to 1962.

In the early 1960s he started competing in drag racing. He won the American Hot Rod Association AA Gas Dragster Championship in 1963 and 1964, and in the National Hot Rod Association AA Dragster championship title in 1965. He defeated Don Prudhomme at the 1966 HHRA Nationals Top Fuel semifinals. In 1969 he won the NHRA Spring Nationals and NHRA U.S. Nationals in the Funny Car class driving a Ford Mustang for Mickey Thompson.

==1970s==
Ongais moved into circuit racing in the 1970s, working his way up the ranks in American racing through SCCA road racing with the help of Ted Field. Eventually progressing through regional series and Formula 5000, Ongais and Field moved to USAC and Indy cars in 1976 under the banner of Interscope Racing. His first Indy car race was the 1976 California 500 at Ontario Motor Speedway, where he finished 28th after a crash.

In 1977, Ongais ran his first full season in Indy cars. He had a 7th at Ontario and 5th at Phoenix and then he won his first Indy car race at Michigan International Speedway. He qualified well over the season, earning three poles, and he finished 12th in the standings.

That year he also ventured into Formula One with the Interscope team, entering the U.S. and Canadian Grands Prix at the end of the season in a year-old Penske PC4. He crashed out on a wet track at Watkins Glen after moving up early but managed a 7th place in Canada in what would be his best finish in F1.

His most successful year in Indy car racing came in 1978. Ongais won five races: at Ontario, Texas World, Mosport, the Milwaukee, and again at Michigan. He also won eight poles in qualifying. Ongais started in the middle of the front row at the 1978 Indianapolis 500, and dominated the early stages of the race. After leading 71 laps, he dropped out with a blown engine while running in second position on lap 145. 

The 1978 victory at Michigan would turn out to be the final Indy car victory of Ongais&#x27; career. Although Ongais won more Indy car races than any other driver that season, a combination of mechanical problems and low finishes in other races meant he would only finish 8th in the 1978 USAC Championship. Still, those five wins—three on the large superspeedways at Ontario, Texas, and Michigan, one at the short Milwaukee Mile oval, and one road race at Mosport—demonstrated Ongais&#x27; versatility as a driver.

In 1978 he also made one final attempt at F1. He entered the season with the Ensign team, in a year-old N177 chassis, and retired in Argentina and Brazil with brake problems. Interscope then bought a new Shadow chassis for him to race but he was unable to qualify at Long Beach and also in the Netherlands later in the season.

Throughout the decade, and indeed throughout the remainder of his driving career, Ongais and Field continued driving sports cars successfully, mainly in IMSA Camel GT competition. The highlight of their sports car endeavours during this time was a victory in the 1979 24 Hours of Daytona, with Ongais and Field sharing their Interscope Porsche 935 with Hurley Haywood.

==CART career==
Ongais made his CART debut during the 1979 season driving the #25 Panasonic/Interscope Racing Parnelli 6C-Cosworth DFX.
He first raced at the Arizona Republic/Jimmy Bryan 150 at Phoenix International Raceway where he qualified 4th and led for several laps only to drop out after 128 laps due to engine problems. He then competed at the Gould Twin Dixie 125 however bad luck hit Ongais in both races.
At the Indianapolis 500 Ongais crashed in practice and this put Ongais in jeopardy of not being able to compete. Ongais qualified 27th and finished 4th. As the season progressed the Parnelli 6C (which was already a two-year-old car) started to struggle due to its age. Ongais scored another 4th-place finish at the Kent Oil 150 at Watkins Glen International and finished in 6th place in points.

For the 1980 season Interscope was intending to use their own chassis with a Porsche V6 engine. The car was disallowed and Interscope brought out their Parnelli 6C-Cosworth DFX.
At his first race of the season, the Indianapolis 500 Ongais started 16th and finished 7th. Ongais endured a tough season highlighted by a 3rd-place finish at Watkins Glen.
Ongais also made a single start for AMI Racing driving the #43 Armstrong Mould Orbiter 80C-Cosworth DFX at the Michigan 400 at Michigan International Speedway, finishing 11th. Ongais ended the season in 15th place in points.

In 1981 at the Indianapolis 500 Ongais was involved in a very serious accident on lap 63. Ongais came into the pits on lap 63 as the leader of the race, but problems during the stop caused it to drag on for a disastrous 46 seconds. After finally leaving the pits, Ongais approached a slower car at the end of the backstretch. He made a late pass going into turn 3. Carrying too much speed out of the turn, the car drifted out into the grey and the back end began to slide. Ongais tried to correct the slide by turning right, and the car hooked to the right and crashed nearly head-on into the wall. He was knocked unconscious by the heavy impact. Officials had to cut open the car to help Ongais out. He was transported by an ambulance to a nearby hospital in a critical condition. By the time the broadcasting of the race ended at 11:30 PM, Ongais&#x27;s condition had improved and his condition was updated to stable. He suffered a concussion, compound fractures in both legs, a broken arm and a 6-inch tear in his diaphragm. He missed the rest of the CART year to recover in rehabilitation.

In 1982, he ran on only one Indy car race, the Indianapolis 500 (which was still sanctioned by USAC). He piloted a new Interscope IP-1 chassis, qualifying 9th and leading several laps before crashing out on lap 62 when running 5th. The rest of the year he raced only sports cars.

Ongais next drove in CART during the 1983 CART/PPG World Series season, first appearing at the 1983 Indianapolis 500. He initially drove the #65 Interscope Racing March 83C-Chevrolet V6, however, that car was replaced with the #25 March 83C-Cosworth DFX. Ongais started in 21st place and retired with mechanical problems. For the next seven races, Ongais replaced an injured Johnny Rutherford at Patrick Racing, who had been driving the #40 Sea Ray Boats Wildcat Mk 9-Cosworth DFX. Later in the season, Interscope Racing set up a partnership between themselves and Patrick Racing giving Patrick March 83C-Cosworth DFXs. Ongais scored a best finish of 5th place at the Escort Warning Radars 200 at Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course. He finished the season in 20th place in points.

For the 1984 season Ongais took over as owner of Interscope Racing fielding the #25 Interscope Racing March 84C-Cosworth DFX. Ongais finished in 3rd place at the Detroit News Grand Prix at Michigan International Speedway. He also finished in 10th place in points.

For the 1985 season Ongais scored a best finish of 6th at the Beatrice Indy Challenge at Tamiami Park and finished in 24th place in points.
Ongais also survived a spectacular barrel roll at the Michigan 500 at Michigan International Speedway when he ran into the slower car of Phil Krueger on the backstretch.

For the 1986 season Ongais only ran the 1986 Indianapolis 500 for Interscope Racing. Fielding the #25 GM Goodwrench/Panavision March 86C-Buick V6, Ongais dropped out with a mechanical failure.

For the 1987 season Interscope Racing teamed up with Team Penske getting Ongais in the #25 Panavision Penske PC-16-Ilmor-Chevrolet Indy V8 for the Indianapolis 500, however Ongais crashed in practice and suffered a concussion. The car went to Al Unser Sr who went on to win a record-tying 4th Indianapolis 500.
Ongais later attempted to race at the Marlboro 500 at Michigan International Speedway, the Nissan Indy Challenge at Tamiami Park, and the Bosch Spark Plug Grand Prix at Nazareth Speedway. He would retire at Michigan and Miami and fail to qualify at Nazareth.

==IndyCar==
After a 9-year hiatus from racing, Ongais was asked by John Menard to fill in for Scott Brayton who was killed during Friday Practice for the 1996 Indianapolis 500. Under qualifying rules he had to start 33rd. He was the oldest driver to compete in that field, at age 54. Ongais finished 7th, having the best car early in the race. He ran his last Indy Car race the next year, in the Indy 200 at Walt Disney World, with Chitwood Motorsports, where he finished 13th. In 1998 he attempted to qualify for the Indianapolis 500 with Team Pelfrey but was unable to do so when he suffered a concussion after a crash.

==Awards==
* He was inducted in the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 2000.
* On the National Hot Rod Association Top 50 Drivers, 1951-2000, he was ranked 39th.
* He was inducted into the Hawaii Sports Hall of Fame in 2001.

==Personal life==
Ongais was notoriously reclusive and a private man, rarely giving interviews and revealing little or no details of his life outside of racing. Roger Penske, while employing Ongais for the 1987 Indy 500, was unable to get the racer to speak to the press, and said of him - &quot;His whole heart is in racing, that&#x27;s his life&quot; Jim Chapman, race director at Interscope Racing stated &quot;Nobody really knew much about him — where he lived, his family, stuff like that&quot;. Chapman did state that well into their relationship he learned Ongais was married and had a son. 

Ongais died from congestive heart failure in Anaheim Hills, California, on February 26, 2022, at the age of 79. His death was announced by the Indianapolis Motor Speedway two days later. He was survived by his long time partner Patricia Soldano, as well as his three children and five grandchildren. His former Indy car competitors remembered him well after his passing, with Mario Andretti calling him “that quiet lion.”

==Disputed birth year==
Throughout his career, Ongais information listed his birth in 1942. However, his birth was likely in either 1938 or 1939. In a May 1978 interview with the Honolulu Star-Bulletin, Dan Ongais Sr. said that his son was preparing to turn 39 instead of 36. The 1940 United States census, taken in April 1940, list the younger Ongais as being one year-old by that point in 1940. The 1950 census lists him as 11 years-old in April 1950.

A 1979 profile in Sport Magazine referenced the age discrepancy, stating &quot;If he began racing motorcycles after his hitch in the Army, as his father states, then Ongais would have been inducted into the Army at 14. But taking liberties with one&#x27;s age is common among race drivers.&quot;

==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One results===
(key) 
===American Open-Wheel racing results===
() (Races in bold indicate pole position)

====USAC====
====PPG Indycar Series====
() (Races in bold indicate pole position)

: &quot;1 Injured, replaced by Al Unser&quot;

====Indy Racing League====
====Indianapolis 500====
: &quot;1 Al Unser succeeded Ongais as driver in the car; Unser won the Indianapolis 500 with a March-Cosworth that had been a show car.&quot;
: &quot;2 After Scott Brayton was killed in a practice crash with a backup car, Ongais drove the car Brayton qualified on the pole; under USAC rules, the car had to start last.&quot;
: &quot;3 John Paul Jr. succeeded Ongais as driver in the car; Paul finished 7th in the Indianapolis 500 after leading 39 laps.&quot;

===24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==Notes==
==External links==
*F1 Rejects profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172322" start="0" end="12" title="Danny Ongais" label="Danny Ongais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="64" end="77" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="139" end="155" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163326" start="187" end="197" title="Motorcycle racing" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="199" end="209" title="Sports car racing" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q840399" start="211" end="215" title="Championship Auto Racing Teams" label="CART"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="217" end="224" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="226" end="237" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q46241" start="243" end="254" title="drag racing" label="drag racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954100" start="421" end="440" title="NHRA U.S. Nationals" label="NHRA U.S. Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q216330" start="449" end="468" title="24 Hours of Daytona" label="24 Hours of Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="810" end="821" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="843" end="854" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q898747" start="1020" end="1041" title="1981 Indianapolis 500" label="1981 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629938" start="1259" end="1272" title="Scott Brayton" label="Scott Brayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012975" start="1576" end="1591" title="Kahului, Hawaii" label="Kahului, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1883" end="1901" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1932" end="1938" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536294" start="2289" end="2317" title="National Hot Rod Association" label="National Hot Rod Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293347" start="2370" end="2383" title="Don Prudhomme" label="Don Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954100" start="2477" end="2496" title="NHRA U.S. Nationals" label="NHRA U.S. Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q183476" start="2530" end="2542" title="Ford Mustang" label="Ford Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931376" start="2547" end="2562" title="Mickey Thompson" label="Mickey Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="2678" end="2682" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="SCCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693189" start="2712" end="2721" title="Ted Field" label="Ted Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q767942" start="2774" end="2786" title="Formula 5000" label="Formula 5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336046" start="2814" end="2818" title="United States Auto Club" label="USAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981633" start="2912" end="2931" title="1976 California 500" label="1976 California 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663312" start="2935" end="2957" title="Ontario Motor Speedway" label="Ontario Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723278" start="3140" end="3171" title="Michigan International Speedway" label="Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663312" start="3660" end="3667" title="Ontario Motor Speedway" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037552" start="3669" end="3680" title="Texas World Speedway" label="Texas World"/>
<link wikidata="Q171570" start="3682" end="3689" title="Canadian Tire Motorsport Park" label="Mosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935979" start="3695" end="3704" title="IndyCar Series at the Milwaukee Mile" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451988" start="3719" end="3727" title="Michigan 500" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q572793" start="3821" end="3842" title="1978 Indianapolis 500" label="1978 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578356" start="4276" end="4298" title="1978 USAC Championship Car season" label="1978 USAC Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573157" start="4990" end="5003" title="IMSA GT Championship" label="IMSA Camel GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q216330" start="5105" end="5124" title="24 Hours of Daytona" label="24 Hours of Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q945563" start="5173" end="5184" title="Porsche 935" label="Porsche 935"/>
<link wikidata="Q177011" start="5190" end="5204" title="Hurley Haywood" label="Hurley Haywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738316" start="5261" end="5272" title="1979 IndyCar season" label="1979 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="5289" end="5298" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693189" start="5299" end="5316" title="Ted Field" label="Interscope Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172483" start="5317" end="5328" title="Parnelli" label="Parnelli 6C"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="5329" end="5341" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth DFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578592" start="5365" end="5397" title="1979 Arizona Republic / Jimmy Bryan 150" label="Arizona Republic/Jimmy Bryan 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803538" start="5401" end="5430" title="Phoenix International Raceway" label="Phoenix International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578706" start="5559" end="5579" title="1979 Gould Twin Dixie 125" label="Gould Twin Dixie 125"/>
<link wikidata="Q934996" start="5630" end="5646" title="1979 Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080867" start="5938" end="5950" title="Camping World Grand Prix at The Glen" label="Kent Oil 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="5954" end="5980" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276934" start="6027" end="6038" title="1980 IndyCar season" label="1980 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="6096" end="6106" title="Porsche" label="Porsche V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q172483" start="6171" end="6182" title="Parnelli" label="Parnelli 6C"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="6183" end="6195" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth DFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q898807" start="6234" end="6250" title="1980 Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6406" end="6416" title="AMI Racing" label="AMI Racing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6433" end="6448" title="Armstrong Mould" label="Armstrong Mould"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="6449" end="6460" title="March Engineering" label="Orbiter 80C"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="6461" end="6473" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth DFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451988" start="6481" end="6493" title="Firestone Indy 400" label="Michigan 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723278" start="6497" end="6528" title="Michigan International Speedway" label="Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q898747" start="6611" end="6627" title="1981 Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q931533" start="7738" end="7754" title="1982 Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022839" start="8009" end="8042" title="1983 IndyCar season" label="1983 CART/PPG World Series season"/>
<link wikidata="Q426982" start="8067" end="8088" title="1983 Indianapolis 500" label="1983 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="8135" end="8144" title="March Engineering" label="March 83C"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="8145" end="8157" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="8203" end="8212" title="March Engineering" label="March 83C"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="8213" end="8225" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth DFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q980888" start="8347" end="8364" title="Johnny Rutherford" label="Johnny Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269772" start="8368" end="8382" title="Patrick Racing" label="Patrick Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476662" start="8413" end="8426" title="Sea Ray Boats" label="Sea Ray Boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269772" start="8427" end="8439" title="Patrick Racing" label="Wildcat Mk 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="8440" end="8452" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth DFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="8567" end="8576" title="March Engineering" label="March 83C"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="8577" end="8590" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth DFXs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350359" start="8640" end="8665" title="Honda Indy 200" label="Escort Warning Radars 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931770" start="8669" end="8695" title="Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course" label="Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022841" start="8754" end="8765" title="1984 IndyCar season" label="1984 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="8848" end="8857" title="March Engineering" label="March 84C"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="8858" end="8870" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth DFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451988" start="8908" end="8931" title="Firestone Indy 400" label="Detroit News Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723278" start="8935" end="8966" title="Michigan International Speedway" label="Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785445" start="9019" end="9030" title="1985 IndyCar season" label="1985 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035729" start="9073" end="9096" title="Miami Indy Challenge" label="Beatrice Indy Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681218" start="9100" end="9112" title="Tamiami Park" label="Tamiami Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451988" start="9205" end="9217" title="Firestone Indy 400" label="Michigan 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182099" start="9288" end="9300" title="Phil Krueger" label="Phil Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080421" start="9330" end="9341" title="1986 IndyCar season" label="1986 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q898838" start="9362" end="9383" title="1986 Indianapolis 500" label="1986 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693189" start="9388" end="9405" title="Interscope Racing" label="Interscope Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513860" start="9424" end="9437" title="GM Goodwrench" label="GM Goodwrench"/>
<link wikidata="Q11289" start="9438" end="9448" title="Panavision" label="Panavision"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="9449" end="9458" title="March Engineering" label="March 86C"/>
<link wikidata="Q27415" start="9459" end="9467" title="Buick" label="Buick V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449367" start="9524" end="9535" title="1987 IndyCar season" label="1987 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q174144" start="9569" end="9580" title="Team Penske" label="Team Penske"/>
<link wikidata="Q11289" start="9607" end="9617" title="Panavision" label="Panavision"/>
<link wikidata="Q174144" start="9618" end="9630" title="Team Penske" label="Penske PC-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q173259" start="9631" end="9636" title="Ilmor Engineering" label="Ilmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="9637" end="9654" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet Indy V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q770238" start="9663" end="9679" title="1987 Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q368039" start="9759" end="9770" title="Al Unser Sr" label="Al Unser Sr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="9809" end="9825" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451988" start="9865" end="9877" title="Firestone Indy 400" label="Marlboro 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723278" start="9881" end="9912" title="Michigan International Speedway" label="Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035729" start="9918" end="9939" title="Miami Indy Challenge" label="Nissan Indy Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681218" start="9943" end="9955" title="Tamiami Park" label="Tamiami Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451983" start="9965" end="9992" title="Firestone Indy 225" label="Bosch Spark Plug Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972602" start="9996" end="10013" title="Nazareth Speedway" label="Nazareth Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248460" start="10154" end="10165" title="John Menard Jr." label="John Menard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629938" start="10181" end="10194" title="Scott Brayton" label="Scott Brayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q934391" start="10241" end="10262" title="1996 Indianapolis 500" label="1996 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592514" start="10483" end="10512" title="1997 Indy 200 at Walt Disney World" label="Indy 200 at Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q934410" start="10605" end="10621" title="1998 Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534737" start="10627" end="10639" title="Team Pelfrey" label="Team Pelfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949998" start="10746" end="10781" title="Motorsports Hall of Fame of America" label="Motorsports Hall of Fame of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q172155" start="11101" end="11113" title="Roger Penske" label="Roger Penske"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="11557" end="11581" title="congestive heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750886" start="11585" end="11610" title="Anaheim Hills, California" label="Anaheim Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="11916" end="11930" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625579" start="12142" end="12164" title="Honolulu Star-Bulletin" label="Honolulu Star-Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q286590" start="12243" end="12268" title="1940 United States census" label="1940 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q585978" start="12364" end="12375" title="1950 United States census" label="1950 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12436" end="12450" title="Sport (American magazine)" label="Sport Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12770" end="12773" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q368039" start="12974" end="12982" title="Al Unser" label="Al Unser"/>
<link wikidata="Q368039" start="13052" end="13060" title="Al Unser" label="Al Unser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629938" start="13201" end="13214" title="Scott Brayton" label="Scott Brayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848448" start="13378" end="13391" title="John Paul Jr. (racing driver)" label="John Paul Jr."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228289" wikidata="Q55520" url="?curid=1228289" title="Kilo-class submarine">
<text>The Kilo-class submarines are a group of diesel-electric attack submarines designed by the Rubin Design Bureau in the Soviet Union in the 1970s and built originally for the Soviet Navy.

The first version had the Soviet designation Project 877 &quot;Paltus (, meaning &quot;[[halibut]]&quot;), [[List of Soviet and Russian submarine classes|NATO reporting name]]Kilo. They entered operational service in 1980 and continued being built until the mid-1990s, when production switched to the more advancedProject 636 &quot;Varshavyanka variant, also known in the West as the Improved Kilo class. The design was updated again by the Russian Navy in the mid-2010s, to a variant called Project 636.3, also known as Improved Kilo II.

== Role ==
The Project 877 attack submarines were mainly intended for anti-shipping and anti-submarine operations in relatively shallow waters. Original Project 877 boats are equipped with Rubikon MGK-400 sonar system (with NATO reporting name Shark Gill), which includes a mine detection and avoidance sonar MG-519 Arfa (with NATO reporting name Mouse Roar).

Newer Project 636 boats are equipped with improved MGK-400EM, with MG-519 Arfa also upgraded to MG-519EM. MGK 400E can detect submarines with 0.05 Pa/Hz noisiness in and surface vessels with 10 Pa/Hz noisiness in . The improved sonar systems have reduced the number of operators needed by sharing the same console via automation.

Anechoic tiles are fitted on casings and fins to absorb the sound waves of active sonar, which results in a reduction and distortion of the return signal. These tiles also help attenuate sounds that are emitted from the submarine, thus reducing the range at which the submarine may be detected by passive sonar.

Project 636 and 636.3 submarines can launch Kalibr (and their Club export version) cruise missiles. It was reported in September 2022 that they can carry four Kalibr missiles, and can launch them through two of their six torpedo tubes.

==History==
A single Project 877 submarine, &quot;Alrosa&quot;, is equipped with pump-jet propulsion, instead of a propeller. It has been retrofitted for the Kalibr missile.

It was planned for Project 636 (Improved Kilo) to be succeeded by the in Russian Navy service. However, by November 2011 it was apparent that the Lada class would be delayed because &quot;Sankt Peterburg&quot; (B-585), the lead boat of the class, had shown major deficiencies. On 27 July 2012, the Russian Navy commander-in-chief announced that construction of the Lada-class submarines would resume, having undergone design changes. Series production was reported to be underway in the latter 2010s.

The Russian Navy also moved forward in the late 2010s, with the construction of Project 636.3, also known as Improved Kilo II. The first-in-class was named &quot;Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky&quot; (PPK) and was launched by the head of Admiralty Shipyard Alexander Buzakov on 28 March 2019, or some thirty months after commission. By November 2019, six units had been built for the Black Sea Fleet and further boats were proposed, but not funded, for the Pacific and Baltic Fleets.

In June 2022, an unconfirmed report from within Russia&#x27;s defense industry suggested that a further tranche of six additional Project 636.3 vessels might be ordered to start construction in around 2024. The PPK class &quot;is slightly longer in length — the sub&#x27;s submerged displacement is around 4,000 tons — and features improved engines, an improved combat system, as well as new noise reduction technology; it can fire both torpedoes and cruise missiles, launched from one of six 533-millimeter torpedo tubes.&quot; The PPK class has a seven-bladed propeller, instead of the six-bladed propeller of the Project 877 class.

== Specifications ==
There are several variants of the Kilo class. The information below is the smallest and largest number from the available information for all three main variants of the boat.

* Displacement:
** 2,300–2,350 tons surfaced
** 3,000–4,000 tons submerged
* Dimensions:
** Length: 70–74 meters
** Beam: 9.9 meters
** Draft: 6.2–6.5 meters
* Maximum speed
** 10–12 knots surfaced (18–22 km/h)
** 17–25 knots submerged (31–46 km/h)
* Propulsion: Diesel-electric 
* Maximum depth: 300 meters (240–250 meters operational)
* Endurance
** at submerged
** at snorkeling (7,500 miles for the Improved Kilo class)
** 45 days sea endurance
* Armament
** Air defence: 8 Strela-3 or 8 Igla-1, but after sea trial it was rejected by the navy.
** Six 533 mm torpedo tubes with 18 53-65 ASuW or TEST 71/76 ASW torpedoes or VA-111 Shkval supercavitating torpedoes, or 24 DM-1 mines,
* Crew: 52
* Price per unit is US$200–250 million (China paid about US$1.5–2 billion for 8 Project 636 Kilo-class submarines)

== Operational history ==
Kilo-class attack submarines originally began entering service with the Soviet Navy from 1980.

At the beginning of 2014, the Chinese PLA Navy held an emergency combat readiness test. The Kilo-class submarine &quot;Yuanzheng 72&quot;, deployed on a combat readiness voyage encountered a &quot;cliff&quot; caused by a sudden change in seawater density. Because the seawater density suddenly decreased, the submarine lost its buoyancy and rapidly fell to the seabed more than deep. The pressure on the submarine increased sharply, and the main engine room pipeline was damaged and water entered. The vessel lost power due to a large amount of water entering the main engine room. The crew reacted quickly, the submarine resurfaced in three minutes, avoiding disaster. The voyage was notable for creating many firsts for PLAN&#x27;s submarine service.

In 2015 five Kilo-class submarines were deployed to the Russian naval facility in Tartus, Syria. At least two of the units reportedly attacked land targets inside Syria with 3M54 Kalibr cruise missiles (NATO designation: SS-N-27A &quot;Sizzler&quot;). On 8 December 2015 marked the first time a Kilo-class submarine fired cruise missiles against an enemy. &quot;B-237 Rostov-on-Don&quot; struck two targets near the ISIS capital of Raqqa by the missile attack. The &quot;B-237 Rostov-on-Don&quot; transited the Dardanelles on its way back to the Black Sea on 12 February 2022.

&quot;B-871 Alrosa&quot;, a pump-jet Kilo class, which derives from the Project 877 hull, participated in the Russo-Ukraine War.

After the sinking of the in April 2022, it was remarked that the Kilo-class subs were the only members of the Black Sea Fleet whose orders did not prohibit venturing into Ukrainian waters near Odesa during the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In September 2022, after the early 2022 Crimea attacks, the UK Ministry of Defence said that the Kilo-class submarines were moved from Sevastopol to the Port of Novorossiysk in Krasnodar Krai.

On 13 September 2023, &quot;B-237 Rostov-on-Don&quot; was severely damaged by a Ukrainian Storm Shadow missile strike while it was drydocked in Sevastopol.
According to satellite images taken in June 2024, the submarine was moved to a lesser used dry dock within the port (at coordinates 44.609975029014116, 33.537496816089906). Camouflage nets were, at least initially, thrown up to disguise its presence and to make observation more challenging. According to reports, the submarine is under repair.

On 2 August 2024, Ukrainian Forces launched a strike against a Russian submarine and an S-400 air defense system in Crimea. Ukrainian sources claimed that the submarine &quot;B-237 Rostov-on-Don&quot; was &quot;sunk on the spot&quot; in the attack. Other sources claim that the submarine was only hit and not sunk. Satellite images showed the that camouflage nets were burned out by the strike.

== Operators ==
The first submarine entered service in the Soviet Navy in 1980, and the class remains in use with the Russian Navy today; around 11 original Kilo-class vessels believed to still be in active service with the Russian Navy (as of 2023), while new Improved Kilo–class subs are being delivered through the 2020s to replace them. About forty vessels have been exported to several countries:

* : 2 original Kilo (Project 877), 4 Improved Kilo (Project 636). 
* : 2 original Kilo (Project 877), 10 Improved Kilo (Project 636).
* : 10 original Kilo (Project 877), 1 sustained major casualty – designated as the 
* : one boat transferred from Indian Navy by March 2020.
* : 1 original Kilo (Project 877) – .
* : 3 original Kilo (Project 877).
* : 1 original Kilo (Project 877) – (not operational).
* : 10–11 original Kilo (Project 877), 11 Improved Kilo (Project 636.3) and 1 additional Improved Kilo on order (636.3) for Pacific Fleet to be delivered in 2024. One further Improved Kilo ordered in August 2020, during the International Military-Technical Forum &quot;ARMY-2020&quot;; up to six additional boats of the class intended to replace Project 877 units; first three ordered in 2023.
* : 6 Improved Kilo (Project 636) – , , , , , .

=== Possible purchasers ===
The government of Venezuela expressed interest since 2005 in acquiring nine AIP-powered conventional submarines, either the German U214 or later the Amur 1650. There was a Russian counteroffer due to technical issues at the shipyards back then, for five Project 636 Kilo-class and four Amur 1650, but it hasn&#x27;t gone through yet.

In 2017, the Philippine Navy showed interest in the Kilo-class submarine as part of its modernization program. Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana said the country was evaluating a Russian offer.

===Failed bids===
The Indonesian Navy was interested in purchasing two used Kilo-class submarines, but the Chief of Staff of the Indonesian Navy Laksamana Marsetio cancelled the plans in 2014 after inspecting the two submarines in Russia with an Indonesian Navy team. He said, &quot;The submarines look good on the outside, but the inside is filled with broken equipment, and the two submarines have been in storage for two years.&quot; Indonesia instead bought six Improved &quot;Jang Bogo&quot;-class submarines, later known as , including a transfer of technology, where Indonesia will eventually build four of six of the submarines with South Korea.
Actually, the bid for Kilo Russian submarines fell apart due to the lapse of the financing term of the Russian Federation.
==Gallery==
==List of submarines==
===Project 877===

===Project 636===
===Project 636.3===
Italics indicate estimates.

==See also==
* List of Soviet and Russian submarine classes
* List of submarine classes in service
* Future of the Russian Navy
* Cruise missile submarine
* Attack submarine

==Notes==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
*

==Further reading==
*
*


==External links==
* SSK Kilo Class (Type 636) at Naval-technology.com
* SSK Kilo Class (Type 877EKM) at Naval-technology.com
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="4" end="25" title="Kilo-class submarine" label="Kilo-class submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163778" start="41" end="56" title="diesel-electric" label="diesel-electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818021" start="57" end="73" title="attack submarine" label="attack submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468427" start="91" end="110" title="Rubin Design Bureau" label="Rubin Design Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="118" end="130" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="173" end="184" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="232" end="362" title="Kilo-class submarine" label="Project 877 &amp;quot;Paltus (, meaning &amp;quot;[[halibut]]&amp;quot;), [[List of Soviet and Russian submarine classes|NATO reporting name]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="366" end="501" title="Kilo-class submarine" label=". They entered operational service in 1980 and continued being built until the mid-1990s, when production switched to the more advanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="555" end="563" title="Western Bloc" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="571" end="584" title="Kilo-class submarine" label="Improved Kilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="679" end="692" title="Kilo-class submarine" label="Project 636.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="708" end="724" title="Kilo-class submarine" label="Improved Kilo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527950" start="797" end="810" title="Anti-surface warfare" label="anti-shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="815" end="829" title="anti-submarine warfare" label="anti-submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221403" start="951" end="970" title="NATO reporting name" label="NATO reporting name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025061" start="1419" end="1432" title="Anechoic tile" label="Anechoic tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q133220" start="1716" end="1729" title="passive sonar" label="passive sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333260" start="1776" end="1782" title="Kalibr" label="Kalibr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356704" start="2050" end="2058" title="pump-jet" label="pump-jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="2084" end="2093" title="propeller" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="2217" end="2229" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292711" start="2877" end="2895" title="Admiralty Shipyard" label="Admiralty Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="3023" end="3038" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="3575" end="3590" title="cruise missiles" label="cruise missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051186" start="4435" end="4443" title="9K34 Strela-3" label="Strela-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q147847" start="4449" end="4455" title="9K38 Igla" label="Igla-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132506" start="4542" end="4547" title="53-65" label="53-65"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="4571" end="4578" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q603126" start="4584" end="4597" title="VA-111 Shkval" label="VA-111 Shkval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571978" start="4598" end="4613" title="Supercavitation" label="supercavitating"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="4868" end="4879" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q468469" start="5253" end="5259" title="seabed" label="seabed"/>
<link wikidata="Q574818" start="5702" end="5734" title="Russian naval facility in Tartus" label="Russian naval facility in Tartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18399867" start="6008" end="6027" title="Russian submarine B-237" label="B-237 Rostov-on-Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="6062" end="6066" title="ISIS" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q283368" start="6078" end="6083" title="Raqqa" label="Raqqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="6157" end="6168" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="6192" end="6201" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="6334" end="6351" title="Russo-Ukraine War" label="Russo-Ukraine War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="6547" end="6552" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="6564" end="6591" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q114550059" start="6628" end="6647" title="2022 Crimea attacks" label="2022 Crimea attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="6656" end="6675" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4325167" start="6746" end="6766" title="Port of Novorossiysk" label="Port of Novorossiysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680" start="6770" end="6784" title="Krasnodar Krai" label="Krasnodar Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200222" start="6877" end="6889" title="Storm Shadow" label="Storm Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q861006" start="7377" end="7382" title="S-400" label="S-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="7405" end="7411" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="7744" end="7755" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="8336" end="8347" title="Indian Navy" label="Indian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546162" start="9310" end="9325" title="Philippine Navy" label="Philippine Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351017" start="9426" end="9442" title="Delfin Lorenzana" label="Delfin Lorenzana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704661" start="9515" end="9530" title="Indonesian Navy" label="Indonesian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479855" start="9600" end="9637" title="Chief of Staff of the Indonesian Navy" label="Chief of Staff of the Indonesian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052576" start="9638" end="9647" title="Laksamana" label="Laksamana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12497140" start="9648" end="9656" title="Marsetio" label="Marsetio"/>
<link wikidata="Q624804" start="9959" end="9995" title="Jang Bogo-class submarine" label="Improved &amp;quot;Jang Bogo&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413939" start="10406" end="10450" title="List of Soviet and Russian submarine classes" label="List of Soviet and Russian submarine classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436962" start="10453" end="10489" title="List of submarine classes in service" label="List of submarine classes in service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510844" start="10492" end="10518" title="Future of the Russian Navy" label="Future of the Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001879" start="10521" end="10545" title="Cruise missile submarine" label="Cruise missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818021" start="10548" end="10564" title="Attack submarine" label="Attack submarine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228291" wikidata="Q460768" url="?curid=1228291" title="Dave Charlton">
<text>David William Charlton (27 October 1936 – 24 February 2013) was a racing driver from South Africa.

Charlton was born in Brotton, Yorkshire. He participated in 13 World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 1 January 1965. He scored no championship points. He competed in many non-World Championship Formula One races, winning the South African Formula One Championship six times in succession from 1970 to 1975.

Charlton died in Johannesburg, South Africa on 24 February 2013, aged 76.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q460768" start="0" end="22" title="Dave Charlton" label="David William Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="66" end="79" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622799" start="121" end="128" title="Brotton" label="Brotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="130" end="139" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="182" end="193" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173758" start="343" end="381" title="South African Formula One Championship" label="South African Formula One Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="443" end="455" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="554" end="557" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228292" wikidata="Q172063" url="?curid=1228292" title="David Hampshire">
<text>David Alan Hampshire (29 December 1917 – 25 August 1990) was a British racing driver from England. He was born in Mickleover, Derbyshire and died in Newton Solney, in South Derbyshire.

Hampshire first appeared amongst Bira, Villoresi, Tony Rolt, Raymond Mays, Peter Whitehead, Leslie Brooke and Reg Parnell in the 1939 Nuffield Trophy at Donington Park. However, the Maserati 6CL which he was driving, formerly owned by Arthur Dobson and re-engineered into an car, only managed a few laps, retiring with a melted piston. The car was subsequently returned to format. He raced the 6CL again at the 1939 Brooklands Whit Monday meeting and the Sydenham Trophy at Crystal Palace on 20 May (televised by the BBC). It had a final outing at Donington Park on 12 August 1939 just before the outbreak of World War 2.

After the Second World War, there were virtually no circuits in England to begin with so sprints were undertaken at Gransden Lodge and Shelsley Walsh. Later in 1946, he competed in his Delage 158L (a 1927 GP car) in the Albi Grand Prix and the Grand Prix des Nations in which he finished eighth.

In 1947, he first drove Reg Parnell&#x27;s &quot;The Challenger&quot; in the British Empire Trophy and Parnell&#x27;s ERA E-type (GP1) at Lausanne both ending in retirements.

On the whole, 1948 was more fruitful: he finished second in his Delage 158L in the 1948 British Empire Trophy at Douglas, Isle of Man, and seventh in the Zandvoort Grand Prix in the Netherlands. He also competed in that year&#x27;s Jersey Road Race.

In 1949, with the newly acquired (but 10-year-old) ERA R12b he was fourth in the British Grand Prix at Silverstone and also fourth at the Goodwood Trophy. There were top ten results in the Jersey Road Race and the British Empire Trophy, an 11th position at the International Trophy Meeting, but retirements at the Albi and Lausanne GPs.

During the 1950 Formula One season, he competed in two World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, and numerous non-Championship Formula One races. He took pole position for the non-Championship Jersey Road Race in the Scuderia Ambrosiana Maserati 4CLT, but his maiden Formula One win eluded him when the car&#x27;s magneto failed. Nevertheless, he recorded the fastest lap of the race, which was won by Peter Whitehead in a Ferrari. Later in the season he did finally manage to take a Formula One race victory in the 1950 Nottingham Trophy at Gamston, which he won in a Scuderia Ambrosiana Maserati 4CLT.

He competed in the 1951 24 Hours of Le Mans race in a works Aston Martin DB2 where, along with his friend, Reg Parnell, he finished third in class and seventh overall.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
==References==

*Race results taken from ChicaneF1.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172063" start="0" end="20" title="David Hampshire" label="David Alan Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="71" end="84" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838865" start="114" end="124" title="Mickleover" label="Mickleover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="126" end="136" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763526" start="149" end="162" title="Newton Solney" label="Newton Solney"/>
<link wikidata="Q173204" start="219" end="223" title="Birabongse Bhanudej" label="Bira"/>
<link wikidata="Q171514" start="225" end="234" title="Luigi Villoresi" label="Villoresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172202" start="236" end="245" title="Tony Rolt" label="Tony Rolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856022" start="247" end="259" title="Raymond Mays" label="Raymond Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q173049" start="261" end="276" title="Peter Whitehead (racing driver)" label="Peter Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794803" start="278" end="291" title="Leslie Brooke" label="Leslie Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q172057" start="296" end="307" title="Reg Parnell" label="Reg Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173202" start="339" end="353" title="Donington Park" label="Donington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395618" start="368" end="380" title="Maserati 6CM" label="Maserati 6CL"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="602" end="612" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q849197" start="660" end="674" title="Crystal Palace circuit" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="795" end="806" title="World War II" label="World War 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913333" start="925" end="939" title="Gransden Lodge Airfield" label="Gransden Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493930" start="944" end="958" title="Shelsley Walsh Speed Hill Climb" label="Shelsley Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27550" start="994" end="1000" title="Delage" label="Delage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978883" start="1029" end="1044" title="Albi Grand Prix" label="Albi Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200342" start="1183" end="1204" title="British Empire Trophy" label="British Empire Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172153" start="1224" end="1227" title="English Racing Automobiles" label="ERA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1228" end="1234" title="English Racing Automobiles#E-type" label="E-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479442" start="1365" end="1391" title="1948 British Empire Trophy" label="1948 British Empire Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557965" start="1436" end="1456" title="1948 Zandvoort Grand Prix" label="Zandvoort Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467651" start="1497" end="1530" title="1948 Jersey Road Race" label="that year&amp;#x27;s Jersey Road Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584027" start="1614" end="1632" title="1949 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q113614050" start="1671" end="1686" title="1949 Goodwood Trophy" label="Goodwood Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738388" start="1722" end="1738" title="1949 Jersey Road Race" label="Jersey Road Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109175" start="1747" end="1768" title="1949 British Empire Trophy" label="British Empire Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068647" start="1794" end="1822" title="1949 BRDC International Trophy" label="International Trophy Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1945" end="1956" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778320" start="2066" end="2082" title="1950 Jersey Road Race" label="Jersey Road Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548586" start="2090" end="2109" title="Scuderia Ambrosiana" label="Scuderia Ambrosiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549417" start="2110" end="2123" title="Maserati 4CLT" label="Maserati 4CLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q173049" start="2275" end="2290" title="Peter Whitehead (racing driver)" label="Peter Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2389" end="2411" title="1950 Formula One season#Non-championship races" label="1950 Nottingham Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549417" start="2462" end="2475" title="Maserati 4CL and 4CLT" label="Maserati 4CLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q216396" start="2497" end="2521" title="1951 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1951 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q283346" start="2538" end="2554" title="Aston Martin DB2" label="Aston Martin DB2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2700" end="2703" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228293" wikidata="Q172288" url="?curid=1228293" title="David Piper (racing driver)">
<text>David Ruff Piper (born 2 December 1930) is a British former Formula One and sports car racing driver from England. He participated in 3 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 18 July 1959. He scored no championship points.

==Racing career==

===Early career and Formula One===
Piper was born in Edgware, Middlesex and began his career in the mid-1950s by competing in sprints and hill-climbs, before beginning circuit racing with a Lotus Eleven. He then moved up to a Lotus 16 which he used in 1959 and 1960 to compete in both Formula One and Formula Two, by means of changing engines as appropriate. His best result with the car was a second place in the Lady Wigram Trophy, in 1960, behind Jack Brabham in a Cooper.

In 1961, Piper competed in European Formula Junior alongside Jo Siffert but drove the Gilby F1 car in the Gold Cup. He also competed in non-championship races in 1962, but had become disenchanted with single-seater racing and moved into sports car racing initially with a Ferrari 250 GTO.

===Later career===
Between 1962 and 1970, Piper raced frequently in many locations worldwide using his personally owned Ferraris and, later, Porsches. He was moderately successful and gained a reputation for reliability and consistency.

Piper&#x27;s personal sport cars of the period are typically painted in bright green, originally from his BP sponsor which replaced Esso after the Suez Crisis; eventually Piper liked the color and made it his own, having never liked the classic British racing green.

Piper crashed a Porsche 917 during the 1970 shooting of the film &quot;Le Mans&quot; and lost part of one leg.

Piper later raced his personal, green, Porsche 917 and other cars in historic events.

==Racing record==
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)

† Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.

===24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==Gallery==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172288" start="0" end="16" title="David Piper (racing driver)" label="David Ruff Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="60" end="71" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="76" end="93" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q149651" start="313" end="320" title="Edgware" label="Edgware"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="322" end="331" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q507192" start="450" end="462" title="Lotus Eleven" label="Lotus Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q173747" start="486" end="494" title="Lotus 16" label="Lotus 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="545" end="556" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="561" end="572" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470596" start="674" end="692" title="Lady Wigram Trophy" label="Lady Wigram Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125" start="710" end="722" title="Jack Brabham" label="Jack Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="728" end="734" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437637" start="773" end="787" title="Formula Junior" label="Formula Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q171531" start="798" end="808" title="Jo Siffert" label="Jo Siffert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312686" start="823" end="831" title="Gilby Engineering" label="Gilby F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q210154" start="843" end="851" title="Oulton Park International Gold Cup" label="Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="974" end="991" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q277339" start="1009" end="1024" title="Ferrari 250 GTO" label="Ferrari 250 GTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="1168" end="1175" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="1371" end="1373" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q867662" start="1397" end="1401" title="Esso" label="Esso"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="1412" end="1423" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q919991" start="1510" end="1530" title="British racing green" label="British racing green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514835" start="1549" end="1560" title="Porsche 917" label="Porsche 917"/>
<link wikidata="Q613290" start="1604" end="1611" title="Le Mans (film)" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1805" end="1808" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1866" end="1869" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228294" wikidata="Q172513" url="?curid=1228294" title="David Prophet">
<text>David Prophet (9 October 1937 – 29 March 1981) was a British racing driver from England. He participated in two Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 28 December 1963. He scored no championship points. He finished sixth in the non-Championship 1963 Rand Grand Prix.

Prophet was killed in a helicopter crash shortly after taking off from Silverstone Circuit on 29 March 1981. With him was Christopher Roberts. 

==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Non-Championship Formula One results===
(key)
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap.)
==References==

* &quot;The Formula One Record Book&quot;, John Thompson, 1974.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172513" start="0" end="13" title="David Prophet" label="David Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="61" end="74" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="112" end="123" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571208" start="262" end="282" title="1963 Rand Grand Prix" label="1963 Rand Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="309" end="319" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="356" end="375" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="" start="504" end="507" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="553" end="556" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="614" end="617" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228296" wikidata="Q3305597" url="?curid=1228296" title="Television in Albania">
<text>Television in Albania was first introduced in 1960. RTSH dominated the Albanian broadcasting field up to the mid-90s, a period when privately owned radio and TV stations started to occupy the vast empty Albanian frequencies.

RTSH owns and operates a vast number of transmitter sites throughout the country such as the Fushe Dajt and Dajt 1613m stations at Mount Dajt in the periphery of Tirana. As such, a number of Western radio and TV broadcasters leased the sites to broadcast their own feeds free-to-air during the 1990s until early 2000s, when a law was passed to protect the Albanian television industry and put these stations in pay TV platforms.

After several years of being stalled, deadlines for transition to DTV broadcasting are being continuously announced until all subscribers are equipped with digital antennas.

Albania has 3 national commercial television stations, 56 local stations, 83 local cable stations and two commercial multiplexes.

Of all the existing national television stations, the public broadcaster Radio Televizioni Shqiptar (RTSH) has the greatest reach: its signal covers 80.5% of the territory, followed by Top Channel with 79%, and TV Klan with 78%. However, there are also digital multiplexes but they are unaccounted for in the territorial reach figures.

It could be said that the other main TV stations, based in Tirana, whose signal covers a significant part of the territory include: Ora News, Ora TV, News 24, Top News, Panorama TV, Report TV, RTV Scan, BBF TV, Vizion Plus. Apart from the latter stations, most others are round-the-clock news channels. Euronews and CNN International have opened their own franchises in Albania.

Digital broadcasting is available mainly in Tirana and Durrës, though it is gradually being introduced to the western lowland and further inland.

== Albanian television channels ==
*RTSH
*Top Channel
*Tv Klan
*Vizion Plus
*News 24 Albania
*RTV Ora
*Report TV 
*A2 CNN
*ABC
*Fax News
*Ora News
*Euronews Albania
*MCN TV
*SCAN TV
*Syri TV
*Shijak TV
*IN TV
*Club TV
*CNA TV
*Premium Channel
*Panorama TV
*MCN 24
*Dritare TV

Source:

== See also ==
* List of television stations in Albania
* Media of Albania

==References==
==Further reading==
*TV Ownership in Albania - Media Ownership Monitor Albania
*Londo, Ilda. Television across Europe: follow-up reports 2008 - Albania. Budapest: Open Society Institute, 2008
* Londo, Ilda. Media Ownership, Independence, and Pluralism. Tirana: Albanian Media Institute, 2007
* Londo, Ilda. Digital television in Albania: Policies, development and public debate. Tirana: Albanian Media Institute, 2006
* Kalaja, Diana. Menaxhimi i mediave televizive shqiptare gjate kalimit nga transmetimi analog ne dixhital. Tirana: University of Tirana, 2016 (Albanian)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3305597" start="0" end="21" title="Television in Albania" label="Television in Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846061" start="32" end="50" title="Timeline of the introduction of television in countries" label="introduced in 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334457" start="52" end="56" title="RTSH" label="RTSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="71" end="78" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="80" end="92" title="broadcasting" label="broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="132" end="147" title="privately owned" label="privately owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="158" end="160" title="Television" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="722" end="725" title="Digital television" label="DTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q968899" start="1147" end="1158" title="Top Channel" label="Top Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580767" start="1173" end="1180" title="Televizioni Klan" label="TV Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="1358" end="1364" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277899" start="1431" end="1439" title="Ora News" label="Ora News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019320" start="1449" end="1456" title="News 24 (Albanian TV channel)" label="News 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824579" start="1458" end="1466" title="Top News" label="Top News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321764" start="1510" end="1521" title="Vizion Plus" label="Vizion Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="1734" end="1740" title="Durrës" label="Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334457" start="1862" end="1866" title="RTSH" label="RTSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q968899" start="1868" end="1879" title="Top Channel" label="Top Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580767" start="1881" end="1888" title="Tv Klan" label="Tv Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321764" start="1890" end="1901" title="Vizion Plus" label="Vizion Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019320" start="1903" end="1918" title="News 24 (Albanian TV channel)" label="News 24 Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277899" start="1920" end="1927" title="Ora News" label="RTV Ora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648966" start="1929" end="1938" title="A1 Report" label="Report TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q125759173" start="1941" end="1947" title="A2 CNN" label="A2 CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650196" start="1949" end="1952" title="ABC News (Albanian TV channel)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812948" start="1954" end="1962" title="Fax News" label="Fax News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277899" start="1964" end="1972" title="Ora News" label="Ora News"/>
<link wikidata="Q8478" start="1974" end="1990" title="Euronews Albania" label="Euronews Albania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1992" end="1998" title="MCN TV" label="MCN TV"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2000" end="2007" title="Përdoruesi:SCAN TV" label="SCAN TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q115801956" start="2009" end="2016" title="Syri Television" label="Syri TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2018" end="2027" title="Shijak TV" label="Shijak TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230078" start="2029" end="2034" title="IN TV (Albania)" label="IN TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2036" end="2043" title="Club TV" label="Club TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2045" end="2051" title="CNA TV" label="CNA TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2053" end="2068" title="Premium Channel" label="Premium Channel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2070" end="2081" title="Panorama TV" label="Panorama TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2083" end="2089" title="MCN 24" label="MCN 24"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2091" end="2101" title="Dritare TV" label="Dritare TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q126810690" start="2129" end="2167" title="List of television stations in Albania" label="List of television stations in Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805852" start="2170" end="2186" title="Media of Albania" label="Media of Albania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228297" wikidata="Q424374" url="?curid=1228297" title="Epidermal growth factor">
<text>Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is a protein that stimulates cell growth and differentiation by binding to its receptor, EGFR. Human EGF is 6-kDa and has 53 amino acid residues and three intramolecular disulfide bonds.

EGF was originally described as a secreted peptide found in the submaxillary glands of mice and in human urine. EGF has since been found in many human tissues, including platelets, submandibular gland (submaxillary gland), and parotid gland. Initially, human EGF was known as urogastrone.

== Structure ==

In humans, EGF has 53 amino acids (sequence NSDSECPLSHDGYCLHDGVCMYIEALDKYACNCVVGYIGERCzYRDLKWWELR), with a molecular mass of around 6 kDa. It contains three disulfide bridges (Cys6-Cys20, Cys14-Cys31, Cys33-Cys42).

== Function ==
EGF, via binding to its cognate receptor, results in cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival.

Salivary EGF, which seems to be regulated by dietary inorganic iodine, also plays an important physiological role in the maintenance of oro-esophageal and gastric tissue integrity. The biological effects of salivary EGF include healing of oral and gastroesophageal ulcers, inhibition of gastric acid secretion, stimulation of DNA synthesis as well as mucosal protection from intraluminal injurious factors such as gastric acid, bile acids, pepsin, and trypsin and to physical, chemical and bacterial agents.

== Biological sources ==
The Epidermal growth factor can be found in platelets, urine, saliva, milk, tears, and blood plasma. It can also be found in the submandibular glands, and the parotid gland. The production of EGF has been found to be stimulated by testosterone.

== Polypeptide growth factors ==

Polypeptide growth factors include:

== Mechanism ==

EGF acts by binding with high affinity to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) on the cell surface. This stimulates ligand-induced dimerization, activating the intrinsic protein-tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor (see the second diagram). The tyrosine kinase activity, in turn, initiates a signal transduction cascade that results in a variety of biochemical changes within the cell – a rise in intracellular calcium levels, increased glycolysis and protein synthesis, and increases in the expression of certain genes including the gene for EGFR – that ultimately lead to DNA synthesis and cell proliferation.

== EGF-family / EGF-like domain ==

EGF is the founding member of the EGF-family of proteins. Members of this protein family have highly similar structural and functional characteristics. Besides EGF itself other family members include:
*Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF)
*transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α)
*Amphiregulin (AR)
*Epiregulin (EPR)
*Epigen
*Betacellulin (BTC)
*neuregulin-1 (NRG1)
*neuregulin-2 (NRG2)
*neuregulin-3 (NRG3)
*neuregulin-4 (NRG4).

All family members contain one or more repeats of the conserved amino acid sequence:

CX7CX4-5CX10-13CXCX8GXRC

Where C is cysteine, G is glycine, R is arginine, and X represents any amino acid.

This sequence contains six cysteine residues that form three intramolecular disulfide bonds. Disulfide bond formation generates three structural loops that are essential for high-affinity binding between members of the EGF-family and their cell-surface receptors.

== Interactions ==
Epidermal growth factor has been shown to interact with epidermal growth factor receptors.

==Medical uses==
Recombinant human epidermal growth factor, sold under the brand name Heberprot-P, is used to treat diabetic foot ulcers. It can be given by injection into the wound site, or may be used topically. Tentative evidence shows improved wound healing. Safety has been poorly studied.

EGF is used to modify synthetic scaffolds for manufacturing of bioengineered grafts by emulsion electrospinning or surface modification methods.

=== Bone regeneration ===
EGF plays an enhancer role on the osteogenic differentiation of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) because it is capable of increasing extracellular matrix mineralization. A low concentration of EGF (10 ng/ml) is sufficient to induce morphological and phenotypic changes. These data suggests that DPSCs in combination with EGF could be an effective stem cell-based therapy to bone tissue engineering applications in periodontics and oral implantology.

== History ==
EGF was the second growth factor to be identified. Initially, human EGF was known as urogastrone. Stanley Cohen discovered EGF while working with Rita Levi-Montalcini at the Washington University in St. Louis during experiments researching nerve growth factor. For these discoveries Levi-Montalcini and Cohen were awarded the 1986 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 


== External links ==

* Shaanxi Zhongbang Pharma-Tech Co., Ltd.-Supply of Epidermal Growth Factor
* EGF at the Human Protein Reference Database .
* EGF model in BioModels database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q424374" start="0" end="23" title="Epidermal growth factor" label="Epidermal growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q424374" start="25" end="28" title="Epidermal growth factor" label="EGF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="35" end="42" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q189159" start="59" end="70" title="cell growth" label="cell growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q210861" start="75" end="90" title="Cellular differentiation" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q424401" start="119" end="123" title="Epidermal growth factor receptor" label="EGFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="125" end="130" title="Human" label="Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="141" end="143" title="dalton (unit)" label="Da"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="155" end="174" title="amino acid" label="amino acid residues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="200" end="214" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q579886" start="282" end="300" title="submaxillary gland" label="submaxillary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="305" end="309" title="Mus musculus" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="323" end="328" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="388" end="397" title="Platelet" label="platelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q579886" start="399" end="418" title="submandibular gland" label="submandibular gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q691653" start="445" end="458" title="parotid gland" label="parotid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q424374" start="494" end="505" title="Epidermal growth factor" label="urogastrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="528" end="534" title="Human" label="humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="547" end="558" title="Amino acid" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="632" end="646" title="molecular mass" label="molecular mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="659" end="662" title="kDa" label="kDa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="682" end="699" title="Disulfide" label="disulfide bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q424401" start="776" end="796" title="Epidermal growth factor receptor" label="its cognate receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="928" end="934" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="1443" end="1452" title="Platelet" label="platelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="1454" end="1459" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="1461" end="1467" title="saliva" label="saliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="1469" end="1473" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q76469" start="1475" end="1480" title="tears" label="tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="1486" end="1498" title="blood plasma" label="blood plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q579886" start="1528" end="1548" title="Submandibular gland" label="submandibular glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q691653" start="1558" end="1571" title="parotid gland" label="parotid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="1630" end="1642" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="1763" end="1771" title="Affinity (pharmacology)" label="affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q424401" start="1775" end="1807" title="epidermal growth factor receptor" label="epidermal growth factor receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="1822" end="1834" title="plasma membrane" label="cell surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336082" start="1985" end="2000" title="tyrosine kinase" label="tyrosine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="2032" end="2051" title="signal transduction" label="signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="2089" end="2100" title="biochemistry" label="biochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="2151" end="2158" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="2177" end="2187" title="glycolysis" label="glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211935" start="2192" end="2209" title="protein synthesis" label="protein synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="2232" end="2242" title="gene expression" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="2254" end="2258" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="2314" end="2327" title="DNA replication" label="DNA synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24723491" start="2423" end="2445" title="EGF-like domain" label="EGF-family of proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914537" start="2591" end="2629" title="Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor" label="Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14908037" start="2640" end="2668" title="TGF alpha" label="transforming growth factor-α"/>
<link wikidata="Q14866198" start="2678" end="2690" title="Amphiregulin" label="Amphiregulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914546" start="2697" end="2707" title="Epiregulin" label="Epiregulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18053795" start="2715" end="2721" title="Epigen" label="Epigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914549" start="2723" end="2735" title="Betacellulin" label="Betacellulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914188" start="2743" end="2755" title="neuregulin-1" label="neuregulin-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q59252204" start="2764" end="2776" title="neuregulin" label="neuregulin-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q59252204" start="2785" end="2797" title="neuregulin" label="neuregulin-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q59252204" start="2806" end="2818" title="neuregulin" label="neuregulin-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4995178" start="2882" end="2891" title="conserved sequence" label="conserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="2951" end="2959" title="cysteine" label="cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="2966" end="2973" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173670" start="2980" end="2988" title="arginine" label="arginine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="3011" end="3021" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="3100" end="3114" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="3264" end="3276" title="cell-surface" label="cell-surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q896177" start="3350" end="3358" title="Protein-protein interaction" label="interact"/>
<link wikidata="Q424401" start="3364" end="3397" title="epidermal growth factor receptor" label="epidermal growth factor receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q331672" start="3417" end="3428" title="Recombinant protein" label="Recombinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006488" start="3486" end="3497" title="Heberprot-P" label="Heberprot-P"/>
<link wikidata="Q52859" start="3516" end="3535" title="diabetic foot ulcer" label="diabetic foot ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q580689" start="3759" end="3772" title="Biological engineering" label="bioengineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533542" start="3792" end="3807" title="electrospinning" label="electrospinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259430" start="3932" end="3954" title="dental pulp stem cells" label="dental pulp stem cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="4240" end="4251" title="bone tissue" label="bone tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q938196" start="4280" end="4292" title="periodontics" label="periodontics"/>
<link wikidata="Q143680" start="4297" end="4314" title="Oral Implantology" label="oral implantology"/>
<link wikidata="Q408378" start="4350" end="4363" title="growth factor" label="growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q232299" start="4429" end="4442" title="Stanley Cohen (biochemist)" label="Stanley Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185007" start="4477" end="4497" title="Rita Levi-Montalcini" label="Rita Levi-Montalcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="4505" end="4539" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q417782" start="4571" end="4590" title="nerve growth factor" label="nerve growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="4662" end="4699" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228298" wikidata="Q172297" url="?curid=1228298" title="Dennis Poore">
<text>Roger Dennistoun Poore (19 August 1916 – 12 February 1987) was a British racing driver, financier and entrepreneur. He became chairman of Norton Villiers Triumph (NVT) during the final years of the old British motorcycle industry.

==Background and family==
Poore was born in Paddington, London. His father, Roger Poore, DSO, was killed in action during the First World War on 26 September 1917. 

On 24 March 1949, Dennis Poore married Peta Farley nee Coast. They had one daughter, Victoria Borwick MP.

==Racing career==
Poore was a keen motor sport participant, and competed in two World Championship Grands Prix in 1952. He made his debut in the British Grand Prix on 19 July 1952, where he finished fourth. He scored 3 championship points. Poore won the British Hill Climb Championship in 1950 driving a 3.8-litre twin-Wade-blown Alfa Romeo. He finished second at Shelsley Walsh, first at Prescott, second at Bo&#x27;ness, taking the win at Rest and Be Thankful, then second at Bouley Bay and first at Val des Terres, rounding off the season with another win at Prescott. After his World Championship Grands Prix, Poore raced sportscars for Aston Martin, winning the Goodwood International Nine Hour race with a DB3S in 1955, co-driven by Peter Walker.

Poore used his personal wealth to bankroll the founding, in 1950, of the motor racing journal &quot;Autosport.&quot;

==NVT career==
Poore became chairman of Manganese Bronze Holdings PLC, an engineering company primarily concerned with making marine propellers. Poore later sold off the propeller business and used the funds to buy up a motley collection of failing British motorcycle companies, Associated Motor Cycles, Norton, AJS, James, Francis-Barnett, Matchless, and engine manufacturers Villiers.

Following the collapse of BSA in 1972, the motorcycle interests of Manganese Bronze and BSA/Triumph were merged into Norton Villiers Triumph Ltd. Poore was made chairman of NVT and he quickly sold off BSA&#x27;s substantial non-motorcycle interests. NVT was assisted by substantial aid from the Government, who were anxious to stave off the collapse of the British motorcycle industry. Poore&#x27;s restructuring became rather draconian, making 3,000 of the 4,500 workforce redundant. This led to the creation of the Meriden Cooperative which operated for ten years until it became bankrupt. Production of BSA bikes (the A65 twin and the A75 triple) ceased, and with Triumph lost to the Cooperative, the sole NVT model was the Norton Commando. Although this machine won the &quot;Motor Cycle News&quot; &quot;Bike of the Year&quot; award for several years running, nothing could hide the fact that the Commando was an old design, being a pre-unit pushrod parallel-twin. Eventually Commando production ended and NVT ended up assembling an Asian 125cc trail bike. However, Norton went on to produce a twin-rotor Wankel-engined bike based on David Garside&#x27;s work at BSA.

Compared with BSA&#x27;s hopeless management team who had led their once-mighty company to ruin through incompetence, dire business decisions and a failure even to appreciate bikes, Poore at first seemed a breath of fresh air who could be the hoped-for saviour of the British motorcycle industry. His sporting past showed he was in tune with motorsport and engineering. However, his reconstruction and redundancy plans were heavy-handed and some regarded him as little more than an asset-stripper. What is clear is that his actions led to the fragmentation of the industry when consolidation was essential to save the day.

==London cabs==
With the purchase of BSA came its subsidiary Carbodies, builder of the FX4 London taxi; the classic &quot;black cab&quot;. After disposing of the motorcycle manufacturing arms, Poore continued to head Manganese Bronze as a taxi and component manufacturer until his death in 1987.
==Complete World Drivers&#x27; Championship results==
(key)
==References==
== External links ==
* Dennis Poore&#x27;s Alfa Romeo 8C 35 Photographs and information about the 8C-35 (chassis 50013) that Poore owned for many years.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172297" start="0" end="22" title="Dennis Poore" label="Roger Dennistoun Poore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="73" end="86" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822897" start="138" end="161" title="Norton Villiers Triumph" label="Norton Villiers Triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="358" end="373" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926595" start="483" end="499" title="Victoria Borwick" label="Victoria Borwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953927" start="759" end="790" title="British Hill Climb Championship" label="British Hill Climb Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="835" end="845" title="Alfa Romeo#Motorsport" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493930" start="869" end="883" title="Shelsley Walsh Speed Hill Climb" label="Shelsley Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240870" start="894" end="902" title="Prescott Speed Hill Climb" label="Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931025" start="914" end="926" title="Bo&amp;#x27;ness Hill Climb" label="Bo&amp;#x27;ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316041" start="946" end="966" title="Rest and Be Thankful Speed Hill Climb" label="Rest and Be Thankful"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949689" start="983" end="993" title="Bouley Bay Hill Climb" label="Bouley Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909181" start="1007" end="1021" title="Val des Terres Hill Climb" label="Val des Terres"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="1131" end="1141" title="Sports car racing" label="sportscars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1146" end="1158" title="Aston Martin#Motorsport" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1172" end="1204" title="Goodwood Circuit#Goodwood Nine Hours" label="Goodwood International Nine Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810992" start="1217" end="1221" title="Aston Martin DB3S" label="DB3S"/>
<link wikidata="Q171891" start="1244" end="1256" title="Peter Walker (racing driver)" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="1332" end="1344" title="motor racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q776358" start="1359" end="1368" title="Autosport" label="Autosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621302" start="1417" end="1442" title="Manganese Bronze Holdings" label="Manganese Bronze Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="1451" end="1462" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130281" start="1656" end="1679" title="Associated Motor Cycles" label="Associated Motor Cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150827" start="1681" end="1687" title="Norton (motorcycle)" label="Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q278301" start="1689" end="1692" title="AJS" label="AJS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356929" start="1694" end="1699" title="James Cycle Co" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701633" start="1701" end="1716" title="Francis-Barnett" label="Francis-Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428119" start="1718" end="1727" title="Matchless" label="Matchless"/>
<link wikidata="Q499432" start="1754" end="1762" title="Villiers Ltd" label="Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q686178" start="1791" end="1794" title="Birmingham Small Arms" label="BSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844510" start="1857" end="1864" title="Triumph Engineering" label="Triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822897" start="1882" end="1905" title="Norton Villiers Triumph" label="Norton Villiers Triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="2130" end="2140" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844510" start="2282" end="2301" title="Meriden Cooperative" label="Meriden Cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q730833" start="2492" end="2507" title="Norton Commando" label="Norton Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043340" start="2545" end="2561" title="Motor Cycle News" label="Motor Cycle News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935842" start="2720" end="2733" title="Straight-twin engine" label="parallel-twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182883" start="2875" end="2881" title="Wankel engine" label="Wankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060601" start="2890" end="2894" title="Norton Classic" label="bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066924" start="2904" end="2917" title="David Garside" label="David Garside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894831" start="3421" end="3435" title="Asset stripping" label="asset-stripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q183040" start="3624" end="3633" title="Carbodies" label="Carbodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q781084" start="3650" end="3653" title="Austin FX4" label="FX4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273735" start="3654" end="3665" title="Hackney carriage" label="London taxi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3914" end="3917" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228299" wikidata="Q172825" url="?curid=1228299" title="Desmond Titterington">
<text>James Desmond Titterington (1 May 1928 – 13 April 2002) was a British racing driver from Northern Ireland. He was born at Cultra, near Holywood, County Down. He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, on 14 July 1956. He scored no championship points. He also competed in several non-Championship Grand Prix. He died in Dundee, Scotland, aged 73.
== Complete Formula One World Championship results ==
(key) 
==References==
==External links==
*Profile on F1 Rejects</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172825" start="0" end="26" title="Desmond Titterington" label="James Desmond Titterington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="70" end="83" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="89" end="105" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071868" start="122" end="128" title="Cultra" label="Cultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625366" start="135" end="143" title="Holywood, County Down" label="Holywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q190684" start="145" end="156" title="County Down" label="County Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="181" end="192" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="343" end="349" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="351" end="359" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="425" end="428" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228301" wikidata="Q172423" url="?curid=1228301" title="Dick Gibson (racing driver)">
<text>Richard Gibson (16 April 1918 – 17 December 2010) was a racing driver from England. He participated in two World Championship Formula One Grands Prix, debuting in . He scored no championship points. He also participated in numerous non-Championship Formula One races.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172423" start="0" end="14" title="Dick Gibson (racing driver)" label="Richard Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="56" end="69" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="126" end="137" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="" start="322" end="325" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228302" wikidata="Q78551" url="?curid=1228302" title="Dieter Quester">
<text>Dieter Quester (born 30 May 1939) is an Austrian former racing driver. Quester participated in 53 24-Hour Races. He competed in a single Formula One race in which he finished ninth.

Starting with motorboats in the 1950s, he became part of the Formula 2 team of BMW which intended to take part in the 1969 German Grand Prix. Teammate Gerhard Mitter was killed at the Nürburgring while practising with the &quot;BMW 269&quot;, though. As a suspension or steering failure was suspected, the BMW team with Quester and Hubert Hahne withdrew from the race, as did Mitter&#x27;s teammate at Porsche, Hans Herrmann.

Quester participated in his home 1974 Austrian Grand Prix on 18 August 1974. He out-qualified his three team mates at Surtees and finished 9th ahead of Hans-Joachim Stuck and double World Champion Graham Hill in the race, but scored no championship points.

Quester then focused again on European Touring Car Championship to drive a BMW 3.0 CSL for Schnitzer Motorsport. Quester had already won the 1973 Spa 24 Hours. Later racing in the DTM, he once slid on the roof of his BMW M3 over the start/finish line of the AVUS for a 3rd place.

His career was still active at age 70, sponsored by Red Bull. On 15 January 2006 he won the 24 Hours race at the Dubai Autodrome on a BMW M3 together with Hans-Joachim Stuck, Philipp Peter and Toto Wolff. Stuck and Quester returned in the 24 Hours Nürburgring, but their BMW was destroyed in a crash at night that involved an oil spill and seven cars. During the weekend of 9–10 September 2006, he won the Britcar 24 Hours of Silverstone in a Duller Motorsport BMW M Roadster#Z4 M Roadster (2006–2008), and on 14 January 2007 he again won the 24 Hours race at the Dubai Autodrome in the Duller Motorsport BMW Z4 (E85). In September 2007 he and Duller won the 24 Hours of Silverstone in the Duller BMW Z4 (E85), by a margin of 30 laps.

Quester took part in his final race at the HSR Classic Daytona in November 2018 at the age of 79.


==Racing record==

===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position, races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap.)

† Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.|}

===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Super Tourenwagen Cup results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete FIA GT Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Britcar 24 Hour results===
==References==
==External links==

* Biography at F1 Rejects
* https://web.archive.org/web/20060522051555/http://bmw-motorsport.com/ms/en/fascination/history/bmw_touring/heroes/index.html
* https://web.archive.org/web/20060627021546/http://www.john-w.de/bmwf2/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q78551" start="0" end="14" title="Dieter Quester" label="Dieter Quester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="137" end="148" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="244" end="253" title="Formula 2" label="Formula 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928692" start="262" end="265" title="BMW in Formula One" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q171849" start="301" end="323" title="1969 German Grand Prix" label="1969 German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q60883" start="334" end="348" title="Gerhard Mitter" label="Gerhard Mitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="367" end="378" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q61858" start="515" end="527" title="Hubert Hahne" label="Hubert Hahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q65915" start="594" end="607" title="Hans Herrmann" label="Hans Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q15515" start="643" end="667" title="1974 Austrian Grand Prix" label="1974 Austrian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q58654" start="762" end="780" title="Hans-Joachim Stuck" label="Hans-Joachim Stuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128" start="807" end="818" title="Graham Hill" label="Graham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q570724" start="898" end="931" title="European Touring Car Championship" label="European Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q796481" start="943" end="954" title="BMW E9" label="BMW 3.0 CSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q568432" start="959" end="979" title="Schnitzer Motorsport" label="Schnitzer Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q216585" start="1014" end="1026" title="Spa 24 Hours" label="Spa 24 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994800" start="1048" end="1051" title="Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft" label="DTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q796579" start="1085" end="1091" title="BMW M3" label="BMW M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q155810" start="1126" end="1130" title="AVUS" label="AVUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q51482" start="1201" end="1209" title="Red Bull" label="Red Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q588356" start="1262" end="1277" title="Dubai Autodrome" label="Dubai Autodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q796579" start="1283" end="1289" title="BMW M3" label="BMW M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q58654" start="1304" end="1322" title="Hans-Joachim Stuck" label="Hans-Joachim Stuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q87090" start="1324" end="1337" title="Philipp Peter" label="Philipp Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q90005" start="1342" end="1352" title="Toto Wolff" label="Toto Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q216323" start="1388" end="1408" title="24 Hours Nürburgring" label="24 Hours Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="1475" end="1484" title="oil spill" label="oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1610" end="1650" title="BMW M Roadster#Z4 M Roadster (2006–2008)" label="BMW M Roadster#Z4 M Roadster (2006–2008)"/>
<link wikidata="Q588356" start="1713" end="1728" title="Dubai Autodrome" label="Dubai Autodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754362" start="1754" end="1766" title="BMW Z4 (E85)" label="BMW Z4 (E85)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754362" start="1846" end="1858" title="BMW Z4 (E85)" label="BMW Z4 (E85)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2062" end="2065" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2193" end="2196" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2344" end="2347" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2590" end="2593" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2732" end="2735" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2872" end="2875" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228304" wikidata="Q233449" url="?curid=1228304" title="Divina Galica">
<text>Divina Mary Galica MBE (last name pronounced &quot;Galitsa&quot;; born 13 August 1944) is a British sportswoman. She competed in four Winter Olympics as a skier, captaining the British Women&#x27;s Olympic Ski Team in 1968 and 1972. She also pursued a career in motorsport, entering three Formula One World Championship Grands Prix.

==Skiing career==
Galica was born in Bushey Heath, near Watford, Hertfordshire. Aged 19, she participated in her first Olympic games at Innsbruck in 1964, competing in downhill skiing and the slalom. She also participated in the next two winter Olympics, at Grenoble in 1968 and Sapporo in 1972. On both occasions Galica was captain of the British Women&#x27;s Olympic Ski Team, and finished in the top ten in the giant slalom. Aside from Olympic competition, she achieved two World Cup podium finishes in the downhill event, taking third place at both the Badgastein and Chamonix rounds in 1968. She also held the British women&#x27;s downhill skiing speed record (at 125 mph). Following her subsequent driving career, Galica returned to skiing and once again represented Great Britain at the 1992 Winter Olympics, this time in the speed skiing event.

==Driving career==
Accepting an invitation to a celebrity auto race, Galica surprised everyone with her driving talent. She eventually took up motorsport as a second career, initially racing karts, moving into Formula Two and Formula One before finding success in sports cars and trucks. Her racing career has included stints in Formula Renault and Formula Vauxhall Lotus.

Galica was taken under the wings of John Webb and Nick Whiting, who entered her in the British Shellsport International Group 8 series in 1976, driving a Surtees TS16 Formula One car. After promising showings in this domestic series, Whiting decided to enter Galica for that year&#x27;s British Grand Prix, using their Surtees. This appearance was notable as the first time in 13 years that a car had been entered for a World Championship Grand Prix using the supposedly unlucky number 13; so it also proved for Galica, as she failed to qualify for the race. The appearance meant she also joined a select band of seven Formula One drivers who have also competed in the Olympics.

For 1977 Whiting acquired a second-hand Surtees TS19 for Galica to use in the British series. The Whiting team lacked the technical expertise required to properly set the car up for each race, and Galica was often hindered by poorly adjusted machinery. Arch rival Tony Trimmer was also equipped with a Surtees TS19, but his engineering background and well-funded team meant that he was the class of the field at most venues. Whiting managed to secure sponsorship from Olympus Cameras part way through the season, as prior to this the whole team had been run on a budget of only £10,000 for the entire season. Despite this, Galica did manage to take third place at the Brands Hatch and second place at the Donington Park rounds, but with Trimmer winning both he took the Championship title.

Hesketh Racing&#x27;s works driver Rupert Keegan had taken part in a couple of rounds of the British domestic series in 1977, and at the start of the 1978 Formula One season Hesketh offered Galica the opportunity to replace him in the team&#x27;s Hesketh 308E car. She took the Olympus sponsorship with her (replacing Hesketh&#x27;s previous Penthouse magazine sponsorship), but failed to qualify the 308E for either of the 1978 World Championship season&#x27;s first two races. Following the second failure she returned to the British Shellsport Championship, now a fully Formula One series. Reunited with her TS19, Galica took second place at the Zandvoort round. However, in her absence Trimmer had upgraded to an ex-works McLaren M23 car, and with the ageing TS19 she stood little chance of being competitive. A second entry, later in the season, in her own M23 only produced a seventh-place finish.

Aside from a limited number of outings in single-seater cars, Galica switched her attention to the Thundersports S2000 sports car class, taking a number of top ten finishes, and truck racing. She became a racing instructor with Skip Barber Racing Schools, rising to become senior vice president of Skip Barber Racing, managing both its driving school and racing series. In 2005, at the Mont-Tremblant weekend of the Skip Barber Race Series, Galica announced she was leaving Skip Barber to work for iRacing.com as a director in the company. Since 2018 (or earlier), she has been working for Bertil Roos Racing School as a driving instructor.

==Racing record==

===Complete Shellsport International Series results===
(key) (note: results shown in bold indicate pole position; results in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
===Complete British Formula One Championship results===
(key) (note: results shown in bold indicate pole position; results in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Formula One non-championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position.)
(Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap.)
==See also==
*List of female Formula One drivers

==References==
*
* (World Championship stats.)

==External links==
* Profile at A Second A Lap</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233449" start="0" end="18" title="Divina Galica" label="Divina Mary Galica"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="19" end="22" title="Order of the British Empire" label="MBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="134" end="149" title="Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9642" start="218" end="222" title="1968 Winter Olympics" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q9646" start="227" end="231" title="1972 Winter Olympics" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="262" end="272" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="289" end="300" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996" start="371" end="383" title="Bushey Heath" label="Bushey Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598" start="390" end="397" title="Watford" label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="470" end="479" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636" start="483" end="487" title="1964 Winter Olympics" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="502" end="517" title="downhill skiing" label="downhill skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117409" start="526" end="532" title="Slalom skiing" label="slalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="592" end="600" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q9642" start="604" end="608" title="1968 Winter Olympics" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="613" end="620" title="Sapporo" label="Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9646" start="624" end="628" title="1972 Winter Olympics" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q338208" start="748" end="760" title="giant slalom" label="giant slalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9660" start="1128" end="1148" title="1992 Winter Olympics" label="1992 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15037754" start="1379" end="1383" title="kart" label="kart"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="1398" end="1409" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1414" end="1425" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="1452" end="1463" title="sports car racing" label="sports cars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1598" end="1607" title="John Webb (motor racing)" label="John Webb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1612" end="1624" title="Nick Whiting" label="Nick Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978202" start="1716" end="1728" title="Surtees TS16" label="Surtees TS16"/>
<link wikidata="Q171633" start="1849" end="1867" title="1976 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368675" start="2282" end="2294" title="Surtees TS19" label="Surtees TS19"/>
<link wikidata="Q509740" start="2506" end="2518" title="Tony Trimmer" label="Tony Trimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q688619" start="2710" end="2725" title="Olympus Corporation" label="Olympus Cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q172880" start="2910" end="2922" title="Brands Hatch" label="Brands Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q173202" start="2947" end="2961" title="Donington Park" label="Donington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q171596" start="3033" end="3047" title="Hesketh Racing" label="Hesketh Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171783" start="3068" end="3081" title="Rupert Keegan" label="Rupert Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q69405" start="3183" end="3206" title="1978 Formula One season" label="1978 Formula One season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554009" start="3280" end="3292" title="Hesketh 308E" label="Hesketh 308E"/>
<link wikidata="Q108515" start="3375" end="3384" title="Penthouse (magazine)" label="Penthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172812" start="3561" end="3592" title="British Formula One Championship" label="British Shellsport Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q173083" start="3682" end="3691" title="Circuit Park Zandvoort" label="Zandvoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q172468" start="3759" end="3770" title="McLaren M23" label="McLaren M23"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125027" start="4037" end="4050" title="Thundersports" label="Thundersports"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130184" start="4166" end="4191" title="Skip Barber Racing School" label="Skip Barber Racing School"/>
<link wikidata="Q172094" start="4236" end="4254" title="Skip Barber" label="Skip Barber Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q254255" start="4436" end="4447" title="iRacing.com" label="iRacing.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q172531" start="4528" end="4539" title="Bertil Roos" label="Bertil Roos"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4655" end="4658" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4824" end="4827" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4991" end="4994" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5040" end="5043" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5196" end="5199" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298447" start="5306" end="5340" title="List of female Formula One drivers" label="List of female Formula One drivers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228306" wikidata="Q172990" url="?curid=1228306" title="Domenico Schiattarella">
<text>Domenico &quot;Mimmo&quot; Schiattarella (born 17 November 1967) is an Italian racing driver. He participated in 7 Formula One Grands Prix for Simtek, debuting on October 16, 1994, and finishing when the team folded the next year. He scored no championship points, with a best finish of 9th in the 1995 Argentine Grand Prix. He has also participated in several CART races, Le Mans Series and American Le Mans Series events.

==Motorsports career results==

===Formula One===
(key) 
===American Open Wheel===

====CART====
===Complete FIA GT Championship results===
(key) 
=== Le Mans 24 Hours results===
===Complete International Superstars Series/EuroV8 Series results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===NASCAR===
() (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. &quot;Italics&quot; – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)

====Whelen Euro Series - Elite 1====
==References==
==External links==
*Profile on F1 Rejects</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172990" start="0" end="40" title="Domenico Schiattarella" label="Domenico &amp;quot;Mimmo&amp;quot; Schiattarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="79" end="92" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="115" end="126" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172976" start="143" end="149" title="Simtek" label="Simtek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12636" start="298" end="323" title="1995 Argentine Grand Prix" label="1995 Argentine Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751410" start="361" end="365" title="Champ Car" label="CART"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376760" start="373" end="387" title="Le Mans Series" label="Le Mans Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465450" start="392" end="415" title="American Le Mans Series" label="American Le Mans Series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="476" end="479" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="566" end="569" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="674" end="677" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228307" wikidata="Q22640" url="?curid=1228307" title="Thionville">
<text>Thionville (; ; ) is a city in the northeastern French department of Moselle. The city is located on the left bank of the river Moselle, opposite its suburb Yutz.

==History==
Thionville was settled as early as the time of the Merovingians. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the region was inhabited by the Germanic Alamanni. It was known in the Latin of that era as &quot;Theudonevilla&quot; or &quot;Totonisvilla&quot;. King Pepin the Short had a royal palace constructed here.

The Synod of Thionville was held here beginning on 2 February 835. It reinstated Emperor Louis the Pious and reversed his former conviction on crimes — none of which he actually committed — and deposed the Archbishop of Rheims, Ebbo. The Synod was composed of 43 bishops. On 28 February 835, in Mainz, Ebbo admitted that Louis had not committed the crimes of which he had been indicted and for which he had been deposed as Holy Roman Emperor.

From the 10th century onward, the area was part of the Holy Roman Empire. It was in possession of the House of Luxembourg until 1462 and then, until 1477, of the Duke of Burgundy. From 1477 to 1643, it was Habsburg territory.

Eskil, Archbishop of Lund, was imprisoned at Diedenhofen (at the instigation of the Archbishop of Bremen?) upon his return from his 1153 pilgrimage to Rome.

The Siege of Thionville in June 1639 occurred as part of the Thirty Years&#x27; War. The Hôtel de Ville was completed in 1641.

In 1659 &quot;Diedenhofen&quot; was annexed by France. Fortifications were constructed under the direction of Sébastien de Vauban.


In 1792, Thionville was besieged by the Duke of Brunswick, who unsuccessfully sought to defeat the French Revolution and restore Louis XVI to the royal throne. The writer François-René de Chateaubriand was left for dead during Condé&#x27;s military &quot;émigré&quot; expedition against Thionville in 1792.

After the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, the area of Alsace-Lorraine was annexed by the newly created German Empire in 1871 by the Treaty of Frankfurt and became a &quot;Reichsland&quot;. Thionville once again became &quot;Diedenhofen&quot; and became a prosperous city. Some large neo-Romanesque buildings typical of the German Empire were constructed in the city. The German Army decided to build a fortress line from Mülhausen to Luxembourg to protect the new &quot;Reichsland&quot;. The centerpiece of this line was the great &quot;Moselstellung&quot;, a fortress system protecting Metz and Diedenhofen.

The fortifications around Diedenhofen centred on three main forts: the Fort de Guentrange on the northwest side, Fort de Koenigsmacker to the northeast, and the Fort d&#x27;Illange to the south. Each position was surrounded by several ditches, with shelters and observation cupolas. A large barbed wire belt defended by machine guns completed the defensive system.

Following the armistice with Germany ending the First World War, the French army entered Diedenhofen in November 1918 and the city was transferred to France by the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, after it again became Thionville.

During the Second World War, Lorraine was placed under a German civilian administration and was thus once again &quot;de facto&quot; part of the German Reich (though unrecognized by the Western Allies), and the city became Diedenhofen once more. In 1944, US troops entered Diedenhofen, which has belonged to France as Thionville since then. In the winter of 1944-45, the Displaced Persons Camp No. 8 was established here. In the following years it was home to the thousands of former concentration camp prisoners and POWs.

After experiencing, along with all of France, an economic upswing during the postwar decades (&quot;trente glorieuses&quot;), the heavy industry of Thionville suffered setbacks beginning in the 1970s. The city and the entire region have faced hardships and structural unemployment since then.

Jean-Marie Demange, who had served as the town&#x27;s mayor for thirteen years, committed suicide in 2008 after killing his mistress with two gunshots in the head.

==Economy==

The area around Thionville has relied on heavy industry, most notably since the end of the 19th century, due to the presence of iron ore in the area. The first large steel mill in Thionville was opened in 1898. Since the steel crisis of the 1970s, several steel mills have been closed, and only a few have remained active. A growing number of residents of Thionville commute to nearby Luxembourg (Thionville is 15 kilometres from the border).

===Transport===

The Gare de Thionville railway station offers connections with Luxembourg, Metz, Nancy, Paris, Strasbourg, Brussels, Zürich, and several regional destinations. The A31 motorway connects Thionville with Luxembourg and Metz.

==Twin towns==
*Gao, Mali
*Varallo Pombia, Italy
*Urbana, Illinois, United States

==Administration==
Incorporations:
*Veymerange, in 1967
*Volkrange, in 1970
*Garche (exclave of the commune), Kœking and Œutrange in 1970
*Guentrange
*Elange
*Metzange
*Beuvange-sous-Saint-Michel

Since the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015, Thionville is divided over the cantons of Thionville and Yutz.

===Neighboring communes===

*Algrange
*Basse-Ham (by Garche)
*Entrange
*Escherange
*Cattenom (by Garche)
*Hayange
*Hettange-Grande
*Florange
*Illange
*Manom
*Nilvange
*Terville
*Yutz

==Demographics==
The population of Thionville increased mainly in the first half of the 20th century due to industrial development of the Upper Moselle basin. The economic slowdown and steel crisis of the 1970s affected the town and surrounding area, causing a population stagnation. The population data in the table and graph below refer to the commune of Thionville proper, in its geography at the given years. The commune of Thionville absorbed the former commune of Veymerange in 1966, Volkrange in 1969, and Garche, Kœking, and Œutrange in 1970.

==Sport==
US Thionville Lusitanos is the local football club.

== Notable people ==
* Johann von Aldringen, soldier (1588–1634)
* Joseph Bodin de Boismortier, composer (1689–1755)
* Antoine Merlin de Thionville, politician (&quot;Merlin of Thionville&quot;, 1762–1833)
* Nicolas Dahlmann, military leader (1769–1807)
* Senta Söneland, actress (1882–1934)
* Gerhard Borrmann, physicist (1908–2006)
* Ernest Bour, conductor (1913–2001)
* Henry Anglade, cyclist (born 1933)
* Rachid Arhab, journalist (born 1955)
* Thierry Queffelec, civil servant and Prefect of French Guiana (born 1962)
* Francis Renaud, actor (born 1967)
* Carole Gaessler, journalist (born 1968)
* La Grande Sophie, singer (born 1969)
* Eddy Riva, race walker (born 1973)
* Frédéric Weis, Le dunk de la mort (born 1977)
* Nasreddine Kraouche, footballer (born 1979)
* Julien Quercia, footballer (born 1986)
* Benjamin Corgnet, footballer (born 1987)

==References==
==External links==
* Thionville Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="0" end="10" title="Thionville" label="Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="55" end="65" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q12652" start="69" end="76" title="Moselle (department)" label="Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897058" start="105" end="114" title="left bank" label="left bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="128" end="135" title="Moselle (river)" label="Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21983" start="157" end="161" title="Yutz" label="Yutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="227" end="239" title="Merovingian dynasty" label="Merovingians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="263" end="283" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="326" end="334" title="Alamanni" label="Alamanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="356" end="361" title="Medieval Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81212" start="437" end="452" title="Pepin the Short" label="Pepin the Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796442" start="459" end="471" title="Kaiserpfalz" label="royal palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992029" start="495" end="514" title="Synod of Thionville" label="Synod of Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q43974" start="580" end="595" title="Louis the Pious" label="Louis the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365421" start="697" end="717" title="Archbishop of Rheims" label="Archbishop of Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q819901" start="719" end="723" title="Ebbo" label="Ebbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="786" end="791" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="914" end="932" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="990" end="1007" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q122293" start="1037" end="1056" title="House of Luxembourg" label="House of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1097" end="1113" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="1141" end="1149" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367800" start="1162" end="1167" title="Eskil of Lund" label="Eskil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836998" start="1169" end="1187" title="Archbishop of Lund" label="Archbishop of Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q487982" start="1246" end="1266" title="Archbishop of Bremen" label="Archbishop of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890172" start="1324" end="1343" title="Siege of Thionville (1639)" label="Siege of Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="1381" end="1403" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403367" start="1409" end="1423" title="Hôtel de Ville, Thionville" label="Hôtel de Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q192839" start="1558" end="1577" title="Sébastien de Vauban" label="Sébastien de Vauban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486033" start="1605" end="1613" title="Siege of Thionville (1792)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q58773" start="1621" end="1638" title="Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel" label="Duke of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1680" end="1697" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="1710" end="1719" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q49767" start="1752" end="1782" title="François-René de Chateaubriand" label="François-René de Chateaubriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q430775" start="1808" end="1813" title="Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé" label="Condé"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="1899" end="1918" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="1940" end="1955" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1989" end="2002" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q158021" start="2018" end="2037" title="Treaty of Frankfurt (1871)" label="Treaty of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q744373" start="2169" end="2183" title="neo-Romanesque" label="neo-Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="2257" end="2268" title="German Army (German Empire)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q79815" start="2307" end="2316" title="Mulhouse" label="Mülhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="2320" end="2330" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q829190" start="2417" end="2442" title="Fortifications of Metz" label="&amp;quot;Moselstellung&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="2473" end="2477" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q663708" start="2567" end="2585" title="Fort de Guentrange" label="Fort de Guentrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q823081" start="2609" end="2630" title="Fort de Koenigsmacker" label="Fort de Koenigsmacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q446575" start="2657" end="2676" title="Fort d&amp;#x27;Illange" label="Fort d&amp;#x27;Illange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253436" start="2876" end="2898" title="armistice with Germany" label="armistice with Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2910" end="2925" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="3026" end="3046" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3102" end="3118" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3148" end="3178" title="Lorraine (duchy)#Between France and Germany" label="German civilian administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3277" end="3291" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="3745" end="3759" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238438" start="3872" end="3895" title="structural unemployment" label="structural unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="4215" end="4223" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q872158" start="4308" end="4320" title="steel crisis" label="steel crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="4472" end="4482" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q84007" start="4552" end="4570" title="Gare de Thionville" label="Gare de Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q788721" start="4712" end="4715" title="A31 autoroute" label="A31"/>
<link wikidata="Q188904" start="4788" end="4791" title="Gao" label="Gao"/>
<link wikidata="Q22646" start="4799" end="4813" title="Varallo Pombia" label="Varallo Pombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q462184" start="4822" end="4838" title="Urbana, Illinois" label="Urbana, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="4891" end="4901" title="Veymerange" label="Veymerange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="4912" end="4921" title="Volkrange" label="Volkrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="4932" end="4938" title="Garche" label="Garche"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="4965" end="4971" title="Kœking" label="Kœking"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="4976" end="4984" title="Œutrange" label="Œutrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="4994" end="5004" title="Guentrange" label="Guentrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="5006" end="5012" title="Elange" label="Elange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="5014" end="5022" title="Metzange" label="Metzange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="5024" end="5050" title="Beuvange-sous-Saint-Michel" label="Beuvange-sous-Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184188" start="5069" end="5075" title="Cantons of France" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17623308" start="5171" end="5181" title="Canton of Thionville" label="Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398112" start="5186" end="5190" title="Canton of Yutz" label="Yutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22751" start="5222" end="5230" title="Algrange" label="Algrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q21678" start="5232" end="5241" title="Basse-Ham" label="Basse-Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="5246" end="5252" title="Garche" label="Garche"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007" start="5255" end="5263" title="Entrange" label="Entrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22049" start="5265" end="5275" title="Escherange" label="Escherange"/>
<link wikidata="Q21770" start="5277" end="5285" title="Cattenom" label="Cattenom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="5290" end="5296" title="Garche" label="Garche"/>
<link wikidata="Q21872" start="5299" end="5306" title="Hayange" label="Hayange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22739" start="5308" end="5323" title="Hettange-Grande" label="Hettange-Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q22540" start="5325" end="5333" title="Florange" label="Florange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22922" start="5335" end="5342" title="Illange" label="Illange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22064" start="5344" end="5349" title="Manom" label="Manom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22148" start="5351" end="5359" title="Nilvange" label="Nilvange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22166" start="5361" end="5369" title="Terville" label="Terville"/>
<link wikidata="Q21983" start="5371" end="5375" title="Yutz" label="Yutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506566" start="5515" end="5528" title="Upper Moselle" label="Upper Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q872158" start="5562" end="5574" title="steel crisis" label="steel crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322336" start="5939" end="5962" title="US Thionville Lusitanos" label="US Thionville Lusitanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="5976" end="5984" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q62332" start="6015" end="6035" title="Johann von Aldringen" label="Johann von Aldringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q512133" start="6059" end="6086" title="Joseph Bodin de Boismortier" label="Joseph Bodin de Boismortier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921926" start="6111" end="6139" title="Antoine Merlin de Thionville" label="Antoine Merlin de Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986514" start="6200" end="6216" title="Nicolas Dahlmann" label="Nicolas Dahlmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q99690" start="6248" end="6262" title="Senta Söneland" label="Senta Söneland"/>
<link wikidata="Q95315" start="6286" end="6302" title="Gerhard Borrmann" label="Gerhard Borrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q609605" start="6328" end="6339" title="Ernest Bour" label="Ernest Bour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606451" start="6365" end="6378" title="Henry Anglade" label="Henry Anglade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416142" start="6402" end="6414" title="Rachid Arhab" label="Rachid Arhab"/>
<link wikidata="Q64587283" start="6441" end="6458" title="Thierry Queffelec" label="Thierry Queffelec"/>
<link wikidata="Q939089" start="6517" end="6531" title="Francis Renaud (actor)" label="Francis Renaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377466" start="6553" end="6568" title="Carole Gaessler" label="Carole Gaessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q534940" start="6595" end="6611" title="La Grande Sophie" label="La Grande Sophie"/>
<link wikidata="Q649400" start="6634" end="6643" title="Eddy Riva" label="Eddy Riva"/>
<link wikidata="Q930587" start="6671" end="6684" title="Frédéric Weis" label="Frédéric Weis"/>
<link wikidata="Q728950" start="6719" end="6738" title="Nasreddine Kraouche" label="Nasreddine Kraouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325268" start="6765" end="6779" title="Julien Quercia" label="Julien Quercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q631392" start="6806" end="6822" title="Benjamin Corgnet" label="Benjamin Corgnet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228308" wikidata="Q172830" url="?curid=1228308" title="Don Beauman">
<text>Donald Bentley Beauman (26 July 1928 – 9 July 1955) was a British Formula One driver who took part in one World Championship Grand Prix.

Beauman was born in Farnborough, Hampshire, the only son of Brigadier Archibald Bentley Beauman. He had a career as a hotelier but began motor racing in 1950.
Beauman ran a Cooper 500 for two years in Formula Three before switching to sports car racing, and took on Formula One in 1954 with a Connaught A-Type, sponsored by wealthy privateer Sir Jeremy Boles. He finished eleventh in the British Grand Prix at Silverstone. He achieved some success in Formula Two, with several third and fourth-place finishes and a second place in the Madgwick Cup at Goodwood. In 1955, the weekend before the British Grand Prix, he was killed when he crashed his Connaught during the Leinster Trophy race in Wicklow. He had set the fastest time of 82.94 mph (133.45 km/h) on his first lap but crashed near the Beehive pub on his second and was killed instantly. Beauman&#x27;s death plus other fatal racing accidents that year brought an end to motor car racing at the Curragh.
==Complete Formula One results==
(key)
==References==
==External links==
* Profile at the 500 Owners&#x27; Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172830" start="0" end="22" title="Don Beauman" label="Donald Bentley Beauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="66" end="77" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q547071" start="158" end="180" title="Farnborough, Hampshire" label="Farnborough, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17524770" start="208" end="233" title="Archibald Bentley Beauman" label="Archibald Bentley Beauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631120" start="256" end="264" title="Hotel manager" label="hotelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="275" end="287" title="motor racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="311" end="321" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="373" end="390" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173536" start="431" end="440" title="Connaught Engineering" label="Connaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q306112" start="526" end="544" title="1954 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="548" end="559" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="589" end="600" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q953716" start="689" end="697" title="Goodwood Circuit" label="Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="940" end="943" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q116737" start="1091" end="1098" title="Curragh" label="Curragh"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1134" end="1137" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228309" wikidata="Q172185" url="?curid=1228309" title="Dorino Serafini">
<text>Teodoro &quot;Dorino&quot; Serafini (22 July 1909 – 5 July 2000) was a motorcycle road racer and racing driver from Italy.

A native of Pesaro (Marche), he started his bike racing career in 1928, on a Benelli 175cc. He won the 1939 500cc European Championship on a Gilera, with victories in the German, Swedish and Ulster Grand Prix. He switched to single seater car racing in 1947, starting in a Cisitalia D46. He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix on 3 September 1950, when he finished second and scored 3 championship points, his points being halved as he shared the drive with Alberto Ascari. Serafini remains the only Formula One driver to have scored a podium finish in every World Championship Grand Prix they entered. He also competed in several non-Championship Formula One races.

Serafini finished second in the 1950 Mille Miglia. He retired from racing full-time after sustaining serious injuries during the 1951 Mille Miglia, which required multiple operations over several years. He made a come back for the 1954 Brescia-Rome-Brescia race, finishing 7th overall and first in the GT class.
==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key) 

:&quot;* Indicates shared drive with Alberto Ascari&quot;

===Non-championship Formula One results===
(key)
== References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172185" start="0" end="35" title="Dorino Serafini" label="Teodoro &amp;quot;Dorino&amp;quot; Serafini"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="71" end="81" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404296" start="82" end="92" title="road racing" label="road racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="97" end="110" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="116" end="121" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13134" start="136" end="142" title="Pesaro" label="Pesaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="144" end="150" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q817107" start="201" end="208" title="Benelli (motorcycles)" label="Benelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029711" start="232" end="259" title="List of Grand Prix motorcycle racing European Champions" label="500cc European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q745394" start="265" end="271" title="Gilera" label="Gilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q698783" start="295" end="301" title="German motorcycle Grand Prix" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080438" start="303" end="310" title="Swedish motorcycle Grand Prix" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179427" start="315" end="321" title="Ulster Grand Prix" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093218" start="397" end="406" title="Cisitalia" label="Cisitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="435" end="446" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086" start="608" end="622" title="Alberto Ascari" label="Alberto Ascari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="855" end="867" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1204" end="1207" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086" start="1248" end="1262" title="Alberto Ascari" label="Alberto Ascari"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1314" end="1317" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228310" wikidata="Q4836472" url="?curid=1228310" title="BR Standard Class 3 2-6-2T">
<text>The BR Standard Class 3 2-6-2T was a class of steam locomotive designed by Robert Riddles for British Railways. It was essentially a hybrid design, the chassis being closely based on and sharing a number of parts with the LMS Ivatt Class 4, and having a boiler derived from a GWR No.2 boiler as fitted to the GWR Large Prairie 2-6-2T and 5600 Class 0-6-2T tank engines.

== Design details ==
The design and construction took place at the ex-GWR Swindon Works, along with the 2-6-0 tender engine version of the class.
Although the boiler shared flanged plates with the GWR No.2 boiler the barrel was shortened by  inches and a dome added.
Strangely they did not share the same design of wheels as the Doncaster-designed BR Standard Class 4 2-6-0 (76XXX), which also had driving wheels and the same piston stroke, and hence crank-pin throw.

In common with a number of the other BR Standard Classes, the chassis design used a number of LMS-designed components including Brake Hanger Brackets, Flexible Stretcher Brackets and Reversing Shaft Brackets.

The cylinder covers of engines as built were fitted with &quot;screw-in&quot; type pressure relief valves. From September 1955 revised cylinder covers were introduced for renewals incorporating &quot;bolt-on&quot; type pressure relief valves.

Although the chassis had many almost identical parts to the LMS Ivatt Class 4 the motion brackets were derived from the design of those fitted to the LMS Ivatt Class 2 2-6-0 and LMS Ivatt Class 2 2-6-2T.

Unlike a number of the larger BR Standards the exhaust steam manifold within the smokebox saddle was a steel fabrication that was part of the welded saddle. In a number of the large BR standards (BR Standard Class 6 and Class 7 engines) the exhaust steam manifold was a steel casting welded into the saddle during manufacture.

== Service ==

From new, they were based on the Western Region, Southern Region, North Eastern Region and London Midland Region. The class had a short life as most of the work that they had been built for soon disappeared with the branch lines and the introduction of DMU services on shorter routes. The shortest lived was 82043, only 8 years 8 months old at withdrawal; the longest lived was 82019, two months short of its fifteenth birthday. The class&#x27; design life, however, was 40 years. There were plans to build locomotives nos. 82045–82062, however, these were cancelled.

The last two Class 3 tanks in service were nos. 82019 and 82029 at Nine Elms but four more survived until after the end of steam. Nos. 82000, 82003, 82031 and 82034 were transferred from North Wales at the end of 1966 to Patricroft shed in Manchester for use on local suburban trains. They were not really required there however, but nevertheless they lingered there until the shed&#x27;s closure in 1968. One of these four had run very few miles since its final overhaul, and enquiries were made about saving it, but the price being asked (£1,500, roughly £27,700 today) was too high and they went for scrap at Cashmore&#x27;s in Newport, South Wales, being broken up as late as October 1968.

== Livery and numbering ==
When delivered new the class all carried BR lined Mixed Traffic black livery. From 1957 onwards, those members of the class based on the Western Region started to receive lined green livery. From the early 1960s, some Western Region class members also received unlined green livery as an economy measure. Those class members allocated to other regions retained lined black livery until withdrawal.

One curiosity was 82044 which was painted in green livery by the Western Region but then repainted in black livery after it was transferred away. During this repaint, it mistakenly received a power classification 4 numeral which it carried until withdrawal.

== Withdrawal ==
==Accidents and incidents==
*On 16 October 1961, locomotive No. 82028 was hauling a freight train which ran away whilst approaching , North Riding of Yorkshire. As another train was approaching in the opposite direction, it was diverted into a siding where it crashed through the buffers.

== New Build: 82045 ==

None of the original members of the class has survived into preservation. However, a registered charity, the 82045 Steam Locomotive Trust, is building a &quot;new&quot; class 3 tank locomotive to carry the next number in line had it been built under BR auspices.
The Trust believes that a sprightly performance will be delivered through the 17½&quot; x 26&quot; cylinders. This, coupled with the modest axle load, will make the locomotive an ideal design for today&#x27;s heritage railways.

The locomotive is under construction at the Severn Valley Railway with the frames, cab, driving wheels, smokebox and cylinders assembled. Further parts and patterns continue to be amassed. With construction work on the new engine advancing every week the Trust classifies 82045 as the 1001st steam locomotive to a BR Standard design since the commencement of its construction follows that of 72010 &quot;Hengist&quot;.

Unlike a number of other &quot;new-build&quot; projects the group building 82045 will equip the locomotive with a traditional riveted boiler complete with copper firebox.

The 16-spoke driving wheels from BR standard class 4 2-6-0 No.76080 – which was broken up at Barry scrapyard in early 1972 – which are stored at Eardington Halt, were to have been used for the new build. However, the subsequent discovery that the BR standard class 3s were fitted with 17-spoke wheels of the same diameter has led to the decision that these will not be used. The Engine House management has agreed for the wheelset from 76080 to become an external exhibit there.

The 82045 Locomotive Trust believes that significant costs will be avoided as many of the required cast parts can be made from patterns held by fellow members of the British Railways Standard Locomotive Owners Group (BRSLOG) including the pattern for the pony truck wheels.

== Models ==

Tri-ang produced an OO gauge model of the locomotive in BR Green and BR Black although this was by modern standard under-detailed being produced in the 1960s. Bachmann announced a brand new OO gauge model in February 2009.

A British N gauge version has also been released by Bachmann under their Graham Farish brand.

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
*
* The 82045 Locomotive Fund website

== External links ==

* Class BR3/2 Details at &quot;Rail UK&quot;
* Southern E-group photo gallery
* The 82045 Locomotive Trust</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4836472" start="4" end="30" title="BR Standard Class 3 2-6-2T" label="BR Standard Class 3 2-6-2T"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="46" end="62" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349285" start="75" end="89" title="Robert Riddles" label="Robert Riddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="94" end="110" title="British Railways" label="British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459108" start="222" end="239" title="LMS Ivatt Class 4" label="LMS Ivatt Class 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="276" end="279" title="Great Western Railway" label="GWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039205" start="309" end="333" title="GWR 5101 Class" label="GWR Large Prairie 2-6-2T"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514989" start="338" end="355" title="GWR 5600 Class" label="5600 Class 0-6-2T"/>
<link wikidata="Q922964" start="445" end="458" title="Swindon Works" label="Swindon Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836471" start="475" end="502" title="BR Standard Class 3 2-6-0" label="2-6-0 tender engine version"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295523" start="700" end="709" title="Doncaster Works" label="Doncaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836473" start="719" end="744" title="BR Standard Class 4 2-6-0" label="BR Standard Class 4 2-6-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q629139" start="934" end="937" title="London, Midland and Scottish Railway" label="LMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459105" start="1444" end="1467" title="LMS Ivatt Class 2 2-6-0" label="LMS Ivatt Class 2 2-6-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459106" start="1472" end="1496" title="LMS Ivatt Class 2 2-6-2T" label="LMS Ivatt Class 2 2-6-2T"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988225" start="1875" end="1889" title="Western Region of British Railways" label="Western Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570387" start="1891" end="1906" title="Southern Region of British Railways" label="Southern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055281" start="1908" end="1928" title="North Eastern Region of British Railways" label="North Eastern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670591" start="1933" end="1954" title="London Midland Region of British Railways" label="London Midland Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825800" start="3023" end="3031" title="John Cashmore Ltd" label="Cashmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q372090" start="3942" end="3967" title="North Riding of Yorkshire" label="North Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457957" start="4658" end="4679" title="Severn Valley Railway" label="Severn Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5006" end="5031" title="BR Standard Class 6#Preservation" label="72010 &amp;quot;Hengist&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836473" start="5239" end="5264" title="BR standard class 4 2-6-0" label="BR standard class 4 2-6-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325658" start="5351" end="5366" title="Eardington Halt" label="Eardington Halt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5903" end="5909" title="BRSLOG" label="BRSLOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839786" start="5975" end="5982" title="Tri-ang" label="Tri-ang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807761" start="5995" end="6003" title="OO gauge" label="OO gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838890" start="6134" end="6142" title="Bachmann Branchline" label="Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970507" start="6201" end="6216" title="British N gauge" label="British N gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592814" start="6272" end="6285" title="Graham Farish" label="Graham Farish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228312" wikidata="Q172212" url="?curid=1228312" title="Doug Serrurier">
<text>Louis Douglas Serrurier (9 December 1920 – 4 June 2006) was a racing driver and racing car constructor from South Africa. He participated in 3 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix in the 1960s, only racing in the South African Grand Prix event, debuting on 29 December 1962. He scored no championship points.

==Racing car constructor==
Serrurier built a series of racing cars under the name of LDS, after his initials. The first was based on a Cooper, and later cars were based on Brabhams. The cars were raced mainly by Serrurier himself, and Sam Tingle. From the Cobra Club South Africa:
&quot;Louis Douglas Serrurier built about 20 LDS Cobras during the course of his race car building history. They were all once offs, with different engine, chassis, suspension and brakes depending on the year they were built&quot;.

A handful of other custom built bodies found their home on LDS chassis in the 70s. Mainly laid up from fibreglass, but also aluminium Coupe and Convertibles.

==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
===Non-Championship Formula One results===
(key)
==References==

*
*

==External links==
*Profile on historicracing.com </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172212" start="0" end="23" title="Doug Serrurier" label="Louis Douglas Serrurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="62" end="75" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="108" end="120" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="143" end="154" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172638" start="401" end="404" title="LDS (automobile)" label="LDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="451" end="457" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="488" end="495" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q172493" start="551" end="561" title="Sam Tingle" label="Sam Tingle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1063" end="1066" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1112" end="1115" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228314" wikidata="Q171991" url="?curid=1228314" title="Duncan Hamilton (racing driver)">
<text>James Duncan Hamilton (30 April 1920 – 13 May 1994) was a British racing driver. He was known for his colourful and extroverted personality. After fighting in the Second World War, he took up motorsport. Although adept in single-seaters, he was more successful in sportscars, winning the 1953 24 Hours of Le Mans, two Coupe de Paris events, and the 12 heures internationals Reims race in 1956. He retired in 1958 and ran a garage in Byfleet, Surrey for many years. He died of lung cancer in 1994.

==Early years==

Born in County Cork, Hamilton was brought up in relative obscurity. During the Second World War, he flew Lysanders in the Fleet Air Arm. After the war ended, he opened a car garage. During the years between the war ending and the start of the 1950s, Hamilton started racing in local events. He began racing in such cars as the MG R-type and the Bugatti Type 35B. After racing a Maserati 6CM in 1948, Hamilton began driving a Talbot-Lago Grand Prix car.

==Formula One career==

Hamilton participated in five World Championship Grands Prix and 18 non-Championship Formula One races. His Grand Prix debut was at the 1948 Zandvoort Grand Prix, where he placed fourth with a Maserati 6CM. However, at his last race of 1948, the RAC International Grand Prix, the first official post-WW2 British Grand Prix, he retired with oil pressure problems.

Throughout the 1949 Grand Prix season, he only suffered one retirement, however he did not finish higher than ninth. He managed this feat twice, with both times being at Goodwood. The following season, he competed in fewer Grand Prix races, while he expanded his racing experience by racing sportscars. He won the Wakefield Trophy, a minor Formula Libre race, held at Curragh in the Republic of Ireland.

He finished third in the 1951 Richmond Trophy (ERA B-Type), second in the 1951 BRDC International Trophy (Talbot-Lago T26C), third in the 1952 Richmond Trophy (Talbot-Lago T26C) and fourth in the 1952 Internationales ADAC Eifelrennen (HWM-Alta).

Hamilton was known for his skilled driving in wet weather. At the BRDC International Trophy race at Silverstone in 1951, he beat world champion Juan Manuel Fangio, finishing second to Reg Parnell.

==24 Hours of Le Mans==

He took part in the 24 Hours of Le Mans endurance race nine times, most famously in partnership with Tony Rolt. The pair finished fourth at their first attempt in the 1950 race and sixth in 1951, both times in a special-bodied Nash-Healey coupe. Their Jaguar C-Type did not finish in 1952, but they returned with a C-Type to win in 1953. They were second with a Jaguar D-Type in 1954, losing to a much larger-engined V12 Ferrari. They came within two miles of victory, with Hamilton halving the lead of the Scuderia Ferrari of José Froilán González and Maurice Trintignant in the final stages of the race, as the track was awash following a cloudburst. As the track started to dry out, the Ferrari maintained the lead. He did not finish in 1955. In 1956 Hamilton partnered Alfonso de Portago in a Ferrari but again did not finish. In 1957 he reverted to a Jaguar D-Type and partnered with the American driver Masten Gregory to finish sixth. His last Le Mans appearance was in 1958, when the D-Type he shared with Ivor Bueb failed to finish.

Hamilton also won the 1956 Rheims 12-hour race for Jaguar with a D-Type co-driven by Ivor Bueb. Despite the win, the factory dropped him from their 1956 Le Mans roster for speeding up and passing team-mate Paul Frère&#x27;s car at Rheims when Lofty England had ordered the entire team to slow down, hence his switch to a Ferrari that year. In 1957 Jaguar did not enter Le Mans as cars and equipment had been destroyed by a fire at the factory. Instead, Hamilton used his privately owned D-Type.

===1953 Le Mans Victory===
Hamilton won the 1953 event in a Jaguar C-Type shared with Rolt. Initially, the pairing were disqualified for practising in a Jaguar that had the same racing number as another on the circuit at the same time, but they were reinstated. According to Hamilton&#x27;s own account, when Jaguar team manager Lofty England persuaded the organisers to let them race, both drivers were already drunk in a local bar. England said: &quot;Of course I would never have let them race under the influence. I had enough trouble when they were sober!&quot;

When the race was under way the team tried to sober Hamilton up by giving him coffee during the pit stops but he refused it, saying it made his arms twitch; instead he was given brandy. He also struck a bird face first at 130 mph and broke his nose. Despite the circumstances, the duo went on to win the race and recorded the first 100 mph average speed at Le Mans.

Both England and Rolt have denied that they were drunk.

==Lucky escapes==

On one occasion in 1947, he was transporting his MG R-type to the Brighton Speed Trials. While going down a hill near Guildford, he &quot;saw the splendid honeycomb radiator of a Bugatti in the outside rear-view mirror&quot;, so he moved over and waved it past. However, the car hung back. Further down the hill, the Bugatti drew level with Hamilton, at which point he saw there was no one in it and realised it was his own car which he had forgotten he was towing.

A week after the 1953 Le Mans win, Hamilton drove to Oporto to prepare for the Portuguese Grand Prix at the Circuito da Boavista. He was leading into the first corner of the race when he crashed his Jaguar into an electricity pylon. He was thrown out of the car and into a tree, from which he fell down on the side of the circuit and was almost run over by a Ferrari. He was taken to hospital for an emergency operation. The accident cut off the power supply to Oporto for several hours.

==Retirement==

Hamilton sustained injuries during the 1958 24 Hours of Le Mans, while contesting the lead in his Jaguar D-Type, and then he was affected by the death of his friend Mike Hawthorn in early 1959. He retired from racing in 1959, and concentrated on his garage business in Byfleet. His love and passion for classic cars had led Hamilton to establish his own company back in 1948. Since then, Duncan Hamilton &amp; Co Limited have become internationally recognised specialists in historic cars.
Hamilton co-wrote an autobiography called &quot;Touch Wood!&quot; He died in Sherborne, Dorset. His son Adrian Hamilton, a classic car dealer, ran his father&#x27;s garage in another location until his own death in 2021. Hamilton&#x27;s grandson Archie Hamilton is also a racing driver, who competed in the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 2013 and 2014.

==Racing record==

===Career highlights===

===Complete World Championship results===
(key)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete 12 Hours of Sebring results===
===Complete 12 Hours of Reims results===
===Complete 12 Hours of Pescara results===
===Complete 12 Hours of Hyères results===
==References==

==Further reading==

* Duncan Hamilton. &quot;Touch Wood - The Autobiography of the 1953 Le Man Winner&quot; John Blake Publishing. 2014 978-1782197737.
* Paul Skilleter. &quot;Jaguar Sports Cars&quot;. G T Foulis &amp; Co Ltd. 1976 .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171991" start="0" end="21" title="Duncan Hamilton (racing driver)" label="James Duncan Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="163" end="179" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="192" end="202" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399907" start="222" end="236" title="Open-wheel" label="single-seaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q216407" start="288" end="312" title="1953 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1953 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q171644" start="349" end="379" title="12 Hours of Reims" label="12 heures internationals Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015092" start="433" end="440" title="Byfleet" label="Byfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="442" end="448" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="476" end="487" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="594" end="610" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373850" start="620" end="629" title="Westland Lysander" label="Lysanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="637" end="650" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881449" start="842" end="851" title="MG R-type" label="MG R-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377378" start="860" end="876" title="Bugatti Type 35" label="Bugatti Type 35B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395618" start="893" end="905" title="Maserati 6CM" label="Maserati 6CM"/>
<link wikidata="Q787757" start="940" end="951" title="Talbot-Lago" label="Talbot-Lago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1078" end="1089" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173083" start="1134" end="1143" title="Circuit Park Zandvoort" label="Zandvoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395618" start="1186" end="1198" title="Maserati 6CM" label="Maserati 6CM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095542" start="1239" end="1267" title="1948 British Grand Prix" label="RAC International Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q953716" start="1527" end="1535" title="Goodwood Circuit" label="Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470293" start="1697" end="1710" title="Formula Libre" label="Formula Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q116737" start="1725" end="1732" title="Curragh" label="Curragh"/>
<link wikidata="Q172153" start="1809" end="1812" title="English Racing Automobiles" label="ERA"/>
<link wikidata="Q173704" start="1836" end="1866" title="BRDC International Trophy" label="1951 BRDC International Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q787757" start="1868" end="1879" title="Talbot-Lago" label="Talbot-Lago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035731" start="1997" end="2000" title="Hersham and Walton Motors" label="HWM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825008" start="2001" end="2005" title="Alta Car and Engineering Company" label="Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="2109" end="2120" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="2153" end="2171" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q172057" start="2193" end="2204" title="Reg Parnell" label="Reg Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="2252" end="2271" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q172202" start="2333" end="2342" title="Tony Rolt" label="Tony Rolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q216394" start="2399" end="2408" title="1950 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1950 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q216396" start="2422" end="2426" title="1951 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965679" start="2459" end="2470" title="Nash-Healey" label="Nash-Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484575" start="2484" end="2497" title="Jaguar C-Type" label="Jaguar C-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q216401" start="2516" end="2520" title="1952 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q216407" start="2564" end="2568" title="1953 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q773834" start="2594" end="2607" title="Jaguar D-Type" label="Jaguar D-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q216403" start="2611" end="2615" title="1954 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="2739" end="2755" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q171447" start="2759" end="2780" title="José Froilán González" label="José Froilán González"/>
<link wikidata="Q171438" start="2785" end="2804" title="Maurice Trintignant" label="Maurice Trintignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q285970" start="2972" end="2976" title="1955 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q216413" start="2981" end="2985" title="1956 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q172101" start="3005" end="3023" title="Alfonso de Portago" label="Alfonso de Portago"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="3029" end="3036" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q216414" start="3066" end="3070" title="1957 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q173421" start="3141" end="3155" title="Masten Gregory" label="Masten Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q216415" start="3208" end="3212" title="1958 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q172127" start="3245" end="3254" title="Ivor Bueb" label="Ivor Bueb"/>
<link wikidata="Q171574" start="3301" end="3307" title="Reims-Gueux" label="Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q173328" start="3480" end="3490" title="Paul Frère" label="Paul Frère"/>
<link wikidata="Q216407" start="3814" end="3824" title="1953 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1953 event"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666740" start="4099" end="4112" title="Lofty England" label="Lofty England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967723" start="4847" end="4868" title="Brighton Speed Trials" label="Brighton Speed Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="4899" end="4908" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="5301" end="5307" title="Porto" label="Oporto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9117" start="5327" end="5348" title="Portuguese Grand Prix" label="Portuguese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172874" start="5356" end="5376" title="Circuito da Boavista" label="Circuito da Boavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q914711" start="5462" end="5479" title="Transmission tower" label="electricity pylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104" start="5918" end="5931" title="Mike Hawthorn" label="Mike Hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="6320" end="6329" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353118" start="6366" end="6377" title="classic car" label="classic car"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6676" end="6679" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228315" wikidata="Q172327" url="?curid=1228315" title="Eddie Keizan">
<text>Eddie Keizan (12 September 1944 – 21 May 2016) was a South African racing driver. He raced in three World Championship Formula One Grands Prix during the 1970s, debuting on 3 March 1973. He scored no championship points.

Keizan was born in Johannesburg. After success in South Africa driving saloons and sports cars, Keizan moved into Formula 5000 where he won the national championship. He participated in the South African Formula One championships as well, including three World Championship South African Grands Prix, twice with a Tyrrell owned by Alex Blignaut – this car had been previously raced by Jackie Stewart. For the third of his three attempts, Keizan drove a Lotus 72, entered by local outfit Team Gunston.

After Formula One, Keizan raced in touring cars and also concentrated on his business interests, including a successful alloy wheels company, TSW Alloy Wheels formally known as Tiger Sports Wheels.
==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
==References==
==External links==
*Profile at grandprix.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172327" start="0" end="12" title="Eddie Keizan" label="Eddie Keizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="67" end="80" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="119" end="130" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="241" end="253" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="305" end="316" title="sports car racing" label="sports cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q767942" start="336" end="348" title="Formula 5000" label="Formula 5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q9227" start="496" end="521" title="South African Grand Prix" label="South African Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="536" end="543" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173706" start="553" end="566" title="Alex Blignaut" label="Alex Blignaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="607" end="621" title="Jackie Stewart" label="Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q172529" start="675" end="683" title="Lotus 72" label="Lotus 72"/>
<link wikidata="" start="975" end="978" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228316" wikidata="Q61286" url="?curid=1228316" title="Edgar Barth">
<text>Wilfried Edgar Barth (; 26 January 1917 – 20 May 1965) was a German racing driver who competed under the East German flag in Formula One in , and as a West German between and , taking part in five Grands Prix in all. He also competed in sports car racing, winning the 1959 Targa Florio with Wolfgang Seidel.

==Racing career==
Barth was born in Herold. He began his career as a DKW motorcycle racer and later switched to BMW sportscars. The East German factory of BMW would become the Eisenacher Motorenwerk (EMW) after the war. He drove the factory team car in the East German Formula 2 Championship, which he won in both 1952 and 1953. He was allowed to participate in three events in the West in 1953, including his first appearance in the Formula One World Championship. He finished fifth in the non-championship Eifelrennen, but retired from the Avusrennen and the German Grand Prix.

In 1957, he emigrated to the West and drove sporadically for the works Porsche team in Formula One until 1961. He drove in the F2 sections at his home race in 1956 and 1957, finishing outside the points both times. He drove a Formula 1 car in the 1960 Italian Grand Prix, finishing seventh. He was entered into his home race in 1961 but was later withdrawn and was entered as a substitute at Monza that year. His final F1 appearance came at the 1964 German Grand Prix driving a Cooper-Climax for Rob Walker Racing, failing to make the flag.

Barth participated in the 500 kilometers of the Nürburgring, in 1960 in a BMW 700, finishing fifth. Barth won the 1959, 1963 and 1964 European Mountain Championships (Hillclimb) for Porsche and also the 1959 Targa Florio. Apart from Formula 2 races with Porsche 718, he also took part in the 24 Hours of Le Mans on numerous occasions.

He began to suffer from cancer at the end of 1964, and succumbed to the disease in May 1965. His son Jürgen Barth became an engineer at Porsche and also went into motorsport, winning the Le Mans 24 Hours in 1977.
&#x27;

==Career results==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
==Notes==
==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61286" start="0" end="20" title="Edgar Barth" label="Wilfried Edgar Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="68" end="81" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761546" start="105" end="116" title="Formula One drivers from East Germany" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="125" end="136" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470318" start="151" end="162" title="Formula One drivers from Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q179371" start="197" end="208" title="Formula One Grands Prix" label="Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284152" start="268" end="285" title="1959 Targa Florio" label="1959 Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q61495" start="291" end="306" title="Wolfgang Seidel" label="Wolfgang Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57996" start="345" end="351" title="Thum" label="Herold"/>
<link wikidata="Q639268" start="378" end="381" title="DKW" label="DKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="421" end="424" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q988514" start="485" end="507" title="Eisenacher Motorenwerk" label="Eisenacher Motorenwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q240895" start="817" end="828" title="Eifelrennen" label="Eifelrennen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155810" start="851" end="861" title="AVUSrennen" label="Avusrennen"/>
<link wikidata="Q173040" start="870" end="887" title="1953 German Grand Prix" label="German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="1480" end="1491" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q796417" start="1506" end="1513" title="BMW 700" label="BMW 700"/>
<link wikidata="Q820141" start="1599" end="1608" title="Hillclimbing" label="Hillclimb"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="1640" end="1652" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="1665" end="1674" title="Formula 2" label="Formula 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542615" start="1686" end="1697" title="Porsche 718" label="Porsche 718"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="1724" end="1743" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q76251" start="1869" end="1881" title="Jürgen Barth" label="Jürgen Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="1955" end="1971" title="Le Mans 24 Hours" label="Le Mans 24 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2064" end="2067" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228318" wikidata="Q172210" url="?curid=1228318" title="Eitel Cantoni">
<text>Eitel Danilo Cantoni (listed in some sources as Heitel Cantoni, born in Montevideo, 4 October 1906 – died in Montevideo, 6 June 1997) was a racing driver from Uruguay. He participated in three World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 19 July 1952. He was the patron of the Escuderia Bandeirantes outfit, which entered Maserati A6GCM cars for Cantoni and other drivers. He scored no championship points, but also competed in four other Grands Prix during that year, his best finish being seventh at the Modena Grand Prix. Cantoni later competed in South American endurance races.

==Complete World Championship results==
(key)
===Non-championship Grand Prix results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position, races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172210" start="0" end="20" title="Eitel Cantoni" label="Eitel Danilo Cantoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q172210" start="48" end="62" title="Eitel Cantoni" label="Heitel Cantoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="72" end="82" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="159" end="166" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q258388" start="321" end="335" title="Maserati A6GCM" label="Maserati A6GCM"/>
<link wikidata="" start="624" end="627" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="672" end="675" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228319" wikidata="Q3140854" url="?curid=1228319" title="Hortense Powdermaker">
<text>Hortense Powdermaker (December 24, 1896 – June 16, 1970) was an American anthropologist best known for her ethnographic studies of African Americans in rural America and of Hollywood.

==Early life and education==
Born to a Jewish family, Powdermaker spent her childhood in Reading, Pennsylvania, and in Baltimore, Maryland. She studied history and the humanities at Goucher College, graduating in 1921. She worked as a labor organizer for the Amalgamated Clothing Workers but became dissatisfied with the prospects of the U.S. labor movement amid the repression of the Palmer Raids. She left the United States to study at the London School of Economics, where she met eminent anthropologist Bronisław Malinowski, who convinced her to embark on a course of doctoral studies. While at the LSE, Powdermaker also worked under and was influenced by other well-known anthropologists such as A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, E. E. Evans-Pritchard and Raymond Firth.

Powdermaker completed her PhD on &quot;leadership in primitive society&quot; in 1928. Like her contemporaries, Powdermaker sought to identify her anthropological work with a &quot;primitive&quot; people and conducted fieldwork among the Lesu of New Ireland in present-day Papua New Guinea (&quot;Life in Lesu: The Study of a Melanesian Society in New Ireland.&quot; Williams &amp; Norgate, London 1933).

==Academic work==
After returning to the United States, Powdermaker was given an appointment at the new Rockefeller Foundation-supported Yale Institute of Human Relations. Director Edward Sapir encouraged her to apply ethnographic field methods to the study of communities in her own society. She remained at Yale between 1930 and 1937, during which time she conducted anthropological fieldwork in an African-American community in Indianola, Mississippi, in 1932-34 (&quot;After Freedom: A Cultural Study In the Deep South&quot;, 1939).

In 1938 she began working at Queens College, where she founded the departments of Anthropology and Sociology during a career spanning three decades. Subsequent research yielded &quot;Hollywood, the Dream Factory&quot; (1950), the first and still the only substantial anthropological study of the film industry. She then worked documenting the mining industry and the consumption of American media in Northern Rhodesia (&quot;Copper Town: Changing Africa&quot;, 1962).

Her final book, the memoir &quot;Stranger and Friend: The Way of an Anthropologist&quot; (1966), was her personal account of her anthropological career, from the beginning as a labor movement leader to her last field work in an African copper mining community.

==Later life and legacy==
In 1968, Hortense Powdermaker retired from Queens College, where she had founded the department of anthropology and sociology, and moved to Berkeley, where she remained engaged in ethnographic fieldwork. She died two years later of a heart attack.

The building on the Queens College campus that houses the anthropology and sociology departments (along with other social science disciplines) is named in her memory.

==Bibliography==
Of the many books and articles Hortense Powdermaker wrote during her career, her ethnographies on Northern Rhodesians, Hollywood, and Indianola and her comparison of these and one another ethnography are still recognized today as important works.

===Deep South===
Her study of Indianola, Mississippi, published as &quot;After Freedom&quot;, was one of the first studies of modern American culture by an anthropologist, as well as one of the first academic studies of an interracial community. This study was conducted from 1932 to 1934 and is of particular importance for her having successfully completed participant observation in both white and Black populations, despite the danger involved. This study was the source of her groundbreaking theory focusing on the psychological adaptation undergone by Blacks and whites due to their interracial environment.

===Hollywood===
Most people outside of the field of anthropology know of Powdermaker from her study of Hollywood. &quot;Hollywood, the Dream Factory&quot;, published in 1950 remains the only serious anthropological study of Hollywood.

===Zambia===
In order to write &quot;Copper Town&quot;, Powdermaker had to overcome some difficulties. It has been criticized by many social anthropologists who objected to her use of psychological concepts as well as her lack of “linguistic preparation”. Nevertheless, it is an important work regarding the effects of the cinema on African culture presented in an anthropological perspective.

====&quot;Copper Town: Changing Africa&quot;====
This work was published in 1962 in the United States. This book discusses the direct implication that the cinema, or the “bioscope” as it was called by Northern Rhodesians, had on the people who went to it.

The cinema was introduced to Africa by colonial governments in the mid-twentieth century and was perceived to have different influences on the African population depending on the group writing about it. There were numerous studies on the effects of the cinema on African people, Powdermaker&#x27;s among them. &quot;Copper Town: Changing Africa&quot; was an ethnographic study of the effects on Northern Rhodesia specifically.

One of the main points of her work was to explain the confusion many Africans experienced when viewing Western films. One was their understanding the concept of acting. Some who attended were confused by the concept of a film being fictional. Powdermaker describes that the concept of acting was not understood for the most part, and as a result whenever an actor “died” in one film and reappeared in another, the lack of continuity was disconcerting.

This was part of a broader issue of censorship of films in Africa. Colonial governments at the time were beginning to censor the films intended for African audiences out of fear that certain content might inspire Africans to challenge the colonial governments. Powdermaker examines the films&#x27;s content and explains how some of the content was often critiqued by Africans due to cultural differences such as kissing and the use of guns, the misunderstandings of which led to a lack of respect for European officials. This cultural values conflict, in turn, threatened the colonial order who used film censorship as a means of keeping Africans from rising against them.

One of the main conclusions that Powdermaker draws from this conflict of culture between colonial governments and African people is that as long as the European and African relationship was nonexistent, “the resulting ignorance [was] bound to distort communication from movies” 

===Comparisons===
&quot;Stranger and Friend&quot;, published in 1966, is a comparison of her four ethnographic studies, providing an insight into her own understanding of her works. This book is held in high regard in the anthropological community for its “insight into the anthropological enterprise”.

==References==
Pennsylvania Births and Christenings

==External links==
* Hortense Powdermaker, a detailed biography at the Jewish Women&#x27;s Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3140854" start="0" end="20" title="Hortense Powdermaker" label="Hortense Powdermaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="73" end="87" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="107" end="119" title="ethnography" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="131" end="147" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="173" end="182" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="224" end="237" title="Judaism in the United States" label="Jewish family"/>
<link wikidata="Q237896" start="274" end="281" title="Reading, Pennsylvania" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="304" end="313" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="315" end="323" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134258" start="367" end="382" title="Goucher College" label="Goucher College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886765" start="420" end="435" title="union organizer" label="labor organizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739345" start="444" end="472" title="Amalgamated Clothing Workers" label="Amalgamated Clothing Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="528" end="542" title="labor movement" label="labor movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759544" start="570" end="582" title="Palmer Raids" label="Palmer Raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="627" end="653" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184992" start="692" end="712" title="Bronisław Malinowski" label="Bronisław Malinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q135576" start="886" end="907" title="Alfred Radcliffe-Brown" label="A. R. Radcliffe-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q150379" start="909" end="930" title="E. E. Evans-Pritchard" label="E. E. Evans-Pritchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746323" start="935" end="948" title="Raymond Firth" label="Raymond Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409498" start="1004" end="1021" title="Urgesellschaft" label="primitive society"/>
<link wikidata="Q848365" start="1125" end="1153" title="primitivism" label="&amp;quot;primitive&amp;quot; people"/>
<link wikidata="Q215089" start="1196" end="1207" title="New Ireland (island)" label="New Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="1223" end="1239" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="1460" end="1482" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="1537" end="1549" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q867711" start="1787" end="1796" title="Indianola, Mississippi" label="Indianola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760438" start="1923" end="1937" title="Queens College, City University of New York" label="Queens College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760438" start="2694" end="2708" title="Queens College, New York" label="Queens College"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="2750" end="2762" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2767" end="2776" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="2791" end="2799" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q867711" start="3363" end="3372" title="Indianola, Mississippi" label="Indianola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189988" start="7099" end="7126" title="Jewish Women&amp;#x27;s Archive" label="Jewish Women&amp;#x27;s Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228320" wikidata="Q1361106" url="?curid=1228320" title="Energy return on investment">
<text>In energy economics and ecological energetics, energy return on investment (EROI), also sometimes called energy returned on energy invested (ERoEI), is the ratio of the amount of usable energy (the &quot;exergy&quot;) delivered from a particular energy resource to the amount of exergy used to obtain that energy resource.

Arithmetically the EROI can be defined as:
: formula_1.

When the EROI of a source of energy is less than or equal to one, that energy source becomes a net &quot;energy sink&quot;, and can no longer be used as a source of energy. A related measure, called energy stored on energy invested (ESOEI), is used to analyse storage systems.

To be considered viable as a prominent fuel or energy source a fuel or energy must have an EROI ratio of at least 3:1.

== History ==

The energy analysis field of study is credited with being popularized by Charles A. S. Hall, a Systems ecology and biophysical economics professor at the State University of New York. Hall applied the biological methodology, developed at an Ecosystems Marine Biological Laboratory, and then adapted that method to research human industrial civilization. The concept would have its greatest exposure in 1984, with a paper by Hall that appeared on the cover of the journal &quot;Science&quot;.

== Application to various technologies ==
===Photovoltaic===

The issue is still subject of numerous studies, and prompting academic argument. That&#x27;s mainly because the &quot;energy invested&quot; critically depends on technology, methodology, and system boundary assumptions, resulting in a range from a maximum of 2000 kWh/m2 of module area down to a minimum of 300 kWh/m2 with a median value of 585 kWh/m2 according to a meta-study from 2013.

Regarding output, it obviously depends on the local insolation, not just the system itself, so assumptions have to be made.

Some studies (see below) include in their analysis that photovoltaic produce electricity, while the invested energy may be lower grade primary energy.

A 2015 review in Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews assessed the energy payback time and EROI of a variety of PV module technologies. In this study, which uses an insolation of 1700 kWh/m2/yr and a system lifetime of 30 years, mean harmonized EROIs between 8.7 and 34.2 were found. Mean harmonized energy payback time varied from 1.0 to 4.1 years.
In 2021, the Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems calculated an energy payback time of around 1 year for European PV installations (0.9 years for Catania in Southern Italy, 1.1 years for Brussels) with wafer-based silicon PERC cells.

===Wind turbines===
In the scientific literature EROIs wind turbines is around 16 unbuffered and 4 buffered. Data collected in 2018 found that the EROI of operational wind turbines averaged 19.8 with high variability depending on wind conditions and wind turbine size.
EROIs tend to be higher for recent wind turbines compared to older technology wind turbines.
Vestas reports an EROI of 31 for its V150 model wind turbine.

===Hydropower plants===
The EROI for hydropower plants averages to about 110 when it is run for about 100 years.

=== Oil sands ===
Because much of the energy required for producing oil from oil sands (bitumen) comes from low value fractions separated out by the upgrading process, there are two ways to calculate EROI, the higher value given by considering only the external energy inputs and the lower by considering all energy inputs, including self generated. One study found that in 1970 oil sands net energy returns was about 1.0 but by 2010 had increased to about 5.23.

=== Conventional oil ===
Conventional sources of oil have a rather large variation depending on various geologic factors. The EROI for refined fuel from conventional oil sources varies from around 18 to 43.

=== Oil Shale ===
Due to the process heat input requirements for oil shale harvesting, the EROI is low. Typically natural gas is used, either directly combusted for process heat or used to power an electricity generating turbine, which then uses electrical heating elements to heat the underground layers of shale to produce oil from the kerogen. Resulting EROI is typically around 1.4-1.5. Economically, oil shale might be viable due to the effectively free natural gas on site used for heating the kerogen, but opponents have debated that the natural gas could be extracted directly and used for relatively inexpensive transportation fuel rather than heating shale for a lower EROI and higher carbon emissions.

=== Oil liquids ===
The weighted average standard EROI of all oil liquids (including coal-to-liquids, gas-to-liquids, biofuels, etc.) is expected to decrease from 44.4 in 1950 to a plateau of 6.7 in 2050.

=== Natural gas ===
The standard EROI for natural gas is estimated to decrease from 141.5 in 1950 to an apparent plateau of 16.8 in 2050.

===Nuclear plants===
The EROI for nuclear plants ranges from 20 to 81.

== Non-manmade energy inputs ==
The natural or primary energy sources are not included in the calculation of energy invested, only the human-applied sources.
For example, in the case of biofuels the solar insolation driving photosynthesis is not included, and the energy used in the stellar synthesis of fissile elements is not included for nuclear fission. The energy returned includes only human usable energy and not wastes such as waste heat.

Nevertheless, heat of any form can be counted where it is actually used for heating. However the use of waste heat in district heating and water desalination in cogeneration plants is rare, and in practice it is often excluded in EROI analysis of energy sources.

==Competing methodology==
In a 2010 paper by Murphy and Hall, the advised extended [&quot;Ext&quot;] boundary protocol, for all future research on EROI, was detailed. In order to produce, what they consider, a more realistic assessment and generate greater consistency in comparisons, than what Hall and others view as the &quot;weak points&quot; in a competing methodology. In more recent years, however, a source of continued controversy is the creation of a different methodology endorsed by certain members of the IEA which for example most notably in the case of photovoltaic solar panels, controversially generates more favorable values.

In the case of photovoltaic solar panels, the IEA method tends to focus on the energy used in the factory process alone. In 2016, Hall observed that much of the published work in this field is produced by advocates or persons with a connection to business interests among the competing technologies, and that government agencies had not yet provided adequate funding for rigorous analysis by more neutral observers.

== Relationship to net energy gain ==
EROI and &quot;Net energy (gain)&quot; measure the same quality of an energy source or sink in numerically different ways. Net energy describes the amounts, while EROI measures the ratio or efficiency of the process. They are related simply by

: formula_2

or

: formula_3

For example, given a process with an EROI of 5, expending 1 unit of energy yields a net energy gain of 4 units. The break-even point happens with an EROI of 1 or a net energy gain of 0. The time to reach this break-even point is called energy payback period (EPP) or energy payback time (EPBT).

== Economic influence ==
Although many qualities of an energy source matter (for example oil is energy-dense and transportable, while wind is variable), when the EROI of the main sources of energy for an economy fall that energy becomes more difficult to obtain and its relative price may increase.

In regard to fossil fuels, when oil was originally discovered, it took on average one barrel of oil to find, extract, and process about 100 barrels of oil. The ratio, for discovery of fossil fuels in the United States, has declined steadily over the last century from about 1000:1 in 1919 to only 5:1 in the 2010s.

Since the invention of agriculture, humans have increasingly used exogenous sources of energy to multiply human muscle-power.
Some historians have attributed this largely to more easily exploited (i.e. higher EROI) energy sources, which is related to the concept of energy slaves. Thomas Homer-Dixon argues that a falling EROI in the Later Roman Empire was one of the reasons for the collapse of the Western Empire in the fifth century CE. In &quot;The Upside of Down&quot; he suggests that EROI analysis provides a basis for the analysis of the rise and fall of civilisations. Looking at the maximum extent of the Roman Empire, (60 million) and its technological base the agrarian base of Rome was about 1:12 per hectare for wheat and 1:27 for alfalfa (giving a 1:2.7 production for oxen). One can then use this to calculate the population of the Roman Empire required at its height, on the basis of about 2,500–3,000 calories per day per person. It comes out roughly equal to the area of food production at its height. But ecological damage (deforestation, soil fertility loss particularly in southern Spain, southern Italy, Sicily and especially north Africa) saw a collapse in the system beginning in the 2nd century, as EROI began to fall. It bottomed in 1084 when Rome&#x27;s population, which had peaked under Trajan at 1.5 million, was only 15,000.

Evidence also fits the cycle of Mayan and Cambodian collapse too. Joseph Tainter suggests that diminishing returns of the EROI is a chief cause of the collapse of complex societies, which has been suggested as caused by peak wood in early societies. Falling EROI due to depletion of high quality fossil fuel resources also poses a difficult challenge for industrial economies, and could potentially lead to declining economic output and challenge the concept (which is very recent when considered from a historical perspective) of perpetual economic growth.

==Criticism of EROI==

EROI is calculated by dividing the energy output by the energy input. Measuring total energy output is often easy, especially in the case for an electrical output where some appropriate electricity meter can be used. However, researchers disagree on how to determine energy input accurately and therefore arrive at different numbers for the same source of energy.

How deep should the probing in the supply chain of the tools being used to generate energy go? For example, if steel is being used to drill for oil or construct a nuclear power plant, should the energy input of the steel be taken into account? Should the energy input into building the factory being used to construct the steel be taken into account and amortized? Should the energy input of the roads which are used to ferry the goods be taken into account? What about the energy used to cook the steelworkers&#x27; breakfasts? These are complex questions evading simple answers. A full accounting would require considerations of opportunity costs and comparing total energy expenditures in the presence and absence of this economic activity.

However, when comparing two energy sources a standard practice for the supply chain energy input can be adopted. For example, consider the steel, but don&#x27;t consider the energy invested in factories deeper than the first level in the supply chain. It is in part for these fully encompassed systems reasons, that in the conclusions of Murphy and Hall&#x27;s paper in 2010, an EROI of 5 by their extended methodology is considered necessary to reach the minimum threshold of sustainability, while a value of 12–13 by Hall&#x27;s methodology is considered the minimum value necessary for technological progress and a society supporting high art.

Richards and Watt propose an &quot;Energy Yield Ratio&quot; for photovoltaic systems as an alternative to EROI (which they refer to as &quot;Energy Return Factor&quot;). The difference is that it uses the design lifetime of the system, which is known in advance, rather than the actual lifetime. This also means that it can be adapted to multi-component systems where the components have different lifetimes.

Another issue with EROI that many studies attempt to tackle is that the energy returned can be in different forms, and these forms can have different utility. For example, electricity can be converted more efficiently than thermal energy into motion, due to electricity&#x27;s lower entropy. In addition, the form of energy of the input can be completely different from the output. For example, energy in the form of coal could be used in the production of ethanol. This might have an EROI of less than one, but could still be desirable due to the benefits of liquid fuels (assuming the latters are not used in the processes of extraction and transformation).

==Additional EROI calculations==
There are three prominent expanded EROI calculations, they are point of use, extended and societal. Point of Use EROI expands the calculation to include the cost of refining and transporting the fuel during the refining process. Since this expands the bounds of the calculation to include more production process EROI will decrease. Extended EROI includes point of use expansions as well as including the cost of creating the infrastructure needed for transportation of the energy or fuel once refined. Societal EROI is a sum of all the EROIs of all the fuels used in a society or nation. A societal EROI has never been calculated and researchers believe it may currently be impossible to know all variables necessary to complete the calculation, but attempted estimates have been made for some nations. Calculations are done by summing all of the EROIs for domestically produced and imported fuels and comparing the result to the Human Development Index (HDI), a tool often used to understand well-being in a society. According to this calculation, the amount of energy a society has available to them increases the quality of life for the people living in that country, and countries with less energy available also have a harder time satisfying citizens&#x27; basic needs. This is to say that societal EROI and overall quality of life are very closely linked.

== EROI and payback periods of some types of power plants ==
The following table is a compilation of sources of energy. The minimum requirement is a breakdown of the cumulative energy expenses according to material data. Frequently in literature harvest factors are reported, for which the origin of the values is not completely transparent. These are not included in this table.

The bold numbers are those given in the respective literature source, the normal printed ones are derived (see Mathematical Description).
:(a) The cost of fuel transportation is taken into account
:(b) The values refer to the total energy output. The expense for storage power plants, seasonal reserves or conventional load balancing power plants is not taken into account.
:(c) The data for the E-82 come from the manufacturer, but are confirmed by TÜV Rheinland.

==ESOEI==
ESOEI (or ESOIe) is used when EROI is below 1. &quot;ESOIe is the ratio of electrical energy stored over the lifetime of a storage device to the amount of embodied electrical energy required to build the device.&quot;

One of the notable outcomes of the Stanford University team&#x27;s assessment on ESOI, was that if pumped storage was not available, the combination of wind energy and the commonly suggested pairing with battery technology as it presently exists, would not be sufficiently worth the investment, suggesting instead curtailment.

==EROI under rapid growth==
A related recent concern is energy cannibalism where energy technologies can have a limited growth rate if climate neutrality is demanded. Many energy technologies are capable of replacing significant volumes of fossil fuels and concomitant green house gas emissions. Unfortunately, neither the enormous scale of the current fossil fuel energy system nor the necessary growth rate of these technologies is well understood within the limits imposed by the net energy produced for a growing industry. This technical limitation is known as energy cannibalism and refers to an effect where rapid growth of an entire energy producing or energy efficiency industry creates a need for energy that uses (or cannibalizes) the energy of existing power plants or production plants.

The overcomes some of these problems. A solar breeder is a photovoltaic panel manufacturing plant which can be made energy-independent by using energy derived from its own roof using its own panels. Such a plant becomes not only energy self-sufficient but a major supplier of new energy, hence the name solar breeder. Research on the concept was conducted by Centre for Photovoltaic Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia. The reported investigation establishes certain mathematical relationships for the solar breeder which clearly indicate that a vast amount of net energy is available from such a plant for the indefinite future. The solar module processing plant at Frederick, Maryland was originally planned as such a solar breeder. In 2009 the Sahara Solar Breeder Project was proposed by the &quot;Science Council of Japan&quot; as a cooperation between Japan and Algeria with the highly ambitious goal of creating hundreds of GW of capacity within 30 years.

==See also==

* Cost of electricity by source – levelized cost of energy
* Embodied energy
* Emergy
* Energy balance
* Energy cannibalism
* Exergy – useful energy
* Jevons paradox – 1880s observation of the efficiency effect multiplier
* Khazzoom-Brookes Postulate – 1980s updating of Jevons paradox
* Net energy gain
* Social metabolism
* Thermoeconomics

==References==
==External links==
* World-Nuclear.org , World Nuclear Association study on EROI with assumptions listed.
* Web.archive.org, Wayback Archive of OilAnalytics.org, &quot;EROI as a Measure of Energy Availability&quot;
* EOearth.org, Energy return on investment (EROI)
* EOearth.org, Net energy analysis
* H2-pv.us, Essay on H2-PV Breeder Synergies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q473160" start="3" end="19" title="energy economics" label="energy economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341307" start="24" end="45" title="energy flow (ecology)" label="ecological energetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361106" start="47" end="74" title="Energy return on investment" label="energy return on investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361106" start="76" end="80" title="Energy return on investment" label="EROI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361106" start="105" end="139" title="Energy return on investment" label="energy returned on energy invested"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361106" start="141" end="146" title="Energy return on investment" label="ERoEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="156" end="161" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="186" end="192" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663290" start="204" end="210" title="exergy" label="exergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361106" start="580" end="612" title="Energy return on investment" label="energy stored on energy invested"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361106" start="614" end="619" title="Energy return on investment" label="ESOEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074934" start="867" end="885" title="Charles A. S. Hall" label="Charles A. S. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076438" start="889" end="904" title="Systems ecology" label="Systems ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197365" start="909" end="930" title="biophysical economics" label="biophysical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="948" end="976" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="1791" end="1801" title="insolation" label="insolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059714" start="1999" end="2013" title="primary energy" label="primary energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313090" start="2033" end="2073" title="Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews" label="Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q161057" start="2383" end="2393" title="Fraunhofer Society" label="Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2601" end="2605" title="Crystalline silicon#PERC solar cell" label="PERC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3191" end="3249" title="Oil sands#Energy balance" label="energy required for producing oil from oil sands (bitumen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="5155" end="5171" title="solar insolation" label="solar insolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="5180" end="5194" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="5260" end="5267" title="fissile" label="fissile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="5297" end="5312" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q288706" start="5391" end="5401" title="waste heat" label="waste heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q278784" start="5522" end="5538" title="district heating" label="district heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="5543" end="5561" title="water desalination" label="water desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="5565" end="5577" title="cogeneration" label="cogeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="6186" end="6189" title="International Energy Agency" label="IEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="6236" end="6260" title="solar photovoltaics" label="photovoltaic solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998450" start="6783" end="6800" title="Net energy gain" label="Net energy (gain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377202" start="6819" end="6851" title="Energy quality" label="same quality of an energy source"/>
<link wikidata="Q15081665" start="7233" end="7237" title="Payback period" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7310" end="7329" title="Crystalline silicon#Energy payback time" label="energy payback time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142538" start="7609" end="7623" title="relative price" label="relative price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277561" start="8221" end="8233" title="energy slave" label="energy slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106359" start="8236" end="8254" title="Thomas Homer-Dixon" label="Thomas Homer-Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8570" end="8582" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="8874" end="8882" title="calories" label="calories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="8980" end="8997" title="Environmental degradation" label="ecological damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="8999" end="9012" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="9014" end="9028" title="soil fertility" label="soil fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="9272" end="9278" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="9345" end="9349" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134839" start="9379" end="9393" title="Joseph Tainter" label="Joseph Tainter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254172" start="9533" end="9542" title="peak wood" label="peak wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q622756" start="10081" end="10098" title="electricity meter" label="electricity meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="10891" end="10908" title="opportunity costs" label="opportunity costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="13688" end="13711" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q659206" start="14952" end="14955" title="TÜV" label="TÜV"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="15232" end="15251" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377026" start="15581" end="15599" title="energy cannibalism" label="energy cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="15660" end="15678" title="climate neutrality" label="climate neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="15765" end="15777" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15794" end="15819" title="Green house gases#Anthropogenic greenhouse gases" label="green house gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998450" start="16008" end="16018" title="net energy" label="net energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="16185" end="16202" title="Efficient energy use" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q472675" start="17010" end="17029" title="Frederick, Maryland" label="Frederick, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399508" start="17090" end="17118" title="Sahara Solar Breeder Project" label="Sahara Solar Breeder Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="17201" end="17206" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="17211" end="17218" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q126932" start="17323" end="17352" title="Cost of electricity by source" label="Cost of electricity by source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153531" start="17382" end="17397" title="Embodied energy" label="Embodied energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738603" start="17400" end="17406" title="Emergy" label="Emergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q613992" start="17409" end="17423" title="Energy balance (disambiguation)" label="Energy balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377026" start="17426" end="17444" title="Energy cannibalism" label="Energy cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q663290" start="17447" end="17453" title="Exergy" label="Exergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474401" start="17472" end="17486" title="Jevons paradox" label="Jevons paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399881" start="17545" end="17571" title="Khazzoom-Brookes Postulate" label="Khazzoom-Brookes Postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998450" start="17609" end="17624" title="Net energy gain" label="Net energy gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27095618" start="17627" end="17644" title="Social metabolism" label="Social metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197365" start="17647" end="17662" title="Thermoeconomics" label="Thermoeconomics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228323" wikidata="Q172036" url="?curid=1228323" title="Élie Bayol">
<text>Élie Marcel Bayol (28 February 1914 in Marseille – 25 May 1995 in La Ciotat) was a French racing driver who raced in Formula One for the O.S.C.A. and Gordini teams. Bayol also raced sports cars, mostly driving DB-Panhards for the Deutsch Bonnet works team including winning the 750cc class and Index of Performance at the 1954 24 Hours of Le Mans.

== Career ==

=== 1950 ===
Bayol started his career in 1950 racing 500cc DB-Panhards in races and hillclimbs around France. Having previously used Citroën engines, DB found that Panhard were more supportive of their racing endeavours. Panhard decided to take their new 611cc two-cylinder model to the 24 Hours of Le Mans. Bayol shared his car with DB co-founder René Bonnet. On Sunday morning, well in the lead in the Index of Performance category, Bayol&#x27;s engine broke a conrod. With Bonnet there to instruct him, Bayol was able to repair the engine using tools carried in the car to the extent that he was able to start it and drive with one cylinder to the pits for a full repair. While a great deal of time was lost, they were able to resume and were classified as finishers.

=== 1951 ===
For 1951 Bayol raced DB&#x27;s Formula 2 car, both he and the car making their debut at the Marseille Grand Prix finishing seventh. He drove the car throughout the year, but as it was based on DB&#x27;s 500cc car, with an engine of just 750cc, it was greatly underpowered compared with their two-litre Formula 2 opponents, but was fast on very tight and twisty circuits. He also returned to Le Mans with Bonnet, driving the new 850cc car but were outclassed by Porsche in the up to 1100cc class.

=== 1952 ===
For 1952, Bayol ran a modified OSCA MT4 in the &quot;Grands Prix de France&quot; races with little success, again due to a relatively underpowered 1.3L engine, but performing better at tighter circuits such as at Pau. He returned again to Le Mans in a DB but retired early in the race.

Bayol debuted the new OSCA 20 Formula 2 car (featuring a full-sized two-litre engine) at the Grand Prix du Comminges where he was running third or fourth when his race was ended by issues in the pits. He then went on to make his World Championship debut at the 1952 Italian Grand Prix at Monza where he qualified tenth but retired on the first lap with a gearbox failure. A week later he finished sixth in the Modena Grand Prix, best of the privateers.

=== 1953 ===
Bayol stayed with OSCA for the 1953 season, now joined by veteran Louis Chiron in a second OSCA 20. After a second place for Chiron at Syracuse (a race in which Bayol did not take part), both drivers struggled at Pau (though Bayol was classified in fourth place, a few laps down) and Bordeaux. Bayol qualified on pole at Albi and finished second in his heat, but spun in the final due to a clutch failure.

At Le Mans, Bayol departed from his usual small capacity cars driving one of four 4.5-litre Talbot-Lagos, partnered with Louis Rosier. They retired early in the race with transmission failure.

At his first World Championship race for the year, at the French Grand Prix, Bayol retired with engine trouble. He did however take OSCA&#x27;s first Formula 2 victory at the Aix-les-Bains Circuit du Lac. Both OSCAs were entered for Switzerland but did not start, and in what would turn out to be OSCA&#x27;s final World Championship race (as they would instead focus on sports car racing) at the Italian Grand Prix, Bayol retired, while Chiron finished tenth.

=== 1954 ===
With the World Championship races returning to Formula One regulations for 1954, Bayol joined the Gordini team alongside lead driver Jean Behra. Bayol scored his first and only World Championship points with a fifth place at the first race of the season, the Argentine Grand Prix. In the Buenos Aires Grand Prix Formule Libre race he crashed into the crowd on the first lap, killing a spectator and injuring a police officer. Returning to Europe, Bayol finished well at Pau as well as at Bordeaux, but in the Bordeaux race he had been instructed to give his car to Behra, an order he refused, and so he was fired by the team.

At Le Mans, Bayol returned to the DB team, again sharing with Bonnet. In a near perfect race they won the Index of Performance as well as the 750cc class and Biennial Cup, finishing tenth overall. Bayol also drove with Bonnet at the Tourist Trophy in Ulster run under handicap conditions. They were leading the race when Bonnet crashed due to a brake failure, with team-mates Paul Armagnac and Gérard Laureau going on to win in the second DB-Panhard.

=== 1955 ===
As Behra left the Gordini team to drive for Maserati, Bayol was brought back as lead driver for 1955. He drove the aging Gordini 16s in five Formula One races in 1955, including the first two World Championship rounds in Argentina and Monaco, but would retire in all of them. At Le Mans, he was to drive one of the new Gordini T24Ss partnered with Behra. The cars were late to arrive, and in Friday practice as Bayol was pulling into the pits he was clipped by the Mercedes of Stirling Moss, causing him to collide with two journalists and Behra who were standing at the pit counter. Robert Manzon was brought in to replace the injured Behra, Manzon driving a few laps to become familiar with the car. Bayol then went out again and on his second flying lap encountered two spectators crossing the road and swerved to avoid them. This caused him to have a severe crash, destroying the car and leaving him in hospital with a fractured skull and broken vertebrae, ending his season.

=== Later career ===
Bayol stayed with the struggling Gordini team for 1956, without much success, finishing eighth and last in the Glover Trophy at Goodwood and making his only World Championship appearance at Monaco, handing his car over during the race to André Pilette who finished sixth.

== Complete Formula One results ==
(key)

:&quot;* Indicates shared drive with André Pilette

==References==
== External links==
*Élie Bayol profile at The 500 Owners Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172036" start="0" end="17" title="Élie Bayol" label="Élie Marcel Bayol"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="39" end="48" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q231554" start="66" end="75" title="La Ciotat" label="La Ciotat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="90" end="103" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="117" end="128" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q936574" start="137" end="145" title="O.S.C.A." label="O.S.C.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q173222" start="150" end="157" title="Gordini" label="Gordini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201942" start="230" end="244" title="Deutsch Bonnet" label="Deutsch Bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216403" start="322" end="346" title="1954 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1954 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201942" start="422" end="424" title="DB (car)" label="DB"/>
<link wikidata="Q731471" start="425" end="432" title="Panhard" label="Panhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746" start="496" end="503" title="Citroën" label="Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q216394" start="650" end="669" title="1950 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q323599" start="711" end="722" title="René Bonnet" label="René Bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1240" end="1260" title="Marseille Grand Prix" label="Marseille Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q216396" start="1539" end="1546" title="1951 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q63929540" start="1609" end="1616" title="Porsche in motorsport" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q17778460" start="1689" end="1697" title="OSCA MT4" label="OSCA MT4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092864" start="1871" end="1874" title="Pau Grand Prix" label="Pau"/>
<link wikidata="Q216401" start="1897" end="1904" title="1952 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1967" end="1974" title="OSCA 20" label="OSCA 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092875" start="2038" end="2061" title="Grand Prix du Comminges" label="Grand Prix du Comminges"/>
<link wikidata="Q173023" start="2206" end="2229" title="1952 Italian Grand Prix" label="1952 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171417" start="2233" end="2238" title="Monza Circuit" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q739305" start="2355" end="2372" title="Modena Grand Prix" label="Modena Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q68980" start="2443" end="2454" title="1953 Formula One season" label="1953 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q173226" start="2478" end="2490" title="Louis Chiron" label="Louis Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q173739" start="2547" end="2555" title="Syracuse Grand Prix" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591907" start="2625" end="2628" title="1953 Pau Grand Prix" label="Pau"/>
<link wikidata="Q216407" start="2822" end="2829" title="1953 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q787757" start="2911" end="2922" title="Talbot-Lago" label="Talbot-Lago"/>
<link wikidata="Q173078" start="2940" end="2952" title="Louis Rosier" label="Louis Rosier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173059" start="3071" end="3088" title="1953 French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q653214" start="3188" end="3216" title="Aix-les-Bains Circuit du Lac" label="Aix-les-Bains Circuit du Lac"/>
<link wikidata="Q173048" start="3246" end="3257" title="1953 Swiss Grand Prix" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q173036" start="3410" end="3428" title="1953 Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q69001" start="3563" end="3567" title="1954 Formula One season" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q172250" start="3621" end="3631" title="Jean Behra" label="Jean Behra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12448" start="3747" end="3767" title="1954 Argentine Grand Prix" label="Argentine Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q113576175" start="3776" end="3799" title="1954 Buenos Aires Grand Prix" label="Buenos Aires Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591799" start="3958" end="3961" title="1954 Pau Grand Prix" label="Pau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304194" start="4348" end="4362" title="1954 RAC Tourist Trophy" label="Tourist Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4491" end="4504" title="Paul Armagnac" label="Paul Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4509" end="4523" title="Gérard Laureau" label="Gérard Laureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="4624" end="4632" title="Maserati in motorsport" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q69015" start="4676" end="4680" title="1955 Formula One season" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q12450" start="4801" end="4810" title="1955 Argentine Grand Prix" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q417694" start="4815" end="4821" title="1955 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q17618918" start="4899" end="4911" title="Gordini T24S" label="Gordini T24S"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="5057" end="5070" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q171512" start="5164" end="5177" title="Robert Manzon" label="Robert Manzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349236" start="5693" end="5706" title="1956 Glover Trophy" label="Glover Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q953716" start="5710" end="5718" title="Goodwood Circuit" label="Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q417729" start="5772" end="5778" title="1956 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172119" start="5820" end="5833" title="André Pilette" label="André Pilette"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5891" end="5894" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q172119" start="5934" end="5947" title="André Pilette" label="André Pilette"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228324" wikidata="Q171508" url="?curid=1228324" title="Emanuele Naspetti">
<text>Emanuele Naspetti (born 24 February 1968) is a racing driver and entrepreneur from Italy.

== Career ==

=== Karting ===
He made his racing debut at the age of 12 and spent seven years in karting (1980–1986), participating in more than 200 races and achieving success in Italian and international events.

=== Formula 3 ===
In 1987 he joined the Forti Corse Team to compete in the Italian Formula 3 Championship. In 1988, again with the Dallara-Alfa Romeo of Forti Corse, he was crowned Italian Formula 3 Champion.

=== Formula 3000 ===
In 1989 he competed in the FIA International Formula 3000 Championship with the Roni Motorsport Team. He enjoyed an extremely good debut season, resulting in him joining the Eddie Jordan Racing team for the following year to replace the reigning champion Jean Alesi, who had moved to Formula 1.
In 1991 he rejoined Forti Corse and came very close to winning the title, taking four race wins. In the meantime he won his debut race (Varano, Class S2) in the Italian Superturismo Championship with the official Peugeot 405 racer.

=== Formula 1 ===
In 1992 he made his debut in Formula One at the wheel of a March-Ilmor, an important decision that forced him to abandon the FIA International Formula 3000 Championship while leading it a few races before the end.
His Formula 1 career continued in 1993 with Jordan Grand Prix, as the team&#x27;s official test driver. In the same year he took part in some races of the Japanese Formula 3000 Championship.

=== Touring and GT cars ===
From 1994 Naspetti focused on racing saloon cars in Super Touring championships. With 27 wins he became the symbol of BMW&#x27;s sporting heritage and in 1997 he won the Italian Superturismo Championship. In the same year he participated in the 24 Hours of Spa, winning the diesel classification and finishing third overall.
In 2000 he participated in the 24 Hours of Le Mans driving a Lola-Judd, while his GT career began in 2001 with a Ferrari 550 Maranello run by the Rafanelli Team in the FIA GT Championship.
In 2002 and 2003 he raced in the U.S. in the American Le Mans Series driving a Ferrari 550 Maranello.
In 2004 he returned to Europe, again in the FIA GT Championship, at the wheel of a Ferrari 575 run by the GPC Team.
In 2005, a call from the legendary Don Panoz, brought him back to the American scene, driving a Panoz in the 12 Hours of Sebring.
In 2006 he was at the wheel of a BMW in the reborn Italian Superturismo Championship, taking five wins and finishing second in the overall standings, while in 2009 he took part in the Porsche Carrera Cup in Italy, winning the race in Adria.

==Racing record==

===Complete International Formula 3000 results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One results===
(key) 
===Complete Japanese Formula 3000 results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Italian Superturismo Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete European Touring Car Championship results===
===Le Mans 24 Hours results===
===Complete FIA GT Championship results===
(key) 
===Complete World Touring Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171508" start="0" end="17" title="Emanuele Naspetti" label="Emanuele Naspetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="83" end="88" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172974" start="346" end="357" title="Forti" label="Forti Corse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110061" start="381" end="398" title="Italian Formula Three Championship" label="Italian Formula 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157975" start="437" end="444" title="Dallara" label="Dallara"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="445" end="455" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q744289" start="568" end="594" title="International Formula 3000" label="International Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q56303119" start="711" end="730" title="Eddie Jordan Racing" label="Eddie Jordan Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172777" start="792" end="802" title="Jean Alesi" label="Jean Alesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257986" start="993" end="1026" title="Italian Superturismo Championship" label="Italian Superturismo Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q825781" start="1045" end="1056" title="Peugeot 405" label="Peugeot 405"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="1142" end="1147" title="March Engineering" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="Q173259" start="1148" end="1153" title="Ilmor" label="Ilmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q171367" start="1341" end="1358" title="Jordan Grand Prix" label="Jordan Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313836" start="1452" end="1473" title="Super Formula Championship" label="Japanese Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505306" start="1569" end="1582" title="Super Touring" label="Super Touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q216585" start="1762" end="1777" title="Spa 24 Hours" label="24 Hours of Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="1873" end="1892" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324461" start="1955" end="1976" title="Ferrari 550" label="Ferrari 550 Maranello"/>
<link wikidata="Q732857" start="2010" end="2029" title="FIA GT Championship" label="FIA GT Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q465450" start="2076" end="2099" title="American Le Mans Series" label="American Le Mans Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249123" start="2216" end="2227" title="Ferrari 575M Maranello" label="Ferrari 575"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035879" start="2284" end="2293" title="Don Panoz" label="Don Panoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="2358" end="2377" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2691" end="2694" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2823" end="2826" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2875" end="2878" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3028" end="3031" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3256" end="3259" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3317" end="3320" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228326" wikidata="Q173206" url="?curid=1228326" title="Emilio de Villota">
<text>Emilio de Villota Ruíz (born 26 July 1946) is a former racing driver from Spain, born in Madrid. He entered 15 Formula One World Championship Grands Prix between 1976 and 1982, qualifying twice. He entered most Spanish Grand Prix between 1976 and 1982 and became a major force in the short-lived Aurora AFX Formula One Championship for F1 cars, winning the title in 1980.

==Career==

De Villota first arrived on the international motor sport scene in 1972, when he raced a SEAT 124 SC, in the 4 Horas de Jarama, a round of the European Touring Car Championship [ETCC]. In a car entered by Scuderia Filipinetti, was co-driven by H. Hengstenberg to 15th place overall. De Villota would not return to international motor sport until 1975, when he re-visited the ETCC, this time in a Ford Capri RS 2600, this time aided by Jorge de Bagration. The pair did not finish in the Zandvoort Trophy, held at the Circuit Park Zandvoort. However, when the Spanish pairing were joined by &quot;Nicha&quot; Cabral, for their home race, the 4 Horas de Jarama, they finished second, albeit five laps adrift of the winner.

For 1976, de Villota turned his back on Touring Cars to try his luck in single-seaters, with the ultimate aim of racing in the World Championship. In order to gain experience of high-powered racing cars, he entered the Shellsport G8 International Series. This was a UK-based Formula Libre championship which ran F1, F2, F5000 and Formula Atlantic cars in the same races. Racing with the Lyncar Engineering Ltd., de Villota scored two 5th places, and finished the season 14th in the overall standings.

Using a regulation which allowed the participation of private teams or drivers who could purchase a car and race alongside the official teams, de Villota debuted in the 1976 World Championship driving a Cosworth powered Brabham BT44B, purchased in effect to participate in the Gran Premio de España. De Villota failed to qualify, and did not return until the following season.

De Villota returned to England for the start of the next season, once again racing for Lyncar which was now entered under the name of Iberia Airlines, winning for opening race of the 1977 Shellsport G8 International Series, at Mallory Park. However, after just four meetings, de Villota abandoned the series for F1.

In 1977, de Villota developed a more ambitious project that would make him one of the first Spaniards to participate in Formula 1 after drivers such as Alfonso de Portago and Alex Soler-Roig. Under the sponsorship of Iberia, de Villota led a modest outfit that raced under the name of Iberia Airlines F1 and contested seven Grands Prix of the European season. For the project Iberia acquired a McLaren M23, Ford-Cosworth DFV engines, the cars painted in the colours of the airline. De Villota would qualify for just two of these Grands Prix, the first was his home event, Gran Premio de España, where he would finish 13th, albeit 5 laps adrift of the winner. The other race he started was the Grand Prix von Österreich, where an accident on the last lap deprived him of the finish, nevertheless classified in 17th position.

Between Grands Prix, de Villota did a number of selected Shellsport G8 races in his F1 McLaren, winning twice. He followed his earlier victory at Mallory, by winning there again, then taking the chequered flag at Brands Hatch. Although his season was split in two by his Grand Prix racing, de Villota still finished 5th in the championship.

Again he attempted to privately contest the 1978 Gran Premio de España, failing again in qualifying. After this failure he turned his back on Formula One and turned his attention to the new Aurora AFX Formula One Championship. In the Aurora championship, racing was cheaper and was therefore less dependent on sponsorships, thus making it more competitive. This proved to be the case with de Villota finishing 3rd overall in 1978 and 1979, then being proclaimed champion in 1980 with a RAM Racing prepared Williams FW07. During this spell, he won nine races, including the infamous Gran Premio Lotteria di Monza.

His main focus for 1978, was the Aurora AFX F1 Championship. This series replaced the Shellsport Group 8 series. He continued to race his McLaren, now entered under the Centro Asegurador banner. The season started promising the trip to the podium in the first three races, however he was unable to keep the momentum going and failed to visit the podium again, although it was still enough to finish 3rd overall at the end of the season.

For the 1979 Aurora AFX F1 Championship, de Villota switched to Lotus-Cosworth 78, prepared and entered by Madom F1 Team. Following a series of poor results, de Villota turned his season around by finishing on the podium in six straights races, winning four of them at Thruxton, Zandvoort, Oulton Park, and Nogaro. Then his poor early season form returned with three retirements in the last five races, with only one point finish. This left him 3rd once again in the overall standings.

He again tried to qualify for the 1980 Gran Premio de España at the wheel of a RAM Racing prepared Williams-Cosworth FW07, which Banco Occidental sponsorship. Originally scheduled to be part of the Formula One World Championship, following the running of the race it was announced that World Championship points would not be awarded to the competitors, making it a non-championship race. He distinguished himself during the race by tripping up both Carlos Reutemann and Jacques Laffite in their battle for the lead.

Back in the Aurora AFX F1, de Villota was at the wheel of the same Williams FW07, as he raced in Spain. Having switched to RAM Racing for the Aurora series as well, de Villota brought the FW07 home, on the podium in nine of eleven races he entered, winning five of them. Twice at Mallory Park, Brands Hatch, Silvestone and the big money event in Italy, the Gran Premio Lotteria di Monza. For one race, RAM switched de Villota to their Fittipaldi F5A, in which he still finished in 5th position. Adding this to the other trips to the podium, de Villota was crowned champion.

For 1981, de Villota made the switch to the World Endurance Championship of Drivers. Having signed for Team Lola, to race their Group 6 Cosworth DFV powered Lola T600, alongside Guy Edwards, they made a poor start to the season, failing to finish their first two races. After an 8th place in the ADAC 1000 km Rennen Nürburgring, the pair are joined by Juan Fernández, for what would be de Villota&#x27;s first race at the Circuit de la Sarthe. The trio finish 15th overall, and 3rd in class. The strong result from Le Mans inspired de Villota and Edwards who would win their next race, the Coppa Florio, 6 ore Enna-Pergusa by two laps, albeit from a field made up by entrants from the Italian Group 6 Championship. The pair would win once more in 1981, this time for season finale, Flying Tiger 1000. In the intermittent rain at Brands Hatch, they would win by a margin of eight laps.

In 1982 made his final attempt to qualify for another Formula 1 race. As a privateer again (with LBT Team March) and this time in a March 821, powered by Ford Cosworth, sought qualification, unsuccessfully for five Grands Prix, It was to be the first time in his career as a racing driver, he would crossed the Atlantic to compete outside Europe.

Away from F1, de Villota continued to race sportscar, in the new Group C category with the Grid Plaza Racing team. The team was under-financed, and undertook a limited World Endurance Championship for Drivers and Manufacturers and Camel GT Championship programme in 1982, and only once finished in the points, claiming 10th in the Shell Oils 1000 Kilometres, at Brands Hatch, when de Villota was joined by Derek Daly and Fred Stiff.

De Villota continued with Grid Racing into 1983. However, their Cosworth-powered Grid S1 remained unreliable, with de Villota only finishing once in the points. Like 1982, this was at Brands Hatch, in the European Endurance Championship race. For the Grand Prix International 1000km, he was joined by Skeeter McKitterick and Dudley Wood, as they bring the Grid home in 8th place. Away from sportscars, de Villota tried his hand in two other categories with very mixed success. He had two drives in Formula Two; a 9th place at Silverstone with James Gresham Racing, in their March-BMW 832 and 13th at Jarama, for Minardi Team Srl aboard their Minardi-BMW M283. The other category was away from the international scene. Driving a Ford Capri RS3000, de Villota won the Spanish Touring Car Championship.

For 1984, Grid Racing had produced a new car, the Grid-Porsche S2. De Villota raced the car in the Budweiser Grand Prix of Miami, but did not complete a lap. He did not race again that season. He did return to the ETCC in 1985 with Escuderia Mezquita, taking in two races. He co-drove with Francisco Romero, finishing both races; 18th in the Vallelunga 500 km and 17th in the Donington 500, in their VW Golf GTi.

Having obtained Spanish backing from Danone for 1986, John Fitzpatrick Racing needed two Spanish drivers. De Villota was one, and he was joined at the team by Fermín Velez. Although the pair only racing seven times, they scored five top ten finished in the Porsche 956. This included a 3rd in the ADAC Kouros 1000 km Nürburgring, and a 4th in the 24 Hour of Le Mans. This would be de Villota&#x27;s last trip to Le Mans 24 hours.

The opening two races of the 1987 World Sport-Prototype Championship was held in Spain, Kremer Racing paired two local drivers for these races. Paco Romero joined de Villota in the Marlboro-sponsored Porsche 962C. The pair finished 10th at Jarama and then 8th at Jerez. De Villota stepped away from Group C racing, to race to 8th overall in the Porsche 944 Turbo Cup.

By 1988, de Villota had retired from International racing, although he still won three Spanish Porsche Carrera Cup Championships in four years (1993, 1995 and 1996) at national level. However, in 1996 he raced in Porsche 911 Bi-Turbo in the Gran Premio Repsol Resistencia Del Jarama, a round of the BRP Global GT series, alongside Pablo de Villota and Fulvio Ballabio. It would be five more years before he reappears, this time at Estoril, racing a Porsche 911 GT2, in a Spanish GT race. De Villota still races, albeit mostly in Spain.

=== After retiring ===

He currently heads the team and racing school, Emilio de Villota Motorsport. His son Emilio de Villota Jr. has raced in Formula Three and Formula 3000. His daughter María de Villota was a test driver for Marussia F1; a major crash in a test in July 2012 left her with serious injuries; she died in October 2013.

==Racing record==

===Career highlights===

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key) 

===Non-Championship Formula One results===
(key)
===Complete Shellsport International Series/British Formula One Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete World Sportscar Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete European Formula Two Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173206" start="0" end="22" title="Emilio de Villota" label="Emilio de Villota Ruíz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="55" end="68" title="Auto racing" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="74" end="79" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="89" end="95" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="111" end="122" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q9208" start="211" end="229" title="Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spanish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172812" start="296" end="331" title="British Formula One Championship" label="Aurora AFX Formula One Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="336" end="338" title="Formula One" label="F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q492037" start="474" end="485" title="SEAT 124" label="SEAT 124 SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q173769" start="590" end="610" title="Scuderia Filipinetti" label="Scuderia Filipinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140133" start="781" end="799" title="Ford Capri" label="Ford Capri RS 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q152988" start="820" end="838" title="Jorge de Bagration" label="Jorge de Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173083" start="901" end="923" title="Circuit Park Zandvoort" label="Circuit Park Zandvoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q173420" start="974" end="998" title="Mário de Araújo Cabral" label="&amp;quot;Nicha&amp;quot; Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748355" start="1325" end="1359" title="1976 Shellsport International Series" label="Shellsport G8 International Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470293" start="1381" end="1394" title="Formula Libre" label="Formula Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160036" start="1493" end="1516" title="Lyncar" label="Lyncar Engineering Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q69387" start="1777" end="1800" title="1976 Formula One season" label="1976 World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="1811" end="1819" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575503" start="1828" end="1840" title="Brabham BT44" label="Brabham BT44"/>
<link wikidata="Q171796" start="1885" end="1906" title="1976 Spanish Grand Prix" label="Gran Premio de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748354" start="2169" end="2208" title="1977 Shellsport International Series" label="1977 Shellsport G8 International Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583363" start="2213" end="2225" title="Mallory Park" label="Mallory Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q69396" start="2306" end="2310" title="1977 Formula One season" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q172101" start="2455" end="2473" title="Alfonso de Portago" label="Alfonso de Portago"/>
<link wikidata="Q172246" start="2478" end="2493" title="Alex Soler-Roig" label="Alex Soler-Roig"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="2520" end="2526" title="Iberia (airline)" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172468" start="2697" end="2708" title="McLaren M23" label="McLaren M23"/>
<link wikidata="Q195996" start="2710" end="2727" title="Cosworth DFV" label="Ford-Cosworth DFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q171832" start="2875" end="2896" title="1977 Spanish Grand Prix" label="Gran Premio de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q15549" start="2996" end="3021" title="1977 Austrian Grand Prix" label="Grand Prix von Österreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q172880" start="3341" end="3353" title="Brands Hatch" label="Brands Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171801" start="3514" end="3540" title="1978 Spanish Grand Prix" label="1978 Gran Premio de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q172812" start="3660" end="3695" title="British Formula One Championship" label="Aurora AFX Formula One Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q173104" start="3956" end="3966" title="RAM Racing" label="RAM Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561144" start="3976" end="3989" title="Williams FW07" label="Williams FW07"/>
<link wikidata="Q737262" start="4117" end="4143" title="1978 British Formula One season" label="Aurora AFX F1 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q740194" start="4530" end="4561" title="1979 British Formula One season" label="1979 Aurora AFX F1 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q173269" start="4586" end="4603" title="Lotus 78" label="Lotus-Cosworth 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465788" start="4791" end="4799" title="Thruxton Circuit" label="Thruxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q997133" start="4812" end="4823" title="Oulton Park" label="Oulton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q867548" start="4829" end="4835" title="Circuit Paul Armagnac" label="Nogaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561109" start="5043" end="5069" title="1980 Spanish Grand Prix" label="1980 Gran Premio de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q69423" start="5207" end="5237" title="1980 Formula One season" label="Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q173238" start="5458" end="5474" title="Carlos Reutemann" label="Carlos Reutemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q171434" start="5479" end="5494" title="Jacques Laffite" label="Jacques Laffite"/>
<link wikidata="Q737053" start="5538" end="5551" title="1980 British Formula One season" label="Aurora AFX F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="5834" end="5844" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silvestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610647" start="5961" end="5974" title="Fittipaldi F5" label="Fittipaldi F5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804051" start="6145" end="6184" title="1981 World Sportscar Championship season" label="World Endurance Championship of Drivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172857" start="6204" end="6213" title="Lola Cars" label="Team Lola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777308" start="6229" end="6236" title="Group 6 (racing)" label="Group 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q195996" start="6237" end="6249" title="Cosworth DFV" label="Cosworth DFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693823" start="6258" end="6267" title="Lola T600" label="Lola T600"/>
<link wikidata="Q171975" start="6279" end="6290" title="Guy Edwards" label="Guy Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6397" end="6428" title="1981 1000km of Nürburgring" label="ADAC 1000 km Rennen Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q16040280" start="6453" end="6467" title="Juan Fernández (racing driver)" label="Juan Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q174090" start="6523" end="6543" title="Circuit de la Sarthe" label="Circuit de la Sarthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q216475" start="6616" end="6623" title="1981 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6691" end="6723" title="1981 6 Hours of Pergusa" label="Coppa Florio, 6 ore Enna-Pergusa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6883" end="6900" title="1981 1000km of Brands Hatch" label="Flying Tiger 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="7119" end="7128" title="March Engineering" label="March 821"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550954" start="7400" end="7407" title="Group C" label="Group C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567232" start="7503" end="7561" title="1982 World Sportscar Championship season" label="World Endurance Championship for Drivers and Manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580474" start="7566" end="7587" title="1982 IMSA GT Championship season" label="Camel GT Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7666" end="7692" title="1982 1000km of Brands Hatch" label="Shell Oils 1000 Kilometres"/>
<link wikidata="Q171635" start="7741" end="7751" title="Derek Daly" label="Derek Daly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7756" end="7766" title="Fred Stiff" label="Fred Stiff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8020" end="8051" title="1983 1000km of Brands Hatch" label="Grand Prix International 1000km"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8070" end="8089" title="Skeeter McKitterick" label="Skeeter McKitterick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312022" start="8094" end="8105" title="Dudley Wood" label="Dudley Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266460" start="8267" end="8278" title="1983 European Formula Two season" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="8343" end="8356" title="March Engineering" label="March-BMW 832"/>
<link wikidata="Q172897" start="8369" end="8375" title="Circuito Permanente Del Jarama" label="Jarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="8381" end="8397" title="Minardi" label="Minardi Team Srl"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="8411" end="8427" title="Minardi" label="Minardi-BMW M283"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8860" end="8876" title="Francisco Romero (racing driver)" label="Francisco Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q247" start="8970" end="8981" title="Volkswagen Golf" label="VW Golf GTi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954095" start="9032" end="9036" title="1986 World Sportscar Championship season" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q952723" start="9038" end="9061" title="John Fitzpatrick (racing driver)" label="John Fitzpatrick Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406451" start="9143" end="9155" title="Fermín Velez" label="Fermín Velez"/>
<link wikidata="Q666606" start="9241" end="9252" title="Porsche 956" label="Porsche 956"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582816" start="9281" end="9312" title="1986 1000 km of Nürburgring" label="ADAC Kouros 1000 km Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q216493" start="9331" end="9349" title="1986 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hour of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954094" start="9444" end="9483" title="1987 World Sportscar Championship season" label="1987 World Sport-Prototype Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q480255" start="9503" end="9516" title="Kremer Racing" label="Kremer Racing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9559" end="9570" title="Paco Romero" label="Paco Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886096" start="9615" end="9626" title="Porsche 962" label="Porsche 962"/>
<link wikidata="Q172884" start="9678" end="9683" title="Circuito de Jerez" label="Jerez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591213" start="10025" end="10066" title="1996 BPR 4 Hours of Jarama" label="Gran Premio Repsol Resistencia Del Jarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632166" start="10083" end="10103" title="1996 BPR Global GT Series season" label="BRP Global GT series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10115" end="10131" title="Pablo de Villota" label="Pablo de Villota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411607" start="10136" end="10151" title="Fulvio Ballabio" label="Fulvio Ballabio"/>
<link wikidata="Q172890" start="10215" end="10222" title="Autódromo do Estoril" label="Estoril"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371974" start="10430" end="10451" title="Emilio de Villota Jr." label="Emilio de Villota Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="10465" end="10478" title="Formula Three" label="Formula Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q362400" start="10483" end="10495" title="Formula 3000" label="Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q236914" start="10510" end="10526" title="María de Villota" label="María de Villota"/>
<link wikidata="Q173179" start="10549" end="10560" title="Marussia F1" label="Marussia F1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10757" end="10760" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10808" end="10811" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10902" end="10905" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11050" end="11053" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11246" end="11249" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228327" wikidata="Q172285" url="?curid=1228327" title="Eppie Wietzes">
<text>Egbert &quot;Eppie&quot; Wietzes (28 May 1938 – 10 June 2020) was a racing driver from Canada.

==Formula One==
Wietzes was born in Assen, Netherlands in 1938, and emigrated with his family to Canada when he was 12 years old. He participated in two Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 27 August 1967 in the inaugural Canadian Grand Prix at Mosport. He retired on lap 69 with wet electrics and was subsequently disqualified for receiving outside assistance. Wietzes also participated in the 1974 Canadian Grand Prix with a rented Brabham BT42 but again retired with a transmission problem. He scored no championship points. Wietzes later experienced success in the F5000 class and won the 1981 Trans-Am Series. In 1993, he was inducted into the Canadian Motorsport Hall of Fame.

==Safety car==
He was the driver of the first safety car in Formula One, in the 1973 Canadian Grand Prix, taking a Porsche 914 course car on to the track after a collision involving François Cevert and Jody Scheckter.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key) 
==References==
==External links==
*F1 Rejects profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172285" start="0" end="32" title="Eppie Wietzes" label="Egbert &amp;quot;Eppie&amp;quot; Wietzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="68" end="81" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="87" end="93" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q798" start="132" end="137" title="Assen" label="Assen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="139" end="150" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="249" end="260" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q171570" start="360" end="367" title="Mosport International Raceway" label="Mosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q65403" start="510" end="534" title="1974 Canadian Grand Prix" label="1974 Canadian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="549" end="556" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="557" end="561" title="Brabham BT42" label="BT42"/>
<link wikidata="Q767942" start="684" end="689" title="F5000" label="F5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580028" start="708" end="728" title="1981 Trans-Am Series" label="1981 Trans-Am Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030343" start="764" end="796" title="Canadian Motorsport Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Motorsport Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q173089" start="845" end="855" title="safety car" label="safety car"/>
<link wikidata="Q65387" start="879" end="903" title="1973 Canadian Grand Prix" label="1973 Canadian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347004" start="914" end="925" title="Porsche 914" label="Porsche 914"/>
<link wikidata="Q172773" start="981" end="996" title="François Cevert" label="François Cevert"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="1001" end="1015" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1071" end="1074" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228329" wikidata="Q172414" url="?curid=1228329" title="Eric Brandon">
<text>Eric Brandon (18 July 1920 in East Ham, Essex – 8 August 1982 in Gosport, Hampshire) was a motor racing driver and businessman. He was closely associated with the Cooper Car Company, and was instrumental in the early development of the company.

When he and his boyhood friend John Cooper were released from military service after World War II they built two cars to the new National regulations. Brandon, whose family business was electrical goods, had access to BTH magnetos for the JAP engines, which Cooper&#x27;s father Charlie then acquired. Brandon entered his Cooper in numerous hillclimbs and sprints and in 1947, at Gransden Lodge airfield, he won Britain&#x27;s first-ever 500 cc circuit race. He also won the first Formula Three title, in 1951.

Later in the 1950s Brandon entered five World Championship Grands Prix in larger, Formula Two Cooper-Bristols, but failed to score any Championship points. For much of his career Brandon raced for the Ecurie Richmond team, which he formed with Alan Brown. In 1955 he funded the construction of his own &quot;Halseylec&quot; sports car, named after his electrical supplies company. He continued to compete in cars until 1956, but had become increasingly involved in hydroplane racing and by 1957 had devoted himself entirely to this outlet for his competitive spirit.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172414" start="0" end="12" title="Eric Brandon" label="Eric Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025593" start="30" end="38" title="East Ham" label="East Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="40" end="45" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q936263" start="65" end="72" title="Gosport" label="Gosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="74" end="83" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="91" end="103" title="motor racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="163" end="181" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q173814" start="277" end="288" title="John Cooper (car maker)" label="John Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="331" end="343" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q173712" start="485" end="488" title="JA Prestwich Industries Ltd" label="JAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q820141" start="587" end="597" title="Hillclimbing" label="hillclimbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="727" end="740" title="Formula Three" label="Formula Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="840" end="851" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="852" end="858" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q27392" start="859" end="867" title="Bristol Cars" label="Bristols"/>
<link wikidata="Q172236" start="1002" end="1012" title="Alan Brown (racing driver)" label="Alan Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955339" start="1223" end="1240" title="hydroplane racing" label="hydroplane racing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1379" end="1382" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228330" wikidata="Q650043" url="?curid=1228330" title="High Heels (1991 film)">
<text>High Heels () is a 1991 melodrama film written and directed by Pedro Almodóvar and starring Victoria Abril, Marisa Paredes and Miguel Bosé. The plot follows the fractured relationship between a self-involved mother, a famous torch singer, and her grown daughter she had abandoned as a child. The daughter, who works as a television newscaster, has married her mother&#x27;s ex-lover and has befriended a female impersonator. A murder further complicates this web of relationships.

The film has the feel of other mother–daughter melodramas like &quot;Stella Dallas&quot; (1937), &quot;Mildred Pierce&quot; (1945), &quot;Imitation of Life&quot; (1959) and particularly &quot;Autumn Sonata&quot; (1978), which is quoted directly in the film.

Despite mixed reviews, the film was a commercial success. It was selected as the Spanish entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 64th Academy Awards, but was not accepted as a nominee.

==Plot==
Rebeca waits anxiously at a Madrid airport for the return of her mother, Becky del Páramo, a famous torch singer, who is returning to Spain after a fifteen-year stay in Mexico. While waiting, Rebeca recalls incidents from her early life when her mother, preoccupied with her career and romantic life, neglected and rejected her.

Rebeca is now a news broadcaster for a television station owned by her husband, Manuel. The drama of the reunion is intensified because years ago Manuel was one of Becky&#x27;s lovers. On the night of Becky’s return, Rebeca takes Becky and Manuel to see “Femme Letal” (Lethal Woman), a female impersonator who portrays Becky in his drag act. For some time, Rebeca has been coming to see Letal’s impersonation. That night, while Manuel and Becky remain in the audience, at Letal’s urging, Rebeca goes backstage to help Letal remove his costume. Seeing him naked, Rebeca is impressed by his manhood. When Rebeca admits that she and Manuel have not had sex in 5 months, Letal takes advantage by seducing her. Meanwhile, Manuel tells Becky that he wants to divorce the &quot;difficult&quot; Rebeca, and he and Becky subsequently become lovers again.

A month later, Manuel is murdered in his getaway villa. He had spent the evening first with his mistress, Isabel (Rebeca&#x27;s sign language interpreter on the news), and then with Becky, who came to break up on discovering his infidelity to &quot;her&quot;. Arriving to confront Manuel about his infidelities, Rebeca reports discovering the body. The investigating magistrate, Judge Domínguez, aware of the tangled infidelities, suspects both mother and daughter.

During the news broadcast on the day of Manuel&#x27;s funeral, Rebeca confesses to his murder live on television. She is arrested on camera. The investigating judge seems eager to prove her innocence despite the evidence. While Rebeca spends her first night in prison, Becky makes her return to the Madrid stage. In prison, Rebeca listens to the radio as her mother dedicates to Rebeca her triumphant return performance. A social worker, Paula, takes a special interest in Rebeca; like her, she is heartbroken, grieving the loss of her boyfriend, Hugo. Seeing a picture of Hugo that Paula carries with her, Rebeca thinks that Letal and Hugo are the same person.

Judge Dominguez arranges for Becky privately to see Rebeca, who now denies killing Manuel. Rebeca draws a comparison between herself and the daughter in the film &quot;Autumn Sonata,&quot; in which the mother, an outstanding pianist, asks her daughter to play the piano then humiliates her by instructing her on how to improve her performance. Rebeca, too, has always felt inferior to Becky, competing with her and &quot;winning&quot; only once by marrying Manuel. Even this “victory” ultimately was denied her when Becky took away Manuel. Rebeca confesses that fifteen years ago, as a child, to be closer to Becky, she murdered her stepfather by switching his medications. She murdered Manuel because he was usurping her mother&#x27;s affection. Becky tells Rebeca that she needs to find a more constructive way to deal with her issues with men. Rebeca&#x27;s fixation and her obsessive adoration are too much for Becky&#x27;s frail heart, whose condition worsens. 

When the prison doctor informs Rebeca that she is pregnant—which can only be with Letal&#x27;s child—the judge releases her from prison despite a lack of fresh evidence. Rebeca goes to see Letal&#x27;s advertised final drag performance. She discovers that Letal is Judge Dominguez, who posed as Letal and Hugo on different cases, adopting disguises as an investigative strategy. Knowing about her pregnancy, the judge asks Rebeca to marry him. As Rebeca struggles to take this in, they see a television broadcast reporting Becky&#x27;s sudden heart attack. 

They rush to the hospital, where Becky asks for Rebeca’s forgiveness for her selfishness and determines to take the blame for Manuel’s murder as redemption. When Becky is taken home to die, Rebeca gives her the gun, and Becky leaves her fingerprints on it, incriminating herself. Hearing the high heels of women passing in the street, Rebeca tells her mother the sound reminds her of her mother coming home when she was little. She turns around and realizes her mother has died while she was talking.

==Cast==
==Production==
&quot;High Heels&quot; was a &quot;&quot; for two essential actresses of the &quot;Almodovarian universe&quot;: Marisa Paredes and Victoria Abril. The male lead was difficult to cast. The actor had to be believable in drag and as a judge. The role eventually went to Miguel Bosé, a famous singer in Spain and Latin America. His casting was a &quot;cause célèbre&quot; of the film publicity.

===Music===
The combined effects of voice, music and lyrics is one of the most prominent features of Almodóvar as a filmmaker. He finds his most significant musical economy in the highly expressive boleros, which are at the forefront in this film. Almodóvar explained that he listened to an enormous number of songs to find those he used in the film. He finally chose &quot;Piensa en Mí&quot; and &quot;Un Año De Amor&quot;. His idea was to find songs that would correspond to a singer such as Becky del Páramo, both at the start and at the end of her career. &quot;Piensa en Mí&quot; is a very famous song in Mexico, composed by Agustín Lara and sung by Lola Beltrán. Almodóvar eventually chose a version by Chavela Vargas, sung as a lament. &quot;Un año de amor&quot;, which Letal sings in playback during his performance, is a French song by Nino Ferrer. There is a famous Italian version sung by Mina, for which Almodóvar rewrote the lyrics in Spanish.

Once the two songs were chosen, Almodóvar had to find a voice that suited Becky del Páramo. After trying several voices, he found that of Luz Casal fitted the appearance of Marisa Paredes. Casal, famous in Spain as a rock singer, accepted Almodóvar&#x27;s offer and the two songs became her most successful. &quot;Piensa en mí&quot; and &quot;Un año de amor&quot;, the songs that Casal performed for the film, were both included on her album &quot;A contraluz&quot;, released in 1991.

The film also contains an unexpected prison yard dance sequence in reference to famous musicals shot in fake prisons, such as &quot;Jailhouse Rock&quot; (1957) with Elvis Presley and John Waters&#x27; &quot;Cry-Baby&quot; (1990). The song used in &quot;High Heels&quot; is a merengue: &quot;Pecadora&quot; by Los Hermanos Rosario.

The score, which Almodóvar did not like, was composed by Ryuichi Sakamoto. For the title sequence and Rebeca&#x27;s second confession, Almodóvar used pieces composed by Miles Davis in the 1960s, which were inspired by flamenco. The first piece, heard while Rebeca is alone waiting for her mother, is called &quot;Solea&quot;, meaning &#x27;solitude&#x27; in Andalusian. After her second confession to Judge Dominguez, when Rebeca goes to the cemetery to throw a handful of earth on her husband&#x27;s coffin, we hear the second piece, &quot;Saeta&quot;, by Gil Evans, from his &quot;Sketches of Spain&quot; album.

Almodóvar also used two themes composed by George Fenton for &quot;Dangerous Liaisons&quot; (1988). They are heard when Rebeca leaves prison and goes home, and when she returns to prison in the van.

===Title===
The original title is &quot;Tacones lejanos&quot;, which can be translated as &quot;Distant Heels&quot; and refers to Rebeca&#x27;s childhood, when she was unable to sleep until her mother entered her bedroom and Rebeca managed to hear the sound of her mother&#x27;s heels as she left, walking down the hallway. The inaccuracy of the English translation of the title affected the reception of the film, as the English &quot;High Heels&quot; suggests stylish comedy, whereas the Spanish &quot;Distant Heels&quot; conveys a feeling of family melodrama. The Spanish title &quot;Distant Heels&quot; is a reference to Raoul Walsh&#x27;s film &quot;Distant Drums&quot; (1951).

==Release==
===Box-office===
&quot;High Heels&quot;, Almodóvar&#x27;s ninth film, was co-produced by El Deseo and Ciby 2000 and released in Spain on 19 October 1991. It was enormously successful in Spain. By the end of 1991, it had attracted an audience of more than 1.5 million and was the highest-grossing Spanish film of the year. It eventually came second, in terms of box-office takings, to &quot;Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown&quot; (1988) among Almodóvar&#x27;s films released up to that point, with a gross of €5.2 million. In France, it was one of the top ten highest-grossing films of the year with a gross of $8.7 million. In the United States and Canada it grossed $1.7 million.

===Critical response===
Spanish critics&#x27; reaction was hostile, on the whole. Writing in &quot;Dirigido Por&quot;, Antonio Castro felt that Almodóvar&#x27;s desire to create a more straightforward narrative had merely led to a greater loss of vigor. Angel Fernandez Santos, in &quot;El País&quot;, concluded that, in comparison with Douglas Sirk&#x27;s &quot;Imitation of Life&quot; (1959), which he regarded as an Everest, &quot;High Heels&quot; was a mere hill. In &quot;Expansión&quot;, Eduardo Torres-Dulce was firmly of the opinion that Almodóvar had had his day. David Thomson of &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; concluded that in general, &quot;High Heels&quot; did not measure up to much of Almodóvar&#x27;s earlier work. For him, the homage to the other films – including &quot;Autumn Sonata&quot; – &quot;is counter productive, for it merely suggests the inferiority of &quot;High Heels&quot;&quot;.

The film was very successful in Italy, and reviews were both heartfelt and moving. In France, the film was a huge success. It did not fare as well in other countries, such as Germany, where Almodóvar&#x27;s films have not been well understood. He commented, &quot;My films move very freely and to understand them one must simply allow one&#x27;s intuition and sensibility free rein... I&#x27;ve never been asked so many irrational questions as in Germany&quot;.

It was less successful in the United States than many others of Almodóvar&#x27;s films. As with &quot;Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!&quot; (1989), &quot;High Heels&quot; was especially attacked on moral grounds, notably by certain women&#x27;s groups. Almodóvar also complained that Miramax, the film&#x27;s distributor in the United States, did not understand the film and had no idea what to do with it.

On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 59% based on 17 reviews, with an average rating of 6/10. Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 51 out of 100, based on 12 critics, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;. 

&quot;The New York Times&quot;″ critic Janet Maslin wrote that &quot;&quot;High Heels&quot; has no real mirth and not even enough energy to keep it lively.&quot; Critic Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four, commenting that &quot;Pedro Almodóvar&#x27;s films are an acquired taste, and with &quot;High Heels&quot; I am at last beginning to acquire it&quot;.

===Accolades===
&quot;High Heels&quot; received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Foreign Language Film and Goya Award nominations for Costume Design, Editing, Make-Up and Hairstyles, Sound and Supporting Actress (Cristina Marcos). The film won:

* 1991 César Awards as Best Foreign Film
* 1992 Sant Jordi Awards for Best Spanish Actress

==Home media==
&quot;High Heels&quot; has been released on DVD in Region 2, but never issued in Region 1 (US). It received a multi-region DVD release in Mexico in November 2012.

==Analysis==
The film, which Almodóvar eventually made, was not that which he had intended after completing &quot;Law of Desire&quot; in 1986. The intended film would have been a variation on the classic play &quot;The House of Bernarda Alba&quot; by García Lorca, and would have been set in rural Spain, not in Madrid. The story would have involved a domineering mother and her two daughters, both of whom leave home in order to escape her tyranny; the mother is subsequently thought to have perished in a fire, but continues to pursue one of the girls for fifteen years. The proposed film did not come to fruition, for a variety of reasons. Almodóvar turned instead to &quot;Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown&quot; which could be conveniently shot in Madrid. When he eventually made &quot;High Heels&quot;, it was fundamentally different from his original idea. Only the title remained. The plot was developed around the idea of someone confessing a crime on a live television news bulletin.

&quot;High Heels&quot; relates to the American tradition of melodrama and the so-called &#x27;woman&#x27;s picture&#x27;. &quot;Imitation of Life&quot; (1959), directed by Douglas Sirk, was a major influence and there are some striking parallels between &quot;High Heels&quot; and Sirk&#x27;s film. In both, the mother is a performer – Becky is a singer, while the Lana Turner character in Sirk&#x27;s film is an actress – whose career takes precedence over a young daughter; mother and daughter are rivals over a man; both films begin with the child separated from her mother at a holiday resort; and at one point, Rebeca tells her mother to stop acting, a phrase borrowed from Sirk&#x27;s film. &quot;Imitation of Life&quot; was both a remake and a reinterpretation of an earlier film – the 1934 version by John M. Stahl – and so &quot;High Heels&quot; is very much Almodóvar&#x27;s own film, distinguished throughout by his particular style and concerns.

With its tense mother–daughter dynamic, it also pointedly nods to Michael Curtiz&#x27;s &quot;Mildred Pierce&quot; (1945), though in that film it is the mother, a businesswoman, who obsessively loves her daughter. In &quot;Stella Dallas&quot; (1937), directed by King Vidor, the same kind of relationship is also prominent, though here, the mother Stella is neither an artist nor a businesswoman but a lower-class woman who has social aspirations for her daughter. It alludes both to the films made by Turner and Joan Crawford and to their lives, to the relationship between Turner, whose lover was killed by her daughter, and to the tumultuous relationship between Crawford and her daughter Christina.

===Genre===
&quot;High Heels&quot; is a melodrama, though its composite narrative (the poster image of a high-heeled shoe, which is also a gun) testifies to the combination of two genres, melodrama and crime thriller. The themes are typical of melodrama: family relations dominate the story-line, as do relationships between men and women. The narrative charts the reuniting of a long-absent mother with her daughter, and their competition over men (one man in particular) and professional success. All the characters have secrets that the viewer knows. The omniscient narration, typical of melodrama, allows suspense only in terms of how other characters react to revelations the viewer anticipates. For example, Becky conceals her heart condition from her daughter, Rebeca conceals the truth about murdering her husband, and the judge conceals his triple identity as Letal, Hugo and Judge Dominguez.

Thirty-five minutes in, a murder occurs, but the plot does not turn the picture into an investigative narrative. The story follows the conflict between mother and daughter, not the crime investigator. It is clear that Letal is the judge and that Rebeca probably killed her husband. The investigative role of Judge Dominguez is further undermined by the fact that his motivation is love for the murderess Rebeca, rather than solving the crime.

==See also==
* List of submissions to the 64th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
* List of Spanish submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 


==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1919632" start="24" end="38" title="melodrama film" label="melodrama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55171" start="63" end="78" title="Pedro Almodóvar" label="Pedro Almodóvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203138" start="92" end="106" title="Victoria Abril" label="Victoria Abril"/>
<link wikidata="Q235398" start="108" end="122" title="Marisa Paredes" label="Marisa Paredes"/>
<link wikidata="Q356762" start="127" end="138" title="Miguel Bosé" label="Miguel Bosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136047" start="225" end="237" title="torch singer" label="torch singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613737" start="551" end="564" title="Stella Dallas (1937 film)" label="Stella Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q979726" start="585" end="599" title="Mildred Pierce (film)" label="Mildred Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q373774" start="620" end="637" title="Imitation of Life (1959 film)" label="Imitation of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q322572" start="674" end="687" title="Autumn Sonata" label="Autumn Sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="844" end="870" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q857047" start="878" end="897" title="64th Academy Awards" label="64th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="972" end="986" title="Adolfo Suarez Madrid-Barajas Airport" label="Madrid airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136047" start="1044" end="1056" title="torch song" label="torch singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="1543" end="1555" title="femme fatale" label="Lethal Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410369" start="1606" end="1614" title="Drag (entertainment)" label="drag act"/>
<link wikidata="Q322572" start="3419" end="3432" title="Autumn Sonata" label="Autumn Sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q235398" start="5416" end="5430" title="Marisa Paredes" label="Marisa Paredes"/>
<link wikidata="Q203138" start="5435" end="5449" title="Victoria Abril" label="Victoria Abril"/>
<link wikidata="Q356762" start="5571" end="5582" title="Miguel Bosé" label="Miguel Bosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246417" start="5652" end="5665" title="cause célèbre" label="cause célèbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q118323367" start="6099" end="6113" title="Un anno d&amp;#x27;amore" label="Un Año De Amor"/>
<link wikidata="Q399318" start="6326" end="6338" title="Agustín Lara" label="Agustín Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q297703" start="6351" end="6363" title="Lola Beltrán" label="Lola Beltrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q236024" start="6405" end="6419" title="Chavela Vargas" label="Chavela Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377646" start="6541" end="6552" title="Nino Ferrer" label="Nino Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q231156" start="6596" end="6600" title="Mina (Italian singer)" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q265053" start="6792" end="6801" title="Luz Casal" label="Luz Casal"/>
<link wikidata="Q235398" start="6827" end="6841" title="Marisa Paredes" label="Marisa Paredes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654247" start="7102" end="7113" title="A Contraluz (Luz Casal album)" label="A contraluz"/>
<link wikidata="Q536342" start="7272" end="7286" title="Jailhouse Rock (film)" label="Jailhouse Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="7305" end="7318" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q314926" start="7323" end="7334" title="John Waters" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q179746" start="7347" end="7355" title="Cry-Baby" label="Cry-Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="7415" end="7423" title="Merengue music" label="merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582170" start="7449" end="7469" title="Los Hermanos Rosario" label="Los Hermanos Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q345494" start="7529" end="7545" title="Ryuichi Sakamoto" label="Ryuichi Sakamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="7641" end="7652" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="7690" end="7698" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q348477" start="8029" end="8038" title="Gil Evans" label="Gil Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q926812" start="8055" end="8072" title="Sketches of Spain" label="Sketches of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q920167" start="8130" end="8143" title="George Fenton" label="George Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q830553" start="8154" end="8172" title="Dangerous Liaisons" label="Dangerous Liaisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q72756" start="8912" end="8923" title="Raoul Walsh" label="Raoul Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216721" start="8942" end="8955" title="Distant Drums" label="Distant Drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324070" start="9072" end="9080" title="El Deseo" label="El Deseo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036210" start="9085" end="9094" title="Ciby 2000" label="Ciby 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q124130354" start="9262" end="9291" title="List of highest-grossing films in Spain" label="highest-grossing Spanish film"/>
<link wikidata="Q643283" start="9373" end="9414" title="Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown" label="Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="9961" end="9968" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q60858" start="10011" end="10023" title="Douglas Sirk" label="Douglas Sirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q373774" start="10037" end="10054" title="Imitation of Life (1959 film)" label="Imitation of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="10093" end="10100" title="Everest" label="Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q556902" start="10151" end="10160" title="Expansión (Spanish newspaper)" label="Expansión"/>
<link wikidata="Q5819771" start="10168" end="10188" title="Eduardo Torres-Dulce" label="Eduardo Torres-Dulce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176847" start="10247" end="10260" title="David Thomson (film critic)" label="David Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="10270" end="10287" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q322572" start="10462" end="10475" title="Autumn Sonata" label="Autumn Sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q600176" start="11151" end="11174" title="Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!" label="Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="11325" end="11332" title="Miramax" label="Miramax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="11456" end="11473" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="11482" end="11497" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="11593" end="11603" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="11618" end="11634" title="weighted average" label="weighted average"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11758" end="11776" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="11791" end="11803" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="11921" end="11932" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="12173" end="12185" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212828" start="12232" end="12242" title="Goya Award" label="Goya Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q275424" start="12338" end="12353" title="Cristina Marcos" label="Cristina Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q174389" start="12378" end="12390" title="César Awards" label="César Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q900414" start="12394" end="12411" title="César Award for Best Foreign Film" label="Best Foreign Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372386" start="12419" end="12436" title="Sant Jordi Awards" label="Sant Jordi Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="12522" end="12525" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q746611" start="12529" end="12537" title="DVD region code" label="Region 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q478076" start="12756" end="12769" title="Law of Desire" label="Law of Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q822850" start="12857" end="12883" title="The House of Bernarda Alba" label="The House of Bernarda Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="12893" end="12905" title="García Lorca" label="García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q643283" start="13319" end="13360" title="Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown" label="Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q373774" start="13773" end="13790" title="Imitation of Life (1959 film)" label="Imitation of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q60858" start="13817" end="13829" title="Douglas Sirk" label="Douglas Sirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q201034" start="14010" end="14021" title="Lana Turner" label="Lana Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q391541" start="14438" end="14450" title="Imitation of Life (1934 film)" label="1934 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358863" start="14454" end="14467" title="John M. Stahl" label="John M. Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q51491" start="14670" end="14684" title="Michael Curtiz" label="Michael Curtiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q979726" start="14698" end="14712" title="Mildred Pierce (film)" label="Mildred Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613737" start="14827" end="14840" title="Stella Dallas (1937 film)" label="Stella Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51133" start="14867" end="14877" title="King Vidor" label="King Vidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40475" start="15117" end="15130" title="Joan Crawford" label="Joan Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q523816" start="15296" end="15305" title="Christina Crawford" label="Christina"/>
<link wikidata="Q191489" start="15348" end="15357" title="melodrama" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="15510" end="15524" title="crime thriller" label="crime thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641698" start="16670" end="16747" title="List of submissions to the 64th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film" label="List of submissions to the 64th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390420" start="16750" end="16830" title="List of Spanish submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="List of Spanish submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228335" wikidata="Q111157088" url="?curid=1228335" title="Harold Dahl">
<text>Harold Dahl may refer to:
*Harold Edward Dahl, Spanish Civil War fighter ace and World War II RCAF pilot trainer
*Harold J. Dahl, American politician and judge
*Harold Dahl (basketball), American basketball player
*Harold Dahl, seaman involved in the Maury Island incident</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15998804" start="27" end="45" title="Harold Edward Dahl" label="Harold Edward Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q111136623" start="114" end="128" title="Harold J. Dahl" label="Harold J. Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q66695877" start="161" end="185" title="Harold Dahl (basketball)" label="Harold Dahl (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149892" start="251" end="272" title="Maury Island incident" label="Maury Island incident"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228338" wikidata="Q61459" url="?curid=1228338" title="Ernst Klodwig">
<text>Ernst Klodwig (23 May 1903 – 15 April 1973) was an East German racing driver. He participated in two Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, driving privately run BMWs with different engines. He was classified in both races with a best finish of 12th.
==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61459" start="0" end="13" title="Ernst Klodwig" label="Ernst Klodwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="63" end="76" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="101" end="112" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928692" start="167" end="170" title="BMW in Formula One" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="" start="309" end="312" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228339" wikidata="Q62700" url="?curid=1228339" title="Ernst Loof">
<text>Ernst Loof (4 July 1907 in Neindorf near Oschersleben – 3 March 1956 in Bonn) was an automotive engineer and racing driver from Germany. He contributed to the design of the BMW 328 sports car in the late 1930s.

==Biography==
Loof participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, the German Grand Prix held on 2 August 1953. He retired with fuel pump failure after two metres of racing, which remains the record for the shortest Formula One career.

Loof was also a motorcycle racer and designer, and scored numerous successes in pre-war years for Imperia of Bad Godesberg and for BMW. He later became one of the founders of the Veritas company, successful in Formula Two with the Meteor racer in the immediate post-war period. The company also built sports cars, mostly BMW-engined, as well as the Panhard-engined Dyna-Veritas cabriolets.

Loof was the head designer of the Veritas car he drove in this race. The company had already gone bankrupt by this time, and its assets were purchased by BMW. He was hired by BMW in styling and body engineering and worked there until he retired due to illness.

Loof died in 1956 of a brain tumour.

==Complete World Championship results==
(key)
==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62700" start="0" end="10" title="Ernst Loof" label="Ernst Loof"/>
<link wikidata="Q525392" start="41" end="53" title="Oschersleben" label="Oschersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="72" end="76" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="109" end="122" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q796403" start="173" end="180" title="BMW 328" label="BMW 328"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="251" end="262" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998" start="298" end="315" title="German Grand Prix" label="German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q153260" start="573" end="586" title="Bad Godesberg" label="Bad Godesberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q249173" start="595" end="598" title="BMW Motorcycles" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q700373" start="643" end="650" title="Veritas (automobile)" label="Veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="674" end="685" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="785" end="788" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q731471" start="813" end="820" title="Panhard" label="Panhard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1196" end="1199" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228341" wikidata="Q63840" url="?curid=1228341" title="Erwin Bauer">
<text>Erwin Erich Bauer (17 July 1912 in Stuttgart – 3 June 1958 in Cologne) was a German Formula One driver who raced a privately entered Veritas in his one World Championship Grand Prix.

==Racing career==
In April, 1953, Bauer co-drove a Porsche 356 Super 1500 with Hans Herrmann at the Mille Miglia. They finished the race in the 30th position.

Bauer became famous for racing an undermatched Lotus to a fourth place in the 1954 1000km Nürburgring, and thus, providing Lotus with one of its earliest successes. His sole race in the Formula One World Championship came in 1953 at the German Grand Prix at the Nürburgring. In a field of thirty four, Bauer qualified 33rd, only ahead of fellow Veritas entrant Oswald Karch. He made it onto the second lap, which was more than could be said for Hans Stuck and Ernst Loof, but then his engine expired. He had jumped up to 28th, leaping ahead of the two retiring cars plus Rudolf Krause and Maurice Trintignant.

==Death==
Five years later, again at the Nürburgring racetrack, he was killed in a 2-litre sports Ferrari where, not realising he had passed the chequered flag, kept on racing and crashed fatally on what was supposed to be his slowing-down lap.

==Complete Formula One results==
(key) 
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q63840" start="0" end="17" title="Erwin Bauer" label="Erwin Erich Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="35" end="44" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="62" end="69" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="84" end="95" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q700373" start="133" end="140" title="Veritas (constructor)" label="Veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q596504" start="235" end="246" title="Porsche 356" label="Porsche 356"/>
<link wikidata="Q65915" start="263" end="276" title="Hans Herrmann" label="Hans Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="284" end="296" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35935" start="391" end="396" title="Lotus Cars" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164885" start="427" end="445" title="1000km Nürburgring" label="1000km Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q173040" start="581" end="598" title="1953 German Grand Prix" label="German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="606" end="617" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q62697" start="705" end="717" title="Oswald Karch" label="Oswald Karch"/>
<link wikidata="Q61541" start="789" end="799" title="Hans Stuck" label="Hans Stuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q62700" start="804" end="814" title="Ernst Loof" label="Ernst Loof"/>
<link wikidata="Q61842" start="915" end="928" title="Rudolf Krause" label="Rudolf Krause"/>
<link wikidata="Q171438" start="933" end="952" title="Maurice Trintignant" label="Maurice Trintignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="996" end="1017" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring racetrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1053" end="1060" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1100" end="1114" title="Racing flag#The checkered flag" label="chequered flag"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1235" end="1238" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228342" wikidata="Q173298" url="?curid=1228342" title="Esteban Tuero">
<text>Esteban Eduardo Tuero (born 22 April 1978) is an Argentine former racing driver who raced in Formula One for the Minardi team in 1998. At 19, he became the then-third-youngest (now ninth youngest) Formula One driver in history when he landed his seat alongside Shinji Nakano, but left the championship at the end of the season.

== Early life ==
Esteban Eduardo Tuero was born at a time when the likes of Nelson Piquet and Alain Prost were just beginning their careers. The Argentine Grand Prix was based near to his home, at the Oscar Gálvez race circuit. This meant that Formula One was popular where he grew up and, though the Grand Prix was discontinued in 1982, the sport was one of the biggest in the country.

Tuero was born to a family who had a huge interest in motor racing, his father being a minor race car driver, and so Esteban was groomed for the big time from an early age by beginning karts at the age of seven. He would drive karts until 1992, moving up to the Formula series the following year.

== Minor formulae career ==
Tuero moved up to car racing in 1993, spending a season with the Crespi team in Formula Renault. In 1994, he switched to Formula Honda with the Kissling team, becoming champion. All of his career so far had been in his native Argentina, so despite the pressures of racing in a Formula series whilst only 14, he was given his first taste of traveling the continent with a few races in South American Formula Three, driving a Ralt/Opel with the INI team.

In 1995, he moved to Europe, his father knowing his career would need to go there in order to gain momentum. He won the Italian Formula 2000 National Trophy by a large margin in a Dallara 392, and was also given a taste of Italian Formula Three in a Dallara 395. In 1996, he joined the bigger Italian F3 team Coloni Motorsport, driving a Dallara 396 with an Alfa Romeo engine. His performances in the series started generating interest from Formula One teams, with Benetton in the frame for signing him. It would be Minardi, though, who secured his services as a test driver for the team, despite being just 18 years old.

== Route to Formula One ==

In the 1996 Formula Three season, Tuero finished fourth in his first race, and he crossed the line first in his second race, only to be disqualified due to using illegal fuel. In the non-championship Monaco event, he started on the front row alongside future F1 driver Jarno Trulli, battling with him before eventually punting him at the hairpin on Lap 17. Tuero retired due to a flat battery later in the race.

Tuero opted to not finish the season in Formula Three, though, and jumped ship to Formula 3000 halfway through. His finishes in Italian F3 left him 13th in the final championship standings. His run for Draco resulted in only one top ten and a final championship position of 16th. His poor performance for Draco meant he was dropped for 1997, but instead of dropping back to Formula 3, he went to the Formula Nippon series in Japan. He only scored one point and finished 16th in the standings (ending up 81 points down on championship winner Pedro de la Rosa), but Tuero covered the required mileage making him eligible for an F1 Super License. His continuing test role with Minardi impressed the team to the extent that the Italian outfit gave him a race seat for the 1998 season, alongside the Japanese driver Shinji Nakano.

== Formula One career ==
;1998
Initially there were doubts over whether Tuero would be allowed to compete in the 1998 season. Although Minardi had contracted him to drive an M198, alongside Japan&#x27;s Shinji Nakano, he failed to meet all Super License requirements. Formula One pundit and former driver Martin Brundle said, &quot;As for Tuero, it would have been scary. I don&#x27;t like to see these guys out there with so little experience. Imagine it: even if he didn&#x27;t qualify, he&#x27;d be getting in the way during qualifying. And if he did qualify, then he&#x27;d definitely be lapped plenty. He&#x27;d have really needed to have his wits about him. To be honest, it annoys me, people like that, with zilch credibility.&quot;

Tuero was eventually awarded his license by the FIA and upon starting the season at 19 years of age, he became the third-youngest ever Formula One driver at the time. Tuero answered his doubters by qualifying an impressive 17th in Australia, ahead of teammate Nakano and the likes of 1996 Monaco Grand Prix winner Olivier Panis. Race day was a more frustrating affair, he jumped the start and received a 10-second penalty. He incurred the same penalty for speeding in the pit lane before retiring with a blown engine. Gearbox problems in Brazil followed by a poor pitstop and spin into the gravel at his home race in Argentina left Tuero with no finishes in the opening three races.

The San Marino Grand Prix was a race of attrition, but Tuero nursed his Minardi home to 8th for his first finish of the year before coming home 15th in Spain, where he served a stop-and-go penalty for speeding in the pit lane. For five races in a row, Tuero then failed to finish; Monaco, where he spun off before a lap was completed, Canada, France, Great Britain, where he was one of many to spin off in awful conditions, and Austria, where he spun off for the second race running.

16th in Germany halted the run of retirements, but only briefly. Tuero lasted 13 laps in Hungary, and, though he was not involved in the multi-car crash at the start of the Belgian Grand Prix, still retired prior to half-distance. 11th in Italy preceded another retirement at the Luxembourg Grand Prix.

His final race of the season, the Japanese Grand Prix, would also be his final race in a top-level single-seater series. Starting 21st on the grid, he crashed into Toranosuke Takagi on lap 29, after accidentally hitting the throttle rather than the brakes. His Minardi vaulted Takagi&#x27;s Tyrrell and upon landing he damaged a number of vertebrae in his neck. In the immediate aftermath of the incident, Ferrari&#x27;s Michael Schumacher who was challenging McLaren&#x27;s Mika Häkkinen for the Drivers&#x27; Championship, passed the accident spot where carbon fibre debris were littering the race track. Schumacher then suffered a catastrophic rear tyre failure forcing him to retire and thus handing Häkkinen his first World Drivers&#x27; Championship. Meanwhile, Tuero&#x27;s sole Formula One season proved fruitless with no points and no ranking in the Drivers&#x27; Championship.

;1999
The restructured Minardi squad headed toward the 1999 season with plans to run Tuero once more, this time alongside Spaniard Marc Gene. Tuero was due to test the new car, the M01, in late January after recuperating from his injuries, but on the eve of that first test he announced his retirement from Formula One.

== After Formula One ==

Though Minardi had counted on Tuero staying with the team for the 1999 season, to the surprise of the team he walked into a meeting and said he would leave Formula 1 and move back to his home country. In 1999, he joined the Argentinian TC2000 touring car racing series, where he struggled to make an impact by finishing outside the top ten overall. He later won two races at the wheel of a Volkswagen Polo which was one of the three official Volkswagen cars on the grid. After that, Volkswagen discontinued his official link with the team while they were developing new cars for the series. The new car, a Volkswagen Bora, was far from reliable and Tuero lost potential race wins as a result. 

He was linked with a pay-drivers seat in the CART series for 2002, but it never happened. Despite that he continued racing at TC2000 with several teams and some successful performances.

In 2008, he participated part-time in the FIA GT Championship in a Ferrari 550-GTS Maranello.

Tuero announced his retirement from racing after the 2016 TC2000 season.

==Racing record==

===Complete International Formula 3000 results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula Nippon results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
=== Complete Formula One Grand Prix results ===
(key) 
==References==
==Sources==
*Profile at www.grandprix.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173298" start="0" end="21" title="Esteban Tuero" label="Esteban Eduardo Tuero"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="49" end="58" title="Argentina" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="66" end="79" title="Auto racing" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="93" end="104" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="113" end="120" title="Minardi" label="Minardi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="197" end="226" title="List of Formula One driver records#Youngest drivers to start a race" label="Formula One driver in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q171430" start="261" end="274" title="Shinji Nakano" label="Shinji Nakano"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="405" end="418" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="423" end="434" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7854" start="474" end="494" title="Argentine Grand Prix" label="Argentine Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173116" start="530" end="542" title="Autódromo Oscar Alfredo Gálvez" label="Oscar Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q192420" start="902" end="907" title="karting" label="karts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1427" end="1440" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="1442" end="1455" title="Formula Three" label="Formula Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="1472" end="1476" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1518" end="1524" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1617" end="1624" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157975" start="1677" end="1684" title="Dallara" label="Dallara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631454" start="1806" end="1823" title="Coloni Motorsport" label="Coloni Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q173886" start="1855" end="1865" title="Alfa Romeo in motorsport" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="1962" end="1970" title="Renault F1" label="Benetton"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="2013" end="2020" title="Minardi" label="Minardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="2348" end="2354" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q171350" start="2417" end="2429" title="Jarno Trulli" label="Jarno Trulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q744289" start="2643" end="2655" title="International Formula 3000" label="Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313836" start="2961" end="2975" title="Formula Nippon" label="Formula Nippon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2986" end="2991" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82924" start="3102" end="3118" title="Pedro de la Rosa" label="Pedro de la Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q173370" start="3190" end="3203" title="FIA Super Licence" label="Super License"/>
<link wikidata="Q171430" start="3372" end="3385" title="Shinji Nakano" label="Shinji Nakano"/>
<link wikidata="Q69763" start="3501" end="3505" title="1998 Formula One season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="3523" end="3530" title="Minardi" label="Minardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575942" start="3562" end="3566" title="Minardi M198" label="M198"/>
<link wikidata="Q171430" start="3591" end="3604" title="Shinji Nakano" label="Shinji Nakano"/>
<link wikidata="Q172854" start="3693" end="3707" title="Martin Brundle" label="Martin Brundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="4177" end="4180" title="FIA" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057" start="4360" end="4369" title="1998 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173266" start="4413" end="4435" title="1996 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1996 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172018" start="4443" end="4456" title="Olivier Panis" label="Olivier Panis"/>
<link wikidata="Q54420" start="4667" end="4673" title="1998 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12649" start="4746" end="4755" title="1998 Argentine Grand Prix" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q516303" start="4817" end="4838" title="1998 San Marino Grand Prix" label="San Marino Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q593917" start="4965" end="4970" title="1998 Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q419497" start="5094" end="5100" title="1998 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q65916" start="5148" end="5154" title="1998 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q221581" start="5156" end="5162" title="1998 French Grand Prix" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q307049" start="5164" end="5177" title="1998 British Grand Prix" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15590" start="5241" end="5248" title="1998 Austrian Grand Prix" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q297114" start="5306" end="5313" title="1998 German Grand Prix" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q665427" start="5387" end="5394" title="1998 Hungarian Grand Prix" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q20953" start="5471" end="5489" title="1998 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q362961" start="5537" end="5542" title="1998 Italian Grand Prix" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q363610" start="5578" end="5599" title="1998 Luxembourg Grand Prix" label="Luxembourg Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q305754" start="5636" end="5655" title="1998 Japanese Grand Prix" label="Japanese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173160" start="5766" end="5783" title="Toranosuke Takagi" label="Toranosuke Takagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="5893" end="5900" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="5941" end="5950" title="vertebrae" label="vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="6008" end="6022" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9671" start="6023" end="6041" title="Michael Schumacher" label="Michael Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="6062" end="6076" title="McLaren (racing)" label="McLaren&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q172842" start="6077" end="6090" title="Mika Häkkinen" label="Mika Häkkinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="6254" end="6258" title="tire" label="tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q69791" start="6545" end="6549" title="1999 Formula One season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q172780" start="6621" end="6630" title="Marc Gene" label="Marc Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409477" start="6671" end="6674" title="Minardi M01" label="M01"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272469" start="7072" end="7078" title="TC2000" label="TC2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245261" start="7079" end="7097" title="touring car racing" label="touring car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q247819" start="7226" end="7241" title="Volkswagen Polo" label="Volkswagen Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751410" start="7576" end="7580" title="Champ Car" label="CART"/>
<link wikidata="Q784913" start="7592" end="7596" title="2002_CART_season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q821866" start="7760" end="7779" title="2008 FIA GT Championship" label="FIA GT Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324461" start="7785" end="7810" title="Ferrari 550-GTS Maranello" label="Ferrari 550-GTS Maranello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272469" start="7871" end="7877" title="TC2000" label="TC2000"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7957" end="7960" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8092" end="8095" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8237" end="8240" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228346" wikidata="Q172609" url="?curid=1228346" title="Ettore Chimeri">
<text>Ettore Muro Chimeri (4 June 1921 – 27 February 1960) was a racing driver from Venezuela. He was born in Lodi, near Milan, Italy, but his family later settled in Venezuela. He was the first Venezuelan ever to compete in a Formula One Grand Prix.
==Biography==
He became a popular gentleman racing driver and competed with success in many local races in Venezuela. He raced in the Venezuelan Grand Prix held in Los Proceres, Caracas. His success and skill in car racing, gave him the enthusiasm for keep going forward, and he started an international professional promotion, racing sport cars and one-seater cars.

He participated in one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, the 1960 Argentine Grand Prix on 7 February 1960, in his Maserati 250F (a car he owned, previously raced by Juan Manuel Fangio and Francisco Godia, prepared in Venezuela and sold to an Italian buyer sometime after his death). Chimeri qualified 14th, but failed to finish the race having experienced electrical problems, and retired after 37 of 95 laps. He scored no championship points, but he wished to keep going in the Formula One calendar that year.

Two weeks later, while practicing for the Gran Premio Libertad sports car race at the Camp Freedom military airfield on the edge of Havana, his Ferrari 250TR crashed through barriers and plunged into a ravine. Chimeri was flown to hospital, where he died later that day.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==
==External links==
*F1 Rejects profile
*Grand Prix encyclopedia profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172609" start="0" end="19" title="Ettore Chimeri" label="Ettore Muro Chimeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="59" end="72" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="78" end="87" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244" start="104" end="108" title="Lodi, Lombardy" label="Lodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="115" end="120" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="423" end="430" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="636" end="647" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q12455" start="683" end="708" title="1960 Argentine Grand Prix" label="1960 Argentine Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173741" start="736" end="749" title="Maserati 250F" label="Maserati 250F"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="787" end="805" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q171922" start="810" end="825" title="Paco Godia" label="Francisco Godia"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="1197" end="1207" title="sports car racing" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="1266" end="1272" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407641" start="1278" end="1291" title="Ferrari TR" label="Ferrari 250TR"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1459" end="1462" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228348" wikidata="Q171970" url="?curid=1228348" title="Eugène Chaboud">
<text>Marius Eugène Chaboud (12 April 1907 – 28 December 1983) was a French racing driver. He participated in three Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, scoring one championship point. He also participated in numerous non-Championship Formula One races.

==Career==
He completed his first car race in 1936 aged 29 in a Delahaye sports car and partnered his mentor Jean Trémoulet in the 1937 24 Hours of Le Mans race, where they failed to finish. The following year however the partnership won the race in a Delahaye. In 1939 he won the Paris-Nice road race for Ecurie France and after the Second World War he won the 1946 Belgian Grand Prix at Bois de la Cambre in a Delage.
After Formula 1 was introduced in 1950, Chaboud drove a Talbot Lago T26 in several Formula 1 events, including three Grand Prix World Championship races, during 1950 and 1951, scoring 1 championship point for a fifth place in the French Grand Prix.

He retired from the sport after crashing his Talbot-Lago T26 at Le Mans during the 1952 event, when he became trapped under his car.

==Racing record==
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key)
:&quot;* Indicates shared drive with Philippe Étancelin. Chaboud had entered his Ecurie Lutetia Talbot-Lago but did not race this car.

===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==External links==
* Profile on OldRacingCars.com
* Profile from Grand Prix Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171970" start="0" end="21" title="Eugène Chaboud" label="Marius Eugène Chaboud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="70" end="83" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="110" end="121" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q442194" start="365" end="379" title="Jean Trémoulet" label="Jean Trémoulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216386" start="387" end="411" title="1937 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1937 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q216387" start="498" end="502" title="1938 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954" start="623" end="641" title="Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q833646" start="645" end="662" title="Bois de la Cambre" label="Bois de la Cambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q216401" start="1009" end="1019" title="1952 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1952 event"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1133" end="1136" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q171994" start="1175" end="1193" title="Philippe Étancelin" label="Philippe Étancelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321469" start="1219" end="1233" title="Ecurie Lutetia" label="Ecurie Lutetia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228349" wikidata="Q171890" url="?curid=1228349" title="Eugène Martin">
<text>Eugène Martin (24 March 1915 in Suresnes – 12 October 2006 in Aytre) was a racing driver from France. He participated in two Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 13 May 1950. He scored no championship points.

Martin is better known for his participation in several of the prewar grands prix. He won the first Grand Prix Aix les Bains Circuit du Lac in 1949 with a Jicey-BMW developed by Jean Caillas.

In the 1950s he embarked on a brief career as an auto-maker, working at the Paris-based garage he owned with his father to produce the Martin-Spéciale. The car was exhibited at the 1952 Paris Motor Show but never progressed to series production.

He was one of the last surviving drivers from that era until his death at a hospital near his home in La Rochelle in 2006.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==
==External links==
* Profile at oldracingcars.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171890" start="0" end="13" title="Eugène Martin" label="Eugène Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193929" start="32" end="40" title="Suresnes" label="Suresnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q72240" start="62" end="67" title="Aytre" label="Aytre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="75" end="88" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="94" end="100" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="125" end="136" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q653214" start="340" end="368" title="Aix les Bains Circuit du Lac" label="Aix les Bains Circuit du Lac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774829" start="557" end="572" title="Martin-Spéciale" label="Martin-Spéciale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048801" start="608" end="624" title="Paris Motor Show" label="Paris Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q82185" start="771" end="782" title="La Rochelle" label="La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="846" end="849" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228351" wikidata="Q171933" url="?curid=1228351" title="Eugenio Castellotti">
<text>Eugenio Castellotti (10 October 1930 – 14 March 1957) was a racing driver from Italy. He won the 1956 Mille Miglia and 1956 12 Hours of Sebring, and took several Formula One World Championship podiums. His career was cut short by a fatal testing accident at Modena in 1957. He was nicknamed &quot;Il Bello&quot; (&quot;The Handsome&quot;).

==Driving career==

Castellotti was born in Lodi, Italy. He acquired a Ferrari 166 MM s/n 0058M at the age of twenty, from a local benefactor, and began racing sports cars. In 1952 he won the Portuguese Grand Prix, was third at Bari and second at Monaco which was run that year for sports cars. In 1953 he won the 10 Hours of Messina and finished third in the Carrera Panamericana in Mexico. In 1954, he signed for Lancia and again drove sports cars whilst awaiting the team&#x27;s Grand Prix car. He eventually made his Grand Prix debut at Buenos Aires on 16 January 1955, for Lancia, but struggled in the warmer temperatures and crashed. However, he finished second at Monaco, but in mid-season the team amalgamated with Scuderia Ferrari, for whom Castellotti drove for the remainder of his career. He participated in 14 World Championship Grands Prix, achieving 3 podiums and scored a total of 19.5 championship points. He secured pole position, with Lancia, at the 1955 Belgian Grand Prix, becoming the youngest driver to do so (at age 24 years, 7 months and 26 days), a record that stood for 13 years until Jacky Ickx&#x27;s pole position at the 1968 German Grand Prix.
He also participated in several non-Championship Formula One races. Castellotti won the March 1956 12 Hours of Sebring at Sebring, Florida partnered with Fangio. He followed this triumph by winning the Mille Miglia race in Brescia and the Grand Prix for sports cars in Rouen, France. Castellotti&#x27;s Ferrari achieved a total race time of 2 hours 10 minutes 31.1 seconds, winning the race. He was also second in the Nürburgring 1000 km race again partnered with Fangio.

==Private life==
Known for his sophisticated manners and tailored clothes, Castellotti had significantly prominent media profile in Italy for his relationship with ballerina and actress Delia Scala. Castellotti and Scala were officially engaged at the time of his death.

==Death==
Castellotti died at 26 years old during a private Ferrari test session at the Modena Autodrome. Castellotti was testing a new Ferrari Grand Prix car for the 1957 season. He had been told by Enzo Ferrari in person to test there and set a fast time, in order to beat an unofficial lap record that had just been set by Jean Behra for Maserati. He hit a high kerb at a chicane and was thrown out of the car; his body was hurled . The car repeatedly overturned before coming to rest in the members&#x27; stand. No other people were hurt. According to physicians, Castellotti&#x27;s skull fracture caused his instant death.

==Legacy==
Castellotti was considered the greatest Italian driver since Alberto Ascari. In 1958, Castellotti&#x27;s friend Giuseppe Corsi founded Scuderia Castellotti in Lodi to honour his memory. The team used modified Ferrari Tipo 553 2.0-litre engines bored out to 2.5 litres and rebranded as &quot;Castellotti&quot;, with &quot;Eugenio&quot; on the cam covers. The cars were easily distinguishable from other F1 T51s in that their exhausts were fitted on the left, while all other engines used in T51s had their exhausts on the right. The team competed in four events in 1960 with Italian drivers Gino Munaron, Giorgio Scarlatti and Giulio Cabianca. Cabianca scored the team&#x27;s first championship points by finishing fourth at the 1960 Italian Grand Prix. The team folded in 1961 after Cabianca fatally crashed in the same autodrome where Castellotti had his accident. Castellotti&#x27;s legacy has been honoured by Club Auto Moto Storiche Castellotti in Lodi.

Major career wins (sportscars):
*1952: Coppa d&#x27;Oro di Sicilia
*1952: Portuguese Grand Prix
*1953: Circuito di Senigallia
*1956: Mille Miglia
*1956: 12 Hours of Sebring
*1957: 1000 km Buenos Aires

==Racing record==

===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position)
===Non-championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position)
(Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
:&quot;† Indicates shared drive with Luigi Musso&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* The dashing Milanese that stayed young forever. Article on Castellotti at 8w</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171933" start="0" end="19" title="Eugenio Castellotti" label="Eugenio Castellotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="60" end="73" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506538" start="97" end="114" title="1956 Mille Miglia" label="1956 Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171658" start="119" end="143" title="1956 12 Hours of Sebring" label="1956 12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="162" end="173" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q739305" start="258" end="264" title="Modena Autodrome" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244" start="385" end="389" title="Lodi, Lombardy" label="Lodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q416698" start="412" end="423" title="Ferrari 166" label="Ferrari 166"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="501" end="511" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421853" start="569" end="573" title="Bari Grand Prix" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113906" start="588" end="594" title="1952 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q74119339" start="655" end="674" title="10 Hours of Messina" label="10 Hours of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="701" end="721" title="Carrera Panamericana#1953" label="Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="756" end="762" title="Lancia#Formula One" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12450" start="882" end="894" title="1955 Argentine Grand Prix" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q417694" start="1012" end="1018" title="1955 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1064" end="1080" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q588596" start="1275" end="1288" title="pole position" label="pole position"/>
<link wikidata="Q20876" start="1310" end="1333" title="1955 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1955 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173123" start="1453" end="1463" title="Jacky Ickx" label="Jacky Ickx"/>
<link wikidata="Q171913" start="1492" end="1514" title="1968 German Grand Prix" label="1968 German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="1615" end="1634" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q985173" start="1638" end="1654" title="Sebring, Florida" label="Sebring, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="1670" end="1676" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="1718" end="1730" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="1739" end="1746" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="1785" end="1798" title="Rouen, France" label="Rouen, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q164885" start="1934" end="1953" title="1000 km Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring 1000 km"/>
<link wikidata="Q526911" start="2175" end="2186" title="Delia Scala" label="Delia Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q739305" start="2349" end="2365" title="Modena Autodrome" label="Modena Autodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="2397" end="2404" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q181282" start="2461" end="2473" title="Enzo Ferrari" label="Enzo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172250" start="2587" end="2597" title="Jean Behra" label="Jean Behra"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="2602" end="2610" title="Maserati in Formula One" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086" start="2962" end="2976" title="Alberto Ascari" label="Alberto Ascari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244" start="3060" end="3064" title="Lodi, Lombardy" label="Lodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172785" start="3491" end="3503" title="Gino Munaron" label="Gino Munaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q172029" start="3505" end="3522" title="Giorgio Scarlatti" label="Giorgio Scarlatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q711156" start="3527" end="3542" title="Giulio Cabianca" label="Giulio Cabianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q331305" start="3629" end="3652" title="1960 Italian Grand Prix" label="1960 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9117" start="3934" end="3955" title="Portuguese Grand Prix" label="Portuguese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="3993" end="4005" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171650" start="4013" end="4032" title="12 Hours of Sebring" label="12 Hours of Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q164822" start="4040" end="4060" title="1000 km Buenos Aires" label="1000 km Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4136" end="4139" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4212" end="4215" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q171484" start="4345" end="4356" title="Luigi Musso" label="Luigi Musso"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228352" wikidata="Q4914260" url="?curid=1228352" title="Ross Park Zoo">
<text>The Ross Park Zoo is a zoo located in Binghamton, New York, United States. The zoo was opened in 1875, making it the 5th oldest zoo in the nation. The zoo (known as the Binghamton Zoo at Ross Park from 2005 to 2020) is open year round.

==History==

The of land was donated by Erastus Ross, a wealthy businessman whose only instructions were to build a park that all the community could enjoy. The electric trolleys in the area allowed easy access to the park. Other features of the park included roller coasters, swings, a miniature train, and a carousel. Band concerts were a frequent summer event.

Increased use of automobiles let people easily travel outside the city for recreation, this plus the two World Wars and the Great Depression led to the decline of the park. Eventually the USDA was threatening to close the park because of sub-standard exhibits. In 1966, concerned citizens formed the Southern Tier Zoological Society in an attempt to upgrade the facilities.

Mr. Ross donated the zoo enough money to run it for many years. He intended it to be free for all guests as well as the carousel that is on the outskirts of the entrance to the zoo. However, the zoo now has a nominal entrance fee. The carousel still remains free of charge to ride.

In December 2005, the zoo lost its accreditation with the Association of Zoos and Aquariums, &quot;due to turmoil in its previous leadership and finances.&quot; Accreditation was successfully regained in 2009, but lost again in 2014.

==Animals and facilities==

The zoo currently contains a growing number of animal exhibits, including red pandas, red wolves, a snow leopard, lemurs, an aviary, penguins, Pallas’s cats, howler monkeys, binturongs (also known as bearcats, the mascot of the nearby Binghamton University), and many other animals. It is set in a lushly wooded environment.

The zoo also contains, outside the entrance of the zoo, a pavilion with areas for barbecuing, a small park, and rest rooms. The old lions den has been freshly renovated and is being used for educational programs with seating &quot;behind bars&quot;.
The zoo is also a neighbor to the Discovery Center, which is a hands-on children&#x27;s museum.

==Events==

The zoo also holds many annual events and activities. These events include:

Courtship Tails, Eggstravaganza, Zoo Brew &amp; Wine Too!, Ice Cream Safari, Feast with the Beasts, Howloween at the Zoo, and Boo at the Zoo.

==Notes==
== External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4914260" start="4" end="17" title="Ross Park Zoo" label="Ross Park Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43501" start="23" end="26" title="zoo" label="zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213814" start="38" end="58" title="Binghamton, New York" label="Binghamton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="60" end="73" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914260" start="169" end="196" title="Ross Park Zoo" label="Binghamton Zoo at Ross Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="407" end="415" title="Streetcar" label="trolleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q204832" start="497" end="512" title="roller coasters" label="roller coasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q208322" start="547" end="555" title="carousel" label="carousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="619" end="629" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="707" end="717" title="World Wars" label="World Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="726" end="742" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="790" end="794" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876418" start="1318" end="1351" title="Association of Zoos and Aquariums" label="Association of Zoos and Aquariums"/>
<link wikidata="Q41960" start="1597" end="1606" title="red panda" label="red panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q200442" start="1609" end="1619" title="red wolves" label="red wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q863813" start="1758" end="1779" title="Binghamton University" label="Binghamton University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228353" wikidata="Q171897" url="?curid=1228353" title="Felice Bonetto">
<text>Felice Bonetto (9 June 1903 – 21 November 1953) was an Italian racing driver, who competed in Formula One at 16 Grands Prix from to . Nicknamed &quot;il Pirata&quot;, Bonetto won the Targa Florio in 1952 with Lancia.

Born and raised in Manerbio, Bonetto began his career in motorcycle road racing before switching to Grand Prix motor racing in 1931. He enjoyed a brief Formula One career, racing Italian cars with Milano, Alfa Romeo and Maserati, achieving two podium finishes at the 1951 Italian and 1953 Dutch Grands Prix, the former he shared with Giuseppe Farina and the latter with José Froilán González. His greatest successes were in sportscar racing, winning the Targa Florio in 1952, but his career was cut short when he fatally collided with a lamp post whilst leading the 1953 Carrera Panamericana.

==Career==

===Debut and early career===
Felice Bonetto was born in Manerbio, which in the province of Brescia, the home of the Mille Miglia. Despite that, he began to race, very young, on motor bikes. The switch to four wheels came very late to modern standards; he, in fact, already 28 when he participated in the Bobbio-Penice, with a Bugatti. Despite having to make do with cars that not always competitive, but the results were not lacking. In 1933, Bonetto was third in the infamous Gran Premio di Monza with an Alfa Romeo 8C 2600. The race will always be remembered as the &quot;Black Day of Monza&quot;, when three of Europe&#x27;s greatest racing drivers crashed fatally within a few hours of each other: Giuseppe Campari, Mario-Umberto Borzacchini and Count Stanisław Czaykowski. He also finished second in the Coppa Principessa di Piemonte. A year later he came twelfth in the Mille Miglia, but he obtained his greatest success after World War II. After the World War II abruptly ended his career, as well as that of his colleagues of the time. Bonetto resumed his racing in 1946 with the small Cisitalia, before moving into Formula One.
===Formula One===
Although Bonetto had raced Formula One cars before, he made his World Championship F1 debut in the 1950 Swiss Grand Prix. He was five days short of his 47th birthday. He entered his own Maserati 4CLT in several Grands Prix, under the Scuderia Milano banner, and drove a works Alfa Romeo SpA in 1951, as their number three driver. He shared a third, with Giuseppe Farina in the Gran Premio d&#x27;Italia. A move to sports cars followed, but he returned to Formula One at the end of 1952 and had a good season in the Officine Alfieri Maserati in 1953, with a visit to the podium, when he again shared a third-place finish in the Grote Prijs van Nederland. This time partnered by José Froilán González. Away from the World Championship, Bonetto did have some success; he was second in the 1949 in the Gran Premio di Napoli in a Ferrari.

===Ace of sport===

More than F1, however, Bonetto had greater success in sports cars. He won the 1947 Circuito de Firenze driving a Delage 3000. In 1949 he was second in the Mille Miglia, behind Clemente Biondetti, both drove a Ferrari 166 MM Touring for Scuderia Ferrari, and in 1950 he won the Pontedecimo-Giovi hillclimb in an Osca and the Gran Premio di Oporto in his own Alfa Romeo. The following season, he drove for Alfa Romeo&#x27;s new 1900TI model to class victory in the Giro di Sicilia. Then for 1952, he moved to Scuderia Lancia, and at the wheel of a Lancia Aurelia B20, he finished second on the Giro di Sicilia. He followed this with a sixth place in the Preis von Bremgarten and an eighth in the les 24 Heures du Mans, and finally a great win in the Targa Florio. He continued with the Scuderia Lancia outfit for 1953; claiming third in the Mille Miglia, second in the Gran Premio di Monza, victory in the Grande Premio do Jubileu at the Circuito de Monsanto and he became part of the squadron deployed to the Carrera Panamericana: his teammates for the race were Juan Manuel Fangio, Piero Taruffi, Giovanni Bracco and Eugenio Castellotti.

===Death===
The Carrera Panamericana, a notoriously dangerous and difficult public road rally in Mexico that took place over 6 days from one end of the North American country to the other, covering a distance of 2,000 miles (3,200 km). It was the last round of the 1953 World Sportscar Championship, and the race started on 19 November 1953, from Tuxtla Gutiérrez; Bonetto won the first stage, in front of his teammates Taruffi, Fangio and Castellotti. Taruffi would win the next two stages, although Bonetto remained in control. The third day of competition, Bonetto and Taruffi were close and continued to duel with each other; the second stage of the day, however, Taruffi went off the road in the foggy area before the small town of Silao, about 25 miles from León, damaging the steering of his Lancia. In the same locality, Bonetto crashed his Lancia against the balcony of a house, ending up against a pole. Bonetto hit his head on the balcony at speed and was killed instantly. Prior to the event, Bonetto with Taruffi and other Italian drivers reportedly marked dangerous corners along the route with blue signs. His accident happened at one of those locations – despite this care in marking the corners, Felice would take a 60 mph corner at 125 mph.
After Bonetto&#x27;s death, team owner Gianni Lancia wanted to withdraw his cars from the race, but the surviving drivers decided to keep on racing in honour of their teammate. Fangio, Taruffi and Castellotti led to the finish giving Lancia first three places, but it was a success that was not rejoiced, as besides Bonetto the race also claimed the lives of fellow Italian drivers, Antonio Stagnoli and Giuseppe Scotuzzi, as well as six spectators. Bonetto is buried in the Cimitero Italiano section of the Panteón Civil de Dolores, México City.

===Bonetto family in the automotive world===
The contribution of the Bonetto family to the automotive world did not end with the death of Bonetto. The nephew, Rodolfo Bonetto, was a leading figure in the field of Italian architecture and industrial design. Rodolfo&#x27;s son, Marco, continued in this field as chairman of Bonetto Design. As for Felice&#x27;s own son, Roberto Bonetto has dedicated his career to journalism, to become deputy editor of Quattroruote.

==Racing record==

===Career highlights===
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key) 
====Notes====
‡ &quot;Shared drive with José Froilán González&quot;
† &quot;Shared drive with Juan Manuel Fangio&quot;

===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Complete Mille Miglia results===
===Complete Carrera Panamericana results===
==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171897" start="0" end="14" title="Felice Bonetto" label="Felice Bonetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="63" end="76" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="94" end="105" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q179371" start="112" end="123" title="Formula One Grands Prix" label="Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171897" start="150" end="159" title="Felice Bonetto" label="il Pirata"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="183" end="195" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="199" end="203" title="1952 Targa Florio" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="209" end="215" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105148" start="237" end="245" title="Manerbio" label="Manerbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163326" start="275" end="297" title="motorcycle road racing" label="motorcycle road racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="318" end="341" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172787" start="415" end="421" title="Scuderia Milano" label="Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="423" end="433" title="Alfa Romeo (Formula One)" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="438" end="446" title="Maserati in motorsport" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q173021" start="485" end="497" title="1951 Italian Grand Prix" label="1951 Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q173067" start="502" end="512" title="1953 Dutch Grand Prix" label="1953 Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040" start="552" end="567" title="Giuseppe Farina" label="Giuseppe Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q171447" start="588" end="609" title="José Froilán González" label="José Froilán González"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="642" end="658" title="sportscar racing" label="sportscar racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="672" end="684" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044938" start="784" end="809" title="1953 Carrera Panamericana" label="1953 Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="940" end="952" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27401" start="1150" end="1157" title="Bugatti" label="Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472912" start="1330" end="1348" title="Alfa Romeo 8C" label="Alfa Romeo 8C 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385724" start="1526" end="1542" title="Giuseppe Campari" label="Giuseppe Campari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267004" start="1544" end="1569" title="Baconin Borzacchini" label="Mario-Umberto Borzacchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q516020" start="1574" end="1600" title="Stanisław Czaykowski" label="Count Stanisław Czaykowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="1700" end="1712" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1757" end="1769" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1781" end="1793" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093218" start="1918" end="1927" title="Cisitalia" label="Cisitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173041" start="2078" end="2099" title="1950 Swiss Grand Prix" label="1950 Swiss Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549417" start="2165" end="2178" title="Maserati 4CL and 4CLT" label="Maserati 4CLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q172787" start="2213" end="2228" title="Scuderia Milano" label="Scuderia Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="2255" end="2269" title="Alfa Romeo in Formula One" label="Alfa Romeo SpA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040" start="2333" end="2348" title="Giuseppe Farina" label="Giuseppe Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q173021" start="2356" end="2381" title="1951 Italian Grand Prix" label="Gran Premio d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928981" start="2494" end="2519" title="Maserati in motorsport" label="Officine Alfieri Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q173067" start="2606" end="2631" title="1953 Dutch Grand Prix" label="Grote Prijs van Nederland"/>
<link wikidata="Q171447" start="2656" end="2677" title="José Froilán González" label="José Froilán González"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450446" start="2777" end="2798" title="Grand Prix of Naples" label="Gran Premio di Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q27550" start="2947" end="2958" title="Delage" label="Delage 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q172489" start="3010" end="3028" title="Clemente Biondetti" label="Clemente Biondetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147481" start="3043" end="3065" title="Ferrari 166 S" label="Ferrari 166 MM Touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="3070" end="3086" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q936574" start="3145" end="3149" title="O.S.C.A." label="Osca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="3341" end="3356" title="Lancia" label="Scuderia Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801839" start="3380" end="3398" title="Lancia Aurelia" label="Lancia Aurelia B20"/>
<link wikidata="Q216401" start="3528" end="3549" title="1952 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="les 24 Heures du Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="3582" end="3594" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935371" start="3673" end="3685" title="1953 Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9117" start="3738" end="3762" title="Portuguese Grand Prix" label="Grande Premio do Jubileu"/>
<link wikidata="Q174062" start="3770" end="3790" title="Circuito de Monsanto" label="Circuito de Monsanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044938" start="3842" end="3862" title="1953 Carrera Panamericana" label="Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="3896" end="3914" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q171578" start="3916" end="3929" title="Piero Taruffi" label="Piero Taruffi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389834" start="3931" end="3946" title="Giovanni Bracco" label="Giovanni Bracco"/>
<link wikidata="Q171933" start="3951" end="3970" title="Eugenio Castellotti" label="Eugenio Castellotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044949" start="3989" end="4009" title="Carrera Panamericana" label="Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q207429" start="4320" end="4336" title="Tuxtla Gutiérrez" label="Tuxtla Gutiérrez"/>
<link wikidata="Q189128" start="4737" end="4741" title="León, Guanajuato" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763545" start="5271" end="5284" title="Gianni Lancia" label="Gianni Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5615" end="5631" title="Antonio Stagnoli" label="Antonio Stagnoli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5636" end="5653" title="Giuseppe Scotuzzi" label="Giuseppe Scotuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5707" end="5724" title="Cimitero Italiano" label="Cimitero Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5740" end="5764" title="Panteón Civil de Dolores" label="Panteón Civil de Dolores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075621" start="6232" end="6244" title="Quattroruote" label="Quattroruote"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6345" end="6348" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228354" wikidata="Q2672193" url="?curid=1228354" title="Magnolia campbellii">
<text>Magnolia campbellii, or Campbell&#x27;s magnolia, is a species of &quot;Magnolia&quot; that grows in sheltered valleys in the Himalaya from eastern Nepal, Sikkim and Assam, India, east to southwestern China (southern Xizang, Yunnan, southern Sichuan) and south to northern Myanmar.

==Description==

&quot;Magnolia campbellii&quot; is a medium-sized to large deciduous tree growing to 30 m, rarely to 45 m, tall, with smooth grey bark. The leaves are 10–23 cm (rarely to 33 cm) long and 4.5–10 cm (rarely to 14 cm) broad, fuzzy underneath and with an acute apex. The flowers are very large, 15–25 cm (rarely 35 cm) diameter, with 12-16 tepals, which vary from white to dark pink. They appear very early, before the leaves, opening from late winter to early spring. After opening, the innermost tepals remain erect while the others spread widely. This arrangement may shelter the stamens and stigmas from rain, snow, and other harsh environmental conditions common during their very early flowering time period.

Hooker named the species after Archibald Campbell, Superintendent of Darjeeling.

===Varieties===
There are two varieties: 
*&quot;Magnolia campbellii&quot; var. &quot;campbellii&quot;. Western part of the species&#x27; range, in the Himalaya. Shoots and flower stalks thinly hairy.
*&quot;Magnolia campbellii&quot; var. &quot;mollicomata&quot;. Eastern part of the species&#x27; range, in Yunnan and surrounding areas. Shoots more densely hairy, flower stalks thickly felted.

==Cultivation==
&quot;Magnolia campbellii&quot; is grown as an ornamental tree for its breathtaking flowers, though successful flowering is limited to mild areas with no late spring frosts. &quot;Magnolia campbellii&quot; var. &quot;mollicomata&quot; flowers slightly later and is less likely to have its flowers frost-damaged.

Young trees take a long time to reach flowering age and need deep, moist soil and a mild, sheltered site.

===Cultivars===
Several cultivars have been named, including &#x27;Alba&#x27; (white flowers), &#x27;Charles Raffil&#x27; (bright purple-pink flowers; starts flowering on younger trees), and &#x27;Strybing White&#x27; (white flowers).

A number of hybrids with other Magnolias have also been developed.

==References==

*Hunt, D. (ed). (1998). &quot;Magnolias and their allies&quot;. International Dendrology Society and Magnolia Society. 
*Flora of China: Magnoliaceae (draft account)

==Further reading==
* Nelson, E. C. &quot;Magnolia campbellii in County Cork.&quot; The Garden 104 (1979): 495-196.

==External links==
*Magnoliasociety.org: Photo of &quot;Magnolia campbellii&quot; var. &quot;mollicomata&quot; flowers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2672193" start="24" end="48" title="Magnolia campbellii" label="Campbell&amp;#x27;s magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157017" start="72" end="80" title="Magnolia" label="Magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="126" end="134" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="148" end="153" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="155" end="161" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="166" end="171" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="201" end="206" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="217" end="223" title="Xizang" label="Xizang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="225" end="231" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="242" end="249" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="273" end="280" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="359" end="368" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="369" end="373" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="440" end="446" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="567" end="573" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q756954" start="636" end="641" title="tepal" label="tepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="879" end="885" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="891" end="897" title="carpel" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="932" end="945" title="natural environment" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798193" start="1043" end="1061" title="Archibald Campbell (doctor)" label="Archibald Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q767728" start="1124" end="1133" title="variety (biology)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="1553" end="1568" title="ornamental tree" label="ornamental tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1892" end="1896" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="1950" end="1958" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="2174" end="2181" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrids"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228355" wikidata="Q173288" url="?curid=1228355" title="Franck Lagorce">
<text>Franck Lagorce (born 1 September 1968) is a racing driver from France. He participated in two Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 6 November 1994. He scored no championship points.

==Career==
Lagorce competed in French Formula Ford between 1987 and 1989, and was runner up in the French Formula Renault Championship in 1990. He stepped up to the French Formula Three Championship in 1991 and won the title the following year. He competed in Formula 3000 for the next two years, winning four races and finishing the 1994 season in second place. He was Ligier&#x27;s test driver in 1994 and 1995 and drove in the last two races of the 1994 Formula One season when Johnny Herbert moved to Benetton to replace JJ Lehto who had been loaned to Sauber. He then became test driver for Forti Corse in 1996.

He won the Renault Spider trophy in 1996, and has since competed in production car and sportscar racing.

==Racing record==

===Complete International Formula 3000 results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races
in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Formula One results===
(key)
===24 Hours of Le Mans results===
==References==
==External links==
*Franck Lagorce Consulting </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173288" start="0" end="14" title="Franck Lagorce" label="Franck Lagorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="44" end="57" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="94" end="105" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437649" start="221" end="233" title="Formula Ford" label="Formula Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838167" start="282" end="317" title="Championnat de France Formula Renault 2.0" label="French Formula Renault Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q947270" start="348" end="381" title="French Formula Three Championship" label="French Formula Three Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q744289" start="443" end="455" title="International Formula 3000" label="Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q521529" start="517" end="528" title="1994 Formula 3000 season" label="1994 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220251" start="553" end="559" title="Equipe Ligier" label="Ligier"/>
<link wikidata="Q69713" start="635" end="658" title="1994 Formula One season" label="1994 Formula One season"/>
<link wikidata="Q172751" start="664" end="678" title="Johnny Herbert" label="Johnny Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q171329" start="688" end="696" title="Benetton Formula" label="Benetton"/>
<link wikidata="Q172979" start="708" end="716" title="JJ Lehto" label="JJ Lehto"/>
<link wikidata="Q64506339" start="740" end="746" title="Sauber" label="Sauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q172974" start="779" end="790" title="Forti Corse" label="Forti Corse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143864" start="812" end="826" title="Renault Spider" label="Renault Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="888" end="904" title="sportscar racing" label="sportscar racing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="977" end="980" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1109" end="1112" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228358" wikidata="Q172073" url="?curid=1228358" title="Franco Forini">
<text>Franco Forini (born 22 September 1958) is a former racing driver from Switzerland. He competed in the Italian Formula Three Championship between 1981 and 1985, winning the title in his final year in a Dallara-Volkswagen with future Formula One team Forti Corse, and finishing as runner up in the Monaco Grand Prix Formula 3 support race in the same year. He moved up to Formula 3000 in 1986 with little success. He participated in three Formula One Grands Prix, debuting on 6 September 1987. He scored no championship points.

After his brief stint in Formula One, he returned to Formula 3 in 1988 and 1989 without any further success. He later ran a transportation and shipment company in Minusio.
==Complete Formula One results==
(key) 
==References==
==External links==
*Profile at F1 Rejects</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172073" start="0" end="13" title="Franco Forini" label="Franco Forini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="51" end="64" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="70" end="81" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110061" start="102" end="136" title="Italian Formula Three Championship" label="Italian Formula Three Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157975" start="201" end="208" title="Dallara" label="Dallara"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="209" end="219" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172974" start="249" end="260" title="Forti Corse" label="Forti Corse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="296" end="313" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q744289" start="370" end="382" title="International Formula 3000" label="Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="437" end="448" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q69065" start="690" end="697" title="Minusio" label="Minusio"/>
<link wikidata="" start="733" end="736" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228359" wikidata="Q172069" url="?curid=1228359" title="Franco Rol">
<text>Franco Rol (5 June 1908 in Turin – 18 June 1977 in Rapallo) was a racing driver from Italy. He participated in five Formula One World Championship Grands Prix, debuting on 21 May 1950. He scored no championship points. He also participated in many non-championship Formula One events.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172069" start="0" end="10" title="Franco Rol" label="Franco Rol"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="27" end="32" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210098" start="51" end="58" title="Rapallo" label="Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="66" end="79" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="85" end="90" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="116" end="127" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="" start="339" end="342" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1228360" wikidata="Q172257" url="?curid=1228360" title="François Mazet">
<text>François Mazet (born 24 February 1943 in Paris) is a former racing driver from France. He participated in only one Formula One World Championship Grand Prix, finished 13th and scored no championship points.

Mazet won the French Formula Three Championship in 1969 with a Tecno, and moved to Formula Two (F2) with the Sports Motor team alongside Tim Schenken for 1970. It was not a successful move and with sponsorship from Shell Petroleum, Mazet raced Jo Siffert&#x27;s F2 Chevron when Siffert was unavailable as well as touring cars for Ford Germany. The association with Siffert led to Mazet driving the team&#x27;s March 701 at Paul Ricard in the 1971 French Grand Prix. This however, was his only attempt at Formula One.

After his racing career ended, Mazet was involved in the sponsorship of Lotus by Essex Petroleum in the 1980s.

==Complete Formula One World Championship results==
(key)
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172257" start="0" end="14" title="François Mazet" label="François Mazet"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="41" end="46" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="60" end="73" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="115" end="126" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q947270" start="222" end="255" title="French Formula Three Championship" label="French Formula Three Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172631" start="271" end="276" title="Tecno (motorsport)" label="Tecno"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="291" end="302" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q171499" start="345" end="357" title="Tim Schenken" label="Tim Schenken"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="423" end="438" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171531" start="452" end="462" title="Jo Siffert" label="Jo Siffert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071347" start="473" end="480" title="Chevron Cars Ltd" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245261" start="521" end="533" title="Touring car racing" label="touring cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q571943" start="538" end="550" title="Ford Germany" label="Ford Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="618" end="623" title="March Engineering" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="Q173930" start="624" end="627" title="March 701" label="701"/>
<link wikidata="Q171424" start="631" end="642" title="Circuit Paul Ricard" label="Paul Ricard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172032" start="650" end="672" title="1971 French Grand Prix" label="1971 French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="712" end="723" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="798" end="803" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="807" end="822" title="Essex Petroleum" label="Essex Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="891" end="894" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
