<doc id="1262063" wikidata="Q548478" url="?curid=1262063" title="Jewish culture">
<text>Jewish culture is the culture of the Jewish people, from its formation in ancient times until the current age. Judaism itself is not simply a faith-based religion, but an orthopraxy and ethnoreligion, pertaining to deed, practice, and identity. Jewish culture covers many aspects, including religion and worldviews, literature, media, and cinema, art and architecture, cuisine and traditional dress, attitudes to gender, marriage, family, social customs and lifestyles, music and dance. Some elements of Jewish culture come from within Judaism, others from the interaction of Jews with host populations, and others still from the inner social and cultural dynamics of the community. Before the 18th century, religion dominated virtually all aspects of Jewish life, and infused culture. Since the advent of secularization, wholly secular Jewish culture emerged likewise.

==History==
There has not been a political unity of Jewish society since the united monarchy. Since then Israelite populations were always geographically dispersed (see Jewish diaspora), so that by the 19th century, the Ashkenazi Jews were mainly located in Eastern and Central Europe; the Sephardi Jews were largely spread among various communities which lived in the Mediterranean region; Mizrahi Jews were primarily spread throughout Western Asia; and other populations of Jews lived in Central Asia, Ethiopia, the Caucasus, and India. (See Jewish ethnic divisions.)

While there has been communication and traffic between these Jewish communities, many Sephardic exiles blended into the Ashkenazi communities which existed in Central Europe following the Spanish Inquisition; many Ashkenazim migrated to the Ottoman Empire, giving rise to the characteristic Syrian-Jewish family name &quot;Ashkenazi&quot;; Iraqi-Jewish traders formed a distinct Jewish community in India; to some degree, many of these Jewish populations were cut off from the cultures which surrounded them by ghettoization, Muslim laws of &quot;dhimma&quot;, and the traditional discouragement of contact between Jews and members of polytheistic populations by their religious leaders.

Medieval Jewish communities in Eastern Europe continued to display distinct cultural traits over the centuries. Despite the universalist leanings of the Enlightenment (and its echo within Judaism in the Haskalah movement), many Yiddish-speaking Jews in Eastern Europe continued to see themselves as forming a distinct national group — &quot; &#x27;am yehudi&quot;, from the Biblical Hebrew – but, adapting this idea to Enlightenment values, they assimilated the concept as that of an ethnic group whose identity did not depend on religion, which under Enlightenment thinking fell under a separate category.

Constantin Măciucă writes of the existence of &quot;a differentiated but not isolated Jewish spirit&quot; permeating the culture of Yiddish-speaking Jews. This was only intensified as the rise of Romanticism amplified the sense of national identity across Europe generally. Thus, for example, members of the General Jewish Labour Bund in the late 19th and early 20th centuries were generally non-religious, and one of the historical leaders of the Bund was the child of converts to Christianity, though not a practicing or believing Christian himself.

The Haskalah combined with the Jewish Emancipation movement under way in Central and Western Europe to create an opportunity for Jews to enter secular society. At the same time, pogroms in Eastern Europe provoked a surge of migration, in large part to the United States, where some 2 million Jewish immigrants resettled between 1880 and 1920.
By 1931, shortly before The Holocaust, 92% of the World&#x27;s Jewish population was Ashkenazi in origin. Secularism originated in Europe as series of movements that militated for a new, heretofore unheard-of concept called &quot;secular Judaism&quot;. For these reasons, much of what is thought of by English-speakers and, to a lesser extent, by non-English-speaking Europeans as &quot;secular Jewish culture&quot; is, in essence, the Jewish cultural movement that evolved in Central and Eastern Europe, and subsequently brought to North America by immigrants.
During the 1940s, the Holocaust uprooted and destroyed most of the Jewish communities living in much of Europe. This, in combination with the creation of the State of Israel and the consequent Jewish exodus from Arab lands, resulted in a further geographic shift.

Defining secular culture among those who practice traditional Judaism is difficult, because the entire culture is, by definition, entwined with religious traditions: the idea of separate ethnic and religious identity is foreign to the Hebrew tradition of an &quot; &#x27;am yisrael&quot;. (This is particularly true for Orthodox Judaism.) Gary Tobin, head of the Institute for Jewish and Community Research, said of traditional Jewish culture:
&quot;The dichotomy between religion and culture doesn&#x27;t really exist. Every religious attribute is filled with culture; every cultural act filled with religiosity. Synagogues themselves are great centers of Jewish culture. After all, what is life really about? Food, relationships, enrichment ... So is Jewish life. So many of our traditions inherently contain aspects of culture. Look at the Passover Seder — it&#x27;s essentially great theater. Jewish education and religiosity bereft of culture is not as interesting.&quot;

Yaakov Malkin, Professor of Aesthetics and Rhetoric at Tel Aviv University and the founder and academic director of Meitar College for Judaism as Culture in Jerusalem, writes:
&quot;Today very many secular Jews take part in Jewish cultural activities, such as celebrating Jewish holidays as historical and nature festivals, imbued with new content and form, or marking life-cycle events such as birth, bar/bat mitzvah, marriage, and mourning in a secular fashion. They come together to study topics pertaining to Jewish culture and its relation to other cultures, in havurot, cultural associations, and secular synagogues, and they participate in public and political action coordinated by secular Jewish movements, such as the former movement to free Soviet Jews, and movements to combat pogroms, discrimination, and religious coercion. Jewish secular humanistic education inculcates universal moral values through classic Jewish and world literature and through organizations for social change that aspire to ideals of justice and charity.&quot;

In North America, the secular and cultural Jewish movements are divided into three umbrella organizations: the Society for Humanistic Judaism (SHJ), the Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations (CSJO), and The Workers Circle.

==Philosophy and religion==

Jewish philosophy includes all philosophy carried out by Jews, or in relation to the religion of Judaism. The Jewish philosophy is extended over several main eras in Jewish history, including the ancient and biblical era, medieval era and modern era (see Haskalah).

The ancient Jewish philosophy is expressed in the bible. According to Prof. Israel Efros the principles of the Jewish philosophy start in the bible, where the foundations of the Jewish monotheistic beliefs can be found, such as the belief in one god, the separation of god and the world and nature (as opposed to Pantheism) and the creation of the world. Other biblical writings that associated with philosophy are Psalms that contains invitations to admire the wisdom of God through his works; from this, some scholars suggest, Judaism harbors a Philosophical under-current and Ecclesiastes that is often considered to be the only genuine philosophical work in the Hebrew Bible; its author seeks to understand the place of human beings in the world and life&#x27;s meaning. Other writings related to philosophy can be found in the Deuterocanonical books such as Sirach and Book of Wisdom.

During the Hellenistic era, Hellenistic Judaism aspired to combine Jewish religious tradition with elements of Greek culture and philosophy. The philosopher Philo used philosophical allegory to attempt to fuse and harmonize Greek philosophy with Jewish philosophy. His work attempts to combine Plato and Moses into one philosophical system. He developed an allegoric approach of interpreting holy scriptures (the bible), in contrast to (old-fashioned) literally interpretation approaches. His allegorical exegesis was important for several Christian Church Fathers and some scholars hold that his concept of the Logos as God&#x27;s creative principle influenced early Christology. Other scholars, however, deny direct influence but say both Philo and Early Christianity borrow from a common source.

Between the Ancient era and the Middle Ages most of the Jewish philosophy concentrated around the Rabbinic literature that is expressed in the Talmud and Midrash. In the 9th century Saadia Gaon wrote the text Emunoth ve-Deoth which is the first systematic presentation and philosophic foundation of the dogmas of Judaism. The Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain included many influential Jewish philosophers such as Moses ibn Ezra, Abraham ibn Ezra, Solomon ibn Gabirol, Yehuda Halevi, Isaac Abravanel, Nahmanides, Joseph Albo, Abraham ibn Daud, Nissim of Gerona, Bahya ibn Paquda, Abraham bar Hiyya, Joseph ibn Tzaddik, Hasdai Crescas and Isaac ben Moses Arama. The most notable is Maimonides who is considered in the Jewish world to be a prominent philosopher and polymath in the Islamic and Western worlds. Outside of Spain, other philosophers are Natan&#x27;el al-Fayyumi, Elia del Medigo, Jedaiah ben Abraham Bedersi and Gersonides.

Philosophy by Jews in Modern era was expressed by philosophers, mainly in Europe, such as Baruch Spinoza founder of Spinozism, whose work included modern Rationalism and Biblical criticism and laying the groundwork for the 18th-century Enlightenment. His work has earned him recognition as one of Western philosophy&#x27;s most important thinkers; Others are Isaac Orobio de Castro, Tzvi Ashkenazi, David Nieto, Isaac Cardoso, Jacob Abendana, Uriel da Costa, Francisco Sanches and Moses Almosnino. A new era began in the 18th century with the thought of Moses Mendelssohn. Mendelssohn has been described as the &quot;&#x27;third Moses,&#x27; with whom begins a new era in Judaism,&quot; just as new eras began with Moses the prophet and with Moses Maimonides. Mendelssohn was a German Jewish philosopher to whose ideas the renaissance of European Jews, Haskalah (the Jewish Enlightenment) is indebted. He has been referred to as the father of Reform Judaism, though Reform spokesmen have been &quot;resistant to claim him as their spiritual father&quot;. Mendelssohn came to be regarded as a leading cultural figure of his time by both Germans and Jews. The Jewish Enlightenment philosophy included Menachem Mendel Lefin, Salomon Maimon and Isaac Satanow. The next 19th century comprised both secular and religious philosophy and included philosophers such as Elijah Benamozegh, Hermann Cohen, Moses Hess, Samson Raphael Hirsch, Samuel Hirsch, Nachman Krochmal, Samuel David Luzzatto, and Nachman of Breslov founder of Breslov. The 20th century included the notable philosophers Jacques Derrida, Karl Popper, Emmanuel Levinas, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Hilary Putnam, Alfred Tarski, Ludwig Wittgenstein, A. J. Ayer, Walter Benjamin, Raymond Aron, Theodor W. Adorno, Isaiah Berlin and Henri Bergson. 
==Education and politics==

A range of moral and political views is evident early in the history of Judaism, that serves to partially explain the diversity that is apparent among secular Jews who are often influenced by moral beliefs that can be found in Jewish scripture, and traditions. In recent centuries, secular Jews in Europe and the Americas have tended towards the political left, and played key roles in the birth of the 19th century&#x27;s labor movement and socialism. The biographies of women like Emma Goldman and Hannah Arendt embody complicated relationships between politics, Judaism and feminism. While Diaspora Jews have also been represented on the conservative side of the political spectrum, even politically conservative Jews have tended to support pluralism more consistently than many other elements of the political right. Some scholars attribute this to the fact that Jews are not expected to proselytize, derived from Halakha. This lack of a universalizing religion is combined with the fact that most Jews live as minorities in diaspora countries, and that no central Jewish religious authority has existed since 363 CE. Jews value education, and the value of education is strongly embedded in Jewish culture. 
==Economic activity==
In the Middle Ages, European laws prevented Jews from owning land and gave them important incentives to go into professions that non-Jewish Europeans were unwilling to undertake. During the medieval period, there was a very strong social stigma against lending money and charging interest among the Christian majority. In most of Europe until the late 18th century, and in some places to an even later date, Jews were prohibited by Roman Catholic governments (and others) from owning land. On the other hand, the Church, because of a number of Bible verses (e.g., Leviticus 25:36) forbidding usury, declared that charging any interest was against the divine law, and this prevented any mercantile use of capital by pious Christians. As the Canon law did not apply to Jews, they were not liable to the ecclesiastical punishments which were placed upon usurers by the popes. Christian rulers gradually saw the advantage of having a class of men like the Jews who could supply capital for their use without being liable to excommunication, and so the money trade of western Europe by this means fell into the hands of the Jews.

However, in almost every instance where large amounts were acquired by Jews through banking transactions the property thus acquired fell either during their life or upon their death into the hands of the king. This happened to Aaron of Lincoln in England, Ezmel de Ablitas in Navarre, Heliot de Vesoul in Provence, Benveniste de Porta in Aragon, etc. It was often for this reason that kings supported the Jews, and even objected to them becoming Christians (because in that case their fortunes earned by usury could not be seized by the crown after their deaths). Thus, both in England and in France the kings demanded to be compensated by the church for every Jew converted. This type of royal trickery was one factor in creating the stereotypical Jewish role of banker and/or merchant.

As a modern system of capital began to develop, loans became necessary for commerce and industry. Jews were able to gain a foothold in the new field of finance by providing these services: as non-Catholics, they were not bound by the ecclesiastical prohibition against &quot;usury&quot;; and in terms of Judaism itself, Hillel had long ago re-interpreted the Torah&#x27;s ban on charging interest, allowing interest when it is needed to make a living.

==Science and technology==
The strong Jewish tradition of religious scholarship often left Jews well prepared for secular scholarship. In some times and places, this was countered by banning Jews from studying at universities, or admitting them only in limited numbers (see Jewish quota). Over the centuries, Jews have been poorly represented among land-holding classes, but far better represented in academia, professions, finance, commerce and many scientific fields. The strong representation of Jews in science and academia is evidenced by the fact that 193 persons known to be Jews or of Jewish ancestry have been awarded the Nobel Prize, accounting for 22% of all individual recipients worldwide between 1901 and 2014. Of whom, 26% in physics, 22% in chemistry and 27% in Physiology or Medicine. In the fields of mathematics and computer science, 31% of Turing Award recipients and 27% of Fields Medal in mathematics were or are Jewish.

The early Jewish activity in science can be found in the Hebrew Bible where some of the books contain descriptions of the physical world. Biblical cosmology provides sporadic glimpses that may be stitched together to form a Biblical impression of the physical universe. There have been comparisons between the Bible, with passages such as from the Genesis creation narrative, and the astronomy of classical antiquity more generally. The Bible also contains various cleansing rituals. One suggested ritual, for example, deals with the proper procedure for cleansing a leper (). It is a fairly elaborate process, which is to be performed after a leper was already healed of leprosy (), involving extensive cleansing and personal hygiene, but also includes sacrificing a bird and lambs with the addition of using their blood to symbolize that the afflicted has been cleansed.

The Torah proscribes Intercropping (Lev. 19:19, Deut 22:9), a practice often associated with sustainable agriculture and organic farming in modern agricultural science. The Mosaic code has provisions concerning the conservation of natural resources, such as trees () and birds ().

During Medieval era astronomy was a primary field among Jewish scholars and was widely studied and practiced. Prominent astronomers included Abraham Zacuto who published in 1478 his Hebrew book &quot;Ha-hibbur ha-gadol&quot; where he wrote about the Solar System, charting the positions of the Sun, Moon and five planets. His work served Portugal&#x27;s exploration journeys and was used by Vasco da Gama and also by Christopher Columbus. The lunar crater &quot;Zagut&quot; is named after Zacuto&#x27;s name. The mathematician and astronomer Abraham bar Hiyya Ha-Nasi authored the first European book to include the full solution to the quadratic equation x2 – ax + b = 0, and influenced the work of Leonardo Fibonacci. Bar Hiyya proved by the method of indivisibles the following equation for any circle: S = LxR/2, where S is the surface area, L is the circumference length and R is radius.

Garcia de Orta, Portuguese Renaissance Jewish physician, was a pioneer of Tropical medicine. He published his work Colóquios dos simples e drogas da India in 1563, which deals with a series of substances, many of them unknown or the subject of confusion and misinformation in Europe at this period. He was the first European to describe Asiatic tropical diseases, notably cholera; he performed an autopsy on a cholera victim, the first recorded autopsy in India. Bonet de Lattes known chiefly as the inventor of an astronomical ring-dial by means of which solar and stellar altitudes can be measured and the time determined with great precision by night as well as by day. Other related personalities are Abraham ibn Ezra, whose the Moon crater &quot;Abenezra&quot; named after, David Gans, Judah ibn Verga, Mashallah ibn Athari an astronomer, The crater &quot;Messala&quot; on the Moon is named after him.

Albert Einstein was a German-born theoretical physicist and is considered one of the most prominent scientists in history, often regarded as the &quot;father of modern physics&quot;. His revolutionary work on the relativity theory transformed theoretical physics and astronomy during the 20th century. When first published, relativity superseded a 200-year-old theory of mechanics created primarily by Isaac Newton. In the field of physics, relativity improved the science of elementary particles and their fundamental interactions, along with ushering in the nuclear age. With relativity, cosmology and astrophysics predicted extraordinary astronomical phenomena such as neutron stars, black holes, and gravitational waves.
Einstein formulated the well-known Mass–energy equivalence, &quot;E = mc2&quot;, and explained the photoelectric effect. His work also effected and influenced a large variety of fields of physics including the Big Bang theory (Einstein&#x27;s General relativity influenced Georges Lemaître), Quantum mechanics and nuclear energy.

The Manhattan Project was a research and development project that produced the first atomic bombs during World War II and many Jewish scientists had a significant role in the project. The theoretical physicist Robert Oppenheimer, often considered the &quot;father of the atomic bomb&quot;, was chosen to direct the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos National Laboratory in 1942. The physicist Leó Szilárd, that conceived the nuclear chain reaction; Edward Teller, &quot;the father of the hydrogen bomb&quot; and Stanislaw Ulam; Eugene Wigner contributed to theory of Atomic nucleus and Elementary particle; Hans Bethe whose work included Stellar nucleosynthesis and was head of the Theoretical Division at the secret Los Alamos laboratory; Richard Feynman, Niels Bohr, Victor Weisskopf and Joseph Rotblat.

The mathematician and physicist Alexander Friedmann pioneered the theory that universe was expanding governed by a set of equations he developed now known as the Friedmann equations. Arno Allan Penzias, the physicist and radio astronomer co-discoverer of the cosmic microwave background radiation, which helped establish the Big Bang theory, the scientists Robert Herman and Ralph Alpher had also worked on that field. In quantum mechanics Jewish role was significant as well and many of most influential figures and pioneers of the theory were Jewish: Niels Bohr and his work on the atom structure, Max Born (Schrödinger equation), Wolfgang Pauli, Richard Feynman (Quantum chromodynamics), Fritz London work on London dispersion force and London equations, Walter Heitler and Julian Schwinger work on Quantum electrodynamics, Asher Peres a pioneer in Quantum information, David Bohm (Quantum potential).

Sigmund Freud, known as the father of psychoanalysis, is one of the most influential scientists of the 20th century. In creating psychoanalysis, a clinical method for treating psychopathology through dialogue between a patient and a psychoanalyst, Freud developed therapeutic techniques such as the use of free association and discovered transference, establishing its central role in the analytic process. Freud&#x27;s redefinition of sexuality to include its infantile forms led him to formulate the Oedipus complex as the central tenet of psychoanalytical theory. His analysis of dreams as wish-fulfillments provided him with models for the clinical analysis of symptom formation and the mechanisms of repression as well as for elaboration of his theory of the unconscious as an agency disruptive of conscious states of mind. Freud postulated the existence of libido, an energy with which mental processes and structures are invested and which generates erotic attachments, and a death drive, the source of repetition, hate, aggression and neurotic guilt.

John von Neumann, a mathematician and physicist, made major contributions to a number of fields, including foundations of mathematics, functional analysis, ergodic theory, geometry, topology, numerical analysis, quantum mechanics, hydrodynamics and game theory. In made also a major work with computing and the development of the computer, he suggested and described a computer architecture called Von Neumann architecture and worked on linear programming, self-replicating machines, stochastic computing), and statistics. Emmy Noether was an influential mathematician known for her groundbreaking contributions to abstract algebra and theoretical physics. Described by many prominent scientists as the most important woman in the history of mathematics, she revolutionized the theories of rings, fields, and algebras. In physics, Noether&#x27;s theorem explains the fundamental connection between symmetry and conservation laws.

More remarkable contributors include Heinrich Hertz and Steven Weinberg in Electromagnetism; Carl Sagan, his contributions were central to the discovery of the high surface temperatures of Venus and known for his contributions to the scientific research of extraterrestrial life; Felix Hausdorff (founder of topology); Edward Witten (M-theory); Vitaly Ginzburg and Lev Landau (Ginzburg–Landau theory); Yakir Aharonov (Aharonov–Bohm effect); Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen (EPR paradox); Moshe Carmeli (Gauge theory). Rudolf Lipschitz (Lipschitz continuity); Paul Cohen (Continuum hypothesis, Axiom of choice); Laurent Schwartz (theory of distribution); Grigory Margulis (Lie group); Richard M. Karp (Theory of computation); Adi Shamir (RSA, cryptography); Judea Pearl (Artificial intelligence, Bayesian network); Max Newman (Colossus computer); Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi (Jacobi elliptic functions, Jacobian matrix and determinant, Jacobi symbol). Sidney Altman (Molecular biology, RNA); Melvin Calvin (Calvin Cycle); Otto Wallach (Alicyclic compound); Paul Berg (biochemistry of nucleic acids); Lazăr Edeleanu (synthesis of amphetamine); Ada Yonath (Crystallography, structure of the ribosome); Dan Shechtman (Quasicrystal); Julius Axelrod and Bernard Katz (Neurotransmitter); Elie Metchnikoff (discovery of Macrophage); Selman Waksman (discovery of Streptomycin); Rosalind Franklin (DNA); Carl Djerassi (the pill); Stephen Jay Gould (Evolutionary biology); Baruch Samuel Blumberg (Hepatitis B virus); Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin (developers of the Polio vaccines); Paul Ehrlich (discovery of the Blood–brain barrier); In fields such as psychology and neurology: Otto Rank, Viktor Frankl, Stanley Milgram and Solomon Asch; linguistics: Noam Chomsky, Franz Boas, Roman Jakobson, Edward Sapir, Joseph Greenberg; and sociology: Theodor Adorno, Nathan Glazer, Erving Goffman, Georg Simmel.
Beside Scientific discoveries and researches, Jews have created significant and influential innovations in a large variety of fields such as the listed samples: 
Siegfried Marcus- automobile pioneer, inventor of the first petroleum-powered car (56 years after the first internal combustion car); Emile Berliner- developer of the disc record phonograph; Mikhail Gurevich- co-inventor of the MIG aircraft; Theodore Maiman- inventor of the laser; Robert Adler- inventor of the wireless remote control for televisions; Edwin H. Land – inventor of Land Camera; Bob Kahn- inventor of TCP and IP; Bram Cohen- creator of Bittorent; Sergei Brin and Larry Page- creators of Google; Laszlo Biro – Ballpoint pen; Simcha Blass- Drip irrigation; Lee Felsenstein – designer of Osborne 1; Zeev Suraski and Andi Gutmans co-creators of PHP and founders of Zend Technologies; Ralph H. Baer, &quot;The Father of Video Games&quot;.

==Literature and poetry==
In some places where there have been relatively high concentrations of Jews, distinct secular Jewish subcultures have arisen. For example, ethnic Jews formed an enormous proportion of the literary and artistic life of Vienna, Austria at the end of the 19th century, or of New York City 50 years later (and Los Angeles in the mid-late 20th century). Many of these creative Jews were not particularly religious people. In general, Jewish artistic culture in various periods reflected the culture in which they lived.

Literary and theatrical expressions of secular Jewish culture may be in specifically Jewish languages such as Hebrew, Yiddish, Judeo-Tat or Ladino, or it may be in the language of the surrounding cultures, such as English or German. Secular literature and theater in Yiddish largely began in the 19th century and was in decline by the middle of the 20th century. The revival of Hebrew beyond its use in the liturgy is largely an early 20th-century phenomenon, and is closely associated with Zionism. Apart from the use of Hebrew in Israel, whether a Jewish community will speak a Jewish or non-Jewish language as its main vehicle of discourse is generally dependent on how isolated or assimilated that community is. For example, the Jews in the shtetls of Poland and the Lower East Side of New York City during the early 20th century spoke Yiddish at most times, while assimilated Jews in 19th and early 20th-century Germany spoke German, and American-born Jews in the United States speak English.

Jewish authors have both created a unique Jewish literature and contributed to the national literature of many of the countries in which they live. Though not strictly secular, the Yiddish works of authors like Sholem Aleichem (whose collected works amounted to 28 volumes) and Isaac Bashevis Singer (winner of the 1978 Nobel Prize), form their own canon, focusing on the Jewish experience in both Eastern Europe, and in America. In the United States, Jewish writers like Philip Roth, Saul Bellow, and many others are considered among the greatest American authors, and incorporate a distinctly secular Jewish view into many of their works. The poetry of Allen Ginsberg often touches on Jewish themes (notably the early autobiographical works such as &quot;Howl&quot; and &quot;Kaddish&quot;). Other famous Jewish authors that made contributions to world literature include Heinrich Heine, German poet, Miklós Radnóti, Hungarian poet, Mordecai Richler, Canadian author, Isaac Babel, Russian author, Franz Kafka, of Prague, and Harry Mulisch, whose novel &quot;The Discovery of Heaven&quot; was revealed by a 2007 poll as the &quot;Best Dutch Book Ever&quot;.
In &quot;Modern Judaism: An Oxford Guide&quot;, Yaakov Malkin, Professor of Aesthetics and Rhetoric at Tel Aviv University and the founder and academic director of Meitar College for Judaism as Culture in Jerusalem, writes:&quot; Secular Jewish culture embraces literary works that have stood the test of time as sources of aesthetic pleasure and ideas shared by Jews and non-Jews, works that live on beyond the immediate socio-cultural context within which they were created. They include the writings of such Jewish authors as Sholem Aleichem, Itzik Manger, Isaac Bashevis Singer, Philip Roth, Saul Bellow, S.Y. Agnon, Isaac Babel, Martin Buber, Isaiah Berlin, Haim Nahman Bialik, Yehuda Amichai, Amos Oz, A.B. Yehoshua, and David Grossman. It boasts masterpieces that have had a considerable influence on all of western culture, Jewish culture included – works such as those of Heinrich Heine, Gustav Mahler, Leonard Bernstein, Marc Chagall, Jacob Epstein, Ben Shahn, Amedeo Modigliani, Franz Kafka, Max Reinhardt (Goldman), Ernst Lubitsch, and Woody Allen.&quot;

Other notable contributors are Isaac Asimov author of the &quot;Foundation series&quot; and others such as &quot;I, robot&quot;, &quot;Nightfall&quot; and &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot;; Joseph Heller (&quot;Catch-22&quot;); R.L. Stine (&quot;Goosebumps&quot; series); J. D. Salinger (&quot;The Catcher in the Rye&quot;); Michael Chabon (&quot;The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp; Clay&quot;, &quot;The Yiddish Policemen&#x27;s Union&quot;); Marcel Proust (&quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot;); Arthur Miller (&quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; and &quot;The Crucible&quot;); Will Eisner (&quot;A Contract with God&quot;); Shel Silverstein (&quot;The Giving Tree&quot;); Arthur Koestler (&quot;Darkness at Noon&quot;, &quot;The Thirteenth Tribe&quot;); Saul Bellow (&quot;Herzog&quot;); The historical novel series &quot;The Accursed Kings&quot; by Maurice Druon is an inspiration for George R. R. Martin&#x27;s &quot;A Song of Ice and Fire&quot; novels.

Among recipient of Nobel Prize in Literature, 13% were or are Jewish.

Another aspect of Jewish literature is the ethical, called &quot;Musar literature&quot;. This literature has been composed by both religious and secular authors.

Hebrew poetry is expressed by various of poets in different eras of Jewish history. Biblical poetry is related to the poetry in biblical times as it expressed in the Hebrew Bible and Jewish sacred texts. In medieval times the Jewish poetry was mainly expressed by piyyutim and several poets such as Yehuda Halevi, Samuel ibn Naghrillah, Solomon ibn Gabirol, Moses ibn Ezra, Abraham ibn Ezra and Dunash ben Labrat. Modern Hebrew poetry is mostly related to the era of and after the revival of the Hebrew language, pioneered by Moshe Chaim Luzzatto in the Haskalah era and succeeded by poets such as Hayim Nahman Bialik, Nathan Alterman and Shaul Tchernichovsky.

==Theatre==
===Yiddish theatre===

The Ukrainian Jew Abraham Goldfaden founded the first professional Yiddish-language theatre troupe in Iași, Romania in 1876. The next year, his troupe achieved enormous success in 
Bucharest. Within a decade, Goldfaden and others brought Yiddish theater to Ukraine, Russia, Poland, Germany, New York City, and other cities with significant Ashkenazic populations. Between 1890 and 1940, over a dozen Yiddish theatre groups existed in New York City alone, in the Yiddish Theater District, performing original plays, musicals, and Yiddish translations of theatrical works and opera. Perhaps the most famous of Yiddish-language plays is &quot;The Dybbuk&quot; (1919) by S. Ansky.

Yiddish theater in New York in the early 20th century rivalled English-language theater in quantity and often surpassed it in quality. A 1925 &quot;New York Times&quot; article remarks, &quot;…Yiddish theater… is now a stable American institution and no longer dependent on immigration from Eastern Europe. People who can neither speak nor write Yiddish attend Yiddish stage performances and pay Broadway prices on Second Avenue.&quot; This article also mentions other aspects of a New York Jewish cultural life &quot;in full flower&quot; at that time, among them the fact that the extensive New York Yiddish-language press of the time included seven daily newspapers.

In fact, however, the next generation of American Jews spoke mainly English to the exclusion of Yiddish; they brought the artistic energy of Yiddish theater into the American theatrical mainstream, but usually in a less specifically Jewish form.

Yiddish theater, most notably Moscow State Jewish Theater directed by Solomon Mikhoels, also played a prominent role in the arts scene of the Soviet Union until Stalin&#x27;s 1948 reversal in government policy toward the Jews. (See Rootless cosmopolitan, Night of the Murdered Poets.)

Montreal&#x27;s Dora Wasserman Yiddish Theatre continues to thrive after 50 years of performance.

===European theatre===
From their Emancipation to World War II, Jews were very active and sometimes even dominant in certain forms of European theatre, and after the Holocaust many Jews continued to that cultural form. For example, in pre-Nazi Germany, where Nietzsche asked &quot;What good actor of today is not Jewish?&quot;, acting, directing and writing positions were often filled by Jews. Both MacDonald and Jewish Tribal Review would generally be counted as antisemitic sources, but reasonably careful in their factual claims. &quot;In Imperial Berlin, Jewish artists could be found in the forefront of the performing arts, from high drama to more popular forms like cabaret and revue, and eventually film. Jewish audiences patronized innovative theater, regardless of whether they approved of what they saw.&quot; The British historian Paul Johnson, commenting on Jewish contributions to European culture at the Fin de siècle, writes that
The area where Jewish influence was strongest was the theatre, especially in Berlin. Playwrights like Carl Sternheim, Arthur Schnitzler, Ernst Toller, Erwin Piscator, Walter Hasenclever, Ferenc Molnár and Carl Zuckmayer, and influential producers like Max Reinhardt, appeared at times to dominate the stage, which tended to be modishly left-wing, pro-republican, experimental and sexually daring. But it was certainly not revolutionary, and it was cosmopolitan rather than Jewish.
Jews also made similar, if not as massive, contributions to theatre and drama in Austria, Britain, France, and Russia (in the national languages of those countries). Jews in Vienna, Paris and German cities found cabaret both a popular and effective means of expression, as German cabaret in the Weimar Republic &quot;was mostly a Jewish art form&quot;. The involvement of Jews in Central European theatre was halted during the rise of the Nazis and the purging of Jews from cultural posts, though many emigrated to Western Europe or the United States and continued working there.

===English-language theatre===

In the early 20th century the traditions of New York&#x27;s vibrant Yiddish Theatre District both rivaled and fed into Broadway. In the English-speaking theatre Jewish émigrés brought novel theatrical ideas from Europe, such as the theatrical realist movement and the philosophy of Konstantin Stanislavski, whose teachings would influence many Jewish American acting teachers such as the Yiddish theatre-trained acting theorist Stella Adler. Jewish immigrants were instrumental in the creation and development of the genre of musical theatre and earlier forms of theatrical entertainment in America, and would innovate the new, distinctly American, art form, the Broadway musical. 
Brandeis University Professor Stephen J. Whitfield has commented that &quot;More so than behind the screen, the talent behind the stage was for over half a century virtually the monopoly of one ethnic group. That is... [a] feature which locates Broadway at the center of Jewish culture&quot;. New York University Professor Laurence Maslon says that &quot;There would be no American musical without Jews… Their influence is corollary to the influence of black musicians on jazz; there were as many Jews involved in the form&quot;. Other writers, such as Jerome Caryn, have noted that musical theatre and other forms of American entertainment are uniquely indebted to the contributions of Jewish Americans, since &quot;there might not have been a modern Broadway without the &quot;Asiatic horde&quot; of comedians, gossip columnists, songwriters, and singers that grew out of the ghetto, whether it was on the Lower East Side, Harlem (a Jewish ghetto before it was a black one), Newark, or Washington, D.C.&quot; Likewise, in the analysis of Aaron Kula, director of The Klezmer Company,
...the Jewish experience has always been best expressed by music, and Broadway has always been an integral part of the Jewish American experience... The difference is that one can expand the definition of &quot;Jewish Broadway&quot; to include an interdisciplinary roadway with a wide range of artistic activities packed onto one avenue—theatre, opera, symphony, ballet, publishing companies, choirs, synagogues and more. This vibrant landscape reflects the life, times and creative output of the Jewish American artist.

In the 19th and early 20th centuries the European operetta, a precursor the musical, often featured the work of Jewish composers such as Paul Abraham, Leo Ascher, Edmund Eysler, Leo Fall, Bruno Granichstaedten, Jacques Offenbach, Emmerich Kalman, Sigmund Romberg, Oscar Straus and Rudolf Friml; the latter four eventually moved to the United States and produced their works on the New York stage. One of the librettists for Bizet&#x27;s &quot;Carmen&quot; (not an operetta proper but rather a work of the earlier Opéra comique form) was the Jewish Ludovic Halévy, niece of composer Fromental Halévy (Bizet himself was not Jewish but he married the elder Halevy&#x27;s daughter, many have suspected that he was the descendant of Jewish converts to Christianity, and others have noticed Jewish-sounding intervals in his music). The Viennese librettist Victor Leon summarized the connection of Jewish composers and writers with the form of operetta: &quot;The audience for operetta wants to laugh beneath tears—and that is exactly what Jews have been doing for the last two thousand years since the destruction of Jerusalem&quot;. Another factor in the evolution of musical theatre was vaudeville, and during the early 20th century the form was explored and expanded by Jewish comedians and actors such as Jack Benny, Fanny Brice, Eddie Cantor, The Marx Brothers, Anna Held, Al Jolson, Molly Picon, Sophie Tucker and Ed Wynn. During the period when Broadway was monopolized by revues and similar entertainments, Jewish producer Florenz Ziegfeld dominated the theatrical scene with his Follies.

By 1910 Jews (the vast majority of them immigrants from Eastern Europe) already composed a quarter of the population of New York City, and almost immediately Jewish artists and intellectuals began to show their influence on the cultural life of that city, and through time, the country as a whole. Likewise, while the modern musical can best be described as a fusion of operetta, earlier American entertainment and African-American culture and music, as well as Jewish culture and music, the actual authors of the first &quot;book musicals&quot; were the Jewish Jerome Kern, Oscar Hammerstein II, George and Ira Gershwin, George S. Kaufman and Morrie Ryskind. From that time until the 1980s a vast majority of successful musical theatre composers, lyricists, and book-writers were Jewish (a notable exception is the Protestant Cole Porter, who acknowledged that the reason he was so successful on Broadway was that he wrote what he called &quot;Jewish music&quot;). Rodgers and Hammerstein, Frank Loesser, Lerner and Loewe, Stephen Sondheim, Leonard Bernstein, Stephen Schwartz, Kander and Ebb and dozens of others during the &quot;Golden Age&quot; of musical theatre were Jewish. Since the Tony Award for Best Original Score was instituted in 1947, approximately 70% of nominated scores and 60% of winning scores were by Jewish composers. Of successful British and French musical writers both in the West End and Broadway, Claude-Michel Schönberg and Lionel Bart are Jewish, among others.

One explanation of the affinity of Jewish composers and playwrights to the musical is that &quot;traditional Jewish religious music was most often led by a single singer, a cantor while Christians emphasize choral singing.&quot;
Many of these writers used the musical to explore issues relating to assimilation, the acceptance of the outsider in society, the racial situation in the United States, the overcoming of obstacles through perseverance, and other topics pertinent to Jewish Americans and Western Jews in general, often using subtle and disguised stories to get this point across. For example, Kern, Rodgers, Hammerstein, the Gershwins, Harold Arlen and Yip Harburg wrote musicals and operas aiming to normalize societal toleration of minorities and urging racial harmony; these works included &quot;Show Boat&quot;, &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot;, &quot;Finian&#x27;s Rainbow&quot;, &quot;South Pacific&quot; and &quot;The King and I&quot;. Towards the end of Golden Age, writers also began to openly and overtly tackle Jewish subjects and issues, such as &quot;Fiddler on the Roof&quot; and &quot;Rags&quot;; Bart&#x27;s &quot;Blitz!&quot; also tackles relations between Jews and Gentiles. Jason Robert Brown and Alfred Uhry&#x27;s &quot;Parade&quot; is a sensitive exploration of both antisemitism and historical American racism. The original concept that became &quot;West Side Story&quot; was set in the Lower East Side during Easter-Passover celebrations; the rival gangs were to be Jewish and Italian Catholic.

The ranks of prominent Jewish producers, directors, designers and performers include Boris Aronson, David Belasco, Joel Grey, the Minskoff family, Zero Mostel, Joseph Papp, Mandy Patinkin, the Nederlander family, Harold Prince, Max Reinhardt, Jerome Robbins, the Shubert family and Julie Taymor. Jewish playwrights have also contributed to non-musical drama and theatre, both Broadway and regional. Edna Ferber, Moss Hart, Lillian Hellman, Arthur Miller and Neil Simon are only some of the prominent Jewish playwrights in American theatrical history. Approximately 34% of the plays and musicals that have won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama were written and composed by Jewish Americans.

The Association for Jewish Theater is a contemporary organization that includes both American and international theaters that focus on theater with Jewish content. It has also expanded to include Jewish playwrights.

===Hebrew and Israeli theatre===
The earliest known Hebrew language drama was written around 1550 by a Jewish-Italian writer from Mantua. A few works were written by rabbis and Kabbalists in 17th-century Amsterdam, where Jews were relatively free from persecution and had both flourishing religious and secular Jewish cultures. All of these early Hebrew plays were about Biblical or mystical subjects, often in the form of Talmudic parables. During the post-Emancipation period in 19th-century Europe, many Jews translated great European plays such as those by Shakespeare, Molière and Schiller, giving the characters Jewish names and transplanting the plot and setting to within a Jewish context.

Modern Hebrew theatre and drama, however, began with the development of Modern Hebrew in Europe (the first Hebrew theatrical &quot;professional performance&quot; was in Moscow in 1918) and was &quot;closely linked with the Jewish national renaissance movement of the twentieth century. The historical awareness and the sense of primacy which accompanied the Hebrew theatre in its early years dictated the course of its artistic and aesthetic development&quot;. These traditions were soon transplanted to Israel. Playwrights such as Natan Alterman, Hayyim Nahman Bialik, Leah Goldberg, Ephraim Kishon, Hanoch Levin, Aharon Megged, Moshe Shamir, Avraham Shlonsky, Yehoshua Sobol and A. B. Yehoshua have written Hebrew-language plays. Themes that are obviously common in these works are the Holocaust, the Arab–Israeli conflict, the meaning of Jewishness, and contemporary secular-religious tensions within Jewish Israel. The most well-known Hebrew theatre company and Israel&#x27;s national theatre is the Habima (meaning &quot;the stage&quot; in Hebrew), which was formed in 1913 in Lithuania, and re-established in 1917 in Russia; another prominent Israeli theatre company is the Cameri Theatre, which is &quot;Israel&#x27;s first and leading repertory theatre&quot;.

===Judeo-Tat theatre===

The first theatrical event by Mountain Jews took place in December 1903, when Asaf Agarunov, a teacher and a Zionist, staged a story by Naum Shoykovich, translated from Hebrew, &quot;The Burn for Burn,&quot; and staged it in honor of schoolteacher Nagdimuna ben Simona&#x27;s (Shimunov) wedding.

In 1918, a drama studio was opened in Derbent, Soviet Union headed by Rabbi Yashaiyo Rabinovich.

In 1935, the first Soviet Union theatre opened in Derbent, which included three troupes – Russian, Mountain Jews and Turk. It was based on drama circles, which were led by Manashir and Khanum Shalumov. Initially, in the circle, men played the female roles. Later, women began to take part in the theatre. In 1939, the Judeo-Tat theatre was the winner of the festival of theatres in Dagestan.

During World War II, most of the actors were drafted into the army. Many theatre actors died in the war. In 1943, the theatre resumed its work, and in 1948 it was closed. The official reason was its unprofitability.

In the 1960s, the theatre resumed its activities and experienced its second heyday. The actress, Akhso Ilyaguevna Shalumova (1909-1985), &quot;Honored Artist of the Dagestan ASSR&quot; returned to the theatre. She played the role of &quot;(Juhuri:Шими Дербенди)&quot; - Shimi Derbendi&#x27;s wife - &quot;Shahnugor&quot;, based on the stories of writer Hizgil Avshalumov.

In the 1970s, the People&#x27;s Judeo-Tat theatre was organized. For many years, its director was Abram Avdalimov, &quot;Honored Cultural Worker of the Dagestan ASSR,&quot; singer, actor and playwright. His successor was Roman Izyaev, who was awarded the Order of the Badge of Honour for his meritorious service.

In the 1990s, the Judeo-Tat theatre experienced another crisis: it rarely held performances and did not have any premieres. Only in 2000, when it became a municipal theater, was it able to resume its activity. From 2000 to 2002, the theatre was headed by actor and musician Raziil Semenovich Ilyaguev (1945-2016), &quot;Honored Worker of Culture of the Republic of Dagestan.&quot; For the next two years the theatre was headed by Alesya Isakova.

In 2004, Lev Yakovlevich Manakhimov (1950-2021), &quot;Honored Artist of the Republic of Dagestan,&quot; became the artistic director of the theatre. After the death of Manakhimov, Boris Yudaev became the head of the theatre.

==Cinema==

In the era when Yiddish theatre was still a major force in the world of theatre, over 100 films were made in Yiddish. Many are now lost. Prominent films included &quot;Shulamith&quot; (1931), the first Yiddish musical on film &quot;His Wife&#x27;s Lover&quot; (1931), &quot;A Daughter of Her People&quot; (1932), the anti-Nazi film &quot;The Wandering Jew&quot; (1933), &quot;The Yiddish King Lear&quot; (1934), &quot;Shir Hashirim&quot; (1935), the biggest Yiddish film hit of all time &quot;Yidl Mitn Fidl&quot; (1936), &quot;Where Is My Child?&quot; (1937), &quot;Green Fields&quot; (1937), &quot;Dybuk&quot; (1937), &quot;The Singing Blacksmith&quot; (1938), &quot;Tevya&quot; (1939), &quot;Mirele Efros&quot; (1939), &quot;Lang ist der Weg&quot; (1948), and &quot;God, Man and Devil&quot; (1950).

The roster of Jewish entrepreneurs in the English-language American film industry is legendary: Samuel Goldwyn, Louis B. Mayer, the Warner Brothers, David O. Selznick, Marcus Loew, and Adolph Zukor, Fox to name just a few, and continuing into recent times with such industry giants as super-agent Michael Ovitz, Michael Eisner, Lew Wasserman, Jeffrey Katzenberg, Steven Spielberg, and David Geffen. However, few of these brought a specifically Jewish sensibility either to the art of film or, with the sometime exception of Spielberg, to their choice of subject matter. The historian Eric Hobsbawm described the situation as follows: 
A more specifically Jewish sensibility can be seen in the films of the Marx Brothers, Mel Brooks, or Woody Allen; other examples of specifically Jewish films from the Hollywood film industry are the Barbra Streisand vehicle &quot;Yentl&quot; (1983), or John Frankenheimer&#x27;s &quot;The Fixer&quot; (1968). More recently, &quot;Call Me By Your Name&quot; (2017) can be given as an example of a movie with Jewish sensibility. Jewish film festivals are nowadays conducted in many major cities around the world as vehicles of introducing such films to wider audiences, including among others the Boston JFF, San Francisco JFF, Jerusalem JFF, etc.

==Radio and television==

The first radio chains, the Radio Corporation of America and the Columbia Broadcasting System, were created by the Jewish American David Sarnoff and William S. Paley, respectively. These Jewish innovators were also among the first producers of televisions, both black-and-white and color. Among the Jewish immigrant communities of America there was also a thriving Yiddish language radio, with its &quot;golden age&quot; from the 1930s to the 1950s.

Although there is little specifically Jewish television in the United States (National Jewish Television, largely religious, broadcasts only three hours a week), Jews have been involved in American television from its earliest days. From Sid Caesar and Milton Berle to Joan Rivers, Gilda Radner, and Andy Kaufman to Billy Crystal to Jerry Seinfeld, Jewish stand-up comedians have been icons of American television. Other Jews that held a prominent role in early radio and television were Eddie Cantor, Al Jolson, Jack Benny, Walter Winchell and David Susskind. More figures are Larry King, Michael Savage and Howard Stern. In the analysis of Paul Johnson, &quot;The Broadway musical, radio and TV were all examples of a fundamental principle in Jewish diaspora history: Jews opening up a completely new field in business and culture, a &quot;tabula rasa&quot; on which to set their mark, before other interests had a chance to take possession, erect guild or professional fortifications and deny them entry.&quot;

One of the first televised situation comedies, &quot;The Goldbergs&quot; was set in a specifically Jewish milieu in the Bronx. While the overt Jewish milieu of &quot;The Goldbergs&quot; was unusual for an American television series, there were a few other examples, such as &quot;Brooklyn Bridge&quot; (1991–1993) and Bridget Loves Bernie. Jews have also played an enormous role among the creators and writers of television comedies: Woody Allen, Mel Brooks, Selma Diamond, Larry Gelbart, Carl Reiner, and Neil Simon all wrote for Sid Caesar; Reiner&#x27;s son Rob Reiner worked with Norman Lear on &quot;All in the Family&quot; (which often engaged antisemitism and other issues of prejudice); Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld created the hit sitcom &quot;Seinfeld&quot;, Lorne Michaels, Al Franken, Rosie Shuster, and Alan Zweibel of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; breathed new life into the variety show in the 1970s.

More recently, American Jews have been instrumental to &quot;novelistic&quot; television series such as &quot;The Wire&quot; and &quot;The Sopranos&quot;. Variously acclaimed as one of the greatest television series of all time, &quot;The Wire&quot; was created by David Simon. Simon also served as executive producer, head writer, and show runner. Matthew Weiner produced the fifth and sixth seasons of &quot;The Sopranos&quot; and later created &quot;Mad Men&quot;.
More remarkable contributors are David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, creators of &quot;Game of Thrones&quot; TV series; Ron Leavitt co-creator of &quot;Married... with Children&quot;; Damon Lindelof and J. J. Abrams, co-creators of &quot;Lost&quot;; David Crane and Marta Kauffman, creators of &quot;Friends&quot;; Tim Kring creator of &quot;Heroes&quot;; Sydney Newman co-creator of &quot;Doctor Who&quot;; Darren Star, creator &quot;Sex and the City&quot; and &quot;Melrose Place&quot;; Aaron Spelling, co-creator of &quot;Beverly Hills, 90210&quot;; Chuck Lorre, co-creator of &quot;The Big Bang Theory&quot; and &quot;Two and a Half Men&quot;; Gideon Raff, creator of &quot;Prisoners of War&quot; which &quot;Homeland&quot; is based on; Aaron Ruben and Sheldon Leonard co-creators of &quot;The Andy Griffith Show&quot;; Don Hewitt creator of &quot;60 Minutes&quot;; Garry Shandling, co-creator of &quot;The Larry Sanders Show&quot;; Ed. Weinberger, co-creator of &quot;The Cosby Show&quot;; David Milch, creator of &quot;Deadwood&quot;; Steven Levitan, co-creator of &quot;Modern Family&quot;; Dick Wolf, creator of &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot;; David Shore, creator &quot;House&quot;; Max Mutchnick and David Kohan creators of &quot;Will &amp; Grace&quot;; Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis creators of &quot;Once Upon a Time (TV Series)&quot;. There is also a significant role of Jews in acting by actors such as Sarah Jessica Parker, William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy, Mila Kunis, Zac Efron, Hank Azaria, David Duchovny, Fred Savage, Zach Braff, Noah Wyle, Adam Brody, Katey Sagal, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Alyson Hannigan, Michelle Trachtenberg, David Schwimmer, Lisa Kudrow and Mayim Bialik.

==Music==
Jewish musical contributions also tend to reflect the cultures of the countries in which Jews live, the most notable examples being classical and popular music in the United States and Europe. Some music, however, is unique to particular Jewish communities, such as Israeli music, Israeli folk music, Klezmer, Sephardic and Ladino music, and Mizrahi music.

===Classical music===
Before Emancipation, virtually all Jewish music in Europe was sacred music, with the exception of the performances of klezmorim during weddings and other occasions. The result was a lack of a Jewish presence in European classical music until the 19th century, with a very few exceptions, normally enabled by specific aristocratic protection, such as Salamone Rossi and Claude Daquin (the work of the former is considered the beginning of &quot;Jewish art music&quot;). After Jews were admitted to mainstream society in England (gradually after their return in the 17th century), France, Austria-Hungary, the German Empire, and Russia (in that order), the Jewish contribution to the European music scene steadily increased, but in the form of mainstream European music, not specifically Jewish music. Notable examples of Jewish Romantic composers (by country) are Charles-Valentin Alkan, Paul Dukas and Fromental Halevy from France, Josef Dessauer, Karl Goldmark and Gustav Mahler from Bohemia (most Austrian Jews during this time were native not to what is today Austria but the outer provinces of the Empire), Felix Mendelssohn and Giacomo Meyerbeer from Germany, and Anton and Nikolai Rubinstein from Russia. Singers included John Braham and Giuditta Pasta. There were very many notable Jewish violin and pianist virtuosi, including Joseph Joachim, Ferdinand David, Carl Tausig, Henri Herz, Leopold Auer, Jascha Heifetz, and Ignaz Moscheles. During the 20th century the number of Jewish composers and notable instrumentalists increased, as did their geographical distribution. Sample Jewish 20th-century composers include Arnold Schoenberg and Alexander von Zemlinsky from Austria, Hanns Eisler and Kurt Weill from Germany, Viktor Ullmann and Jaromír Weinberger from Bohemia and later the Czech Republic (the former perished at the Auschwitz extermination camps), George Gershwin and Aaron Copland from the United States, Darius Milhaud and Alexandre Tansman from France, Alfred Schnittke and Lera Auerbach from Russia, Lalo Schifrin and Mario Davidovsky from Argentina and Paul Ben-Haim and Shulamit Ran from Israel. There are some genres and forms of classical music that Jewish composers have been associated with, including notably during the Romantic period French Grand Opera. The most prolific composers of this genre included Giacomo Meyerbeer, Fromental Halévy, and the later Jacques Offenbach; Halevy&#x27;s &quot;La Juive&quot; was based on Scribe&#x27;s libretto very loosely connected to the Jewish experience.

While orchestral and operatic music works by Jewish composers would in general be considered secular, many Jewish (as well as non-Jewish) composers have incorporated Jewish themes and motives into their music. Sometimes this is done covertly, such as the klezmer band music that many critics and observers believe lies in the third movement of Mahler&#x27;s Symphony No. 1, and this type of Jewish reference was most common during the 19th century when openly displaying one&#x27;s Jewishness would most likely hamper a Jew&#x27;s chances at assimilation. During the 20th century, however, many Jewish composers wrote music with direct Jewish references and themes, e.g. David Amram (&quot;Symphony – &quot;Songs of the Soul&quot;&quot;), Leonard Bernstein (&quot;Kaddish Symphony&quot;, &quot;Chichester Psalms&quot;), Ernest Bloch (&quot;Schelomo&quot;), Arnold Schoenberg, Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco (&quot;Violin Concerto no. 2&quot;) Kurt Weill (&quot;The Eternal Road&quot;) and Hugo Weisgall (&quot;Psalm of the Instant Dove&quot;).

In the late twentieth century, prominent composers like Morton Feldman, Gyorgy Ligeti or Alfred Schnittke gave significant contributions to the history of contemporary music.

===Popular music===

The great songwriters and lyricists of American traditional popular music and jazz standards were predominantly Jewish, including Harold Arlen, Jerome Kern, George Gershwin, Frank Loesser, Richard Rodgers and Irving Berlin. Popular music as of today for the Jewish World at large mainly stems from Israeli Music, more specifically Mizrahi Music. Popular Jewish artists today include Omer Adam, Noa Kirel, Avior Malasa, A-WA, Eden Alene, Eyal Golan, Debbie Friedman, Barbra Streisand and others.

==Dance==
Deriving from Biblical traditions, Jewish dance has long been used by Jews as a medium for the expression of joy and other communal emotions. Each Jewish diasporic community developed its own dance traditions for wedding celebrations and other distinguished events. For Ashkenazi Jews in Eastern Europe, for example, dances, whose names corresponded to the different forms of klezmer music that were played, were an obvious staple of the wedding ceremony of the shtetl. Jewish dances both were influenced by surrounding Gentile traditions and Jewish sources preserved over time. &quot;Nevertheless the Jews practiced a corporeal expressive language that was highly differentiated from that of the non-Jewish peoples of their neighborhood, mainly through motions of the hands and arms, with more intricate legwork by the younger men.&quot; In general, however, in most religiously traditional communities, members of the opposite sex dancing together or dancing at times other than at these events was frowned upon.

== Sport ==

Historically, Jews were often seen as unathletic. However, sport has played a role in integrating the Jewish diaspora into its local societies. For example, in the United States, the Jewish presence in baseball was important during a major wave of immigration in the early 20th century, and sport was used to shape the assimilation and community formation of both American and British Jews.

==Humor==

Jewish humor is the long tradition of humor in Judaism dating back to the Torah and the Midrash, but generally refers to the more recent stream of verbal, frequently self-deprecating and often anecdotal humor originating in Europe. Jewish humor took root in the United States over the last hundred years, beginning with vaudeville, and continuing through radio, stand-up, film, and television. A significant number of American comedians have been or are Jewish. Notable Jewish-American comedians include Jerry Seinfeld, Larry David, Sammy Davis Jr, Rachel Dratch, Gilbert Gottfried, Ilana Glazer, Jan Murray, Julie Klausner, Don Rickles, Andy Samberg, Gene Wilder, Groucho Marx, Gianmarco Soresi, Ben Shwartz, and many others.

==Visual arts==


Despite fears by early religious communities of art being used for idolatrous purposes, Jewish &quot;sacred&quot; art is recorded in the Tanakh and extends throughout Jewish Antiquity and the Middle Ages. The Tabernacle and the two Temples in Jerusalem form the first known examples of &quot;Jewish art&quot;. During the first centuries of the Common Era, Jewish religious art also was created in regions surrounding the Mediterranean such as Syria and Greece, including frescoes on the walls of synagogues, of which the Dura Europas Synagogue was the only survivor, prior to its destruction by ISIL in 2017, as well as the Jewish catacombs in Rome.

A number of luxury pieces of gold glass from the later Roman period have Jewish motifs. Several Hellenistic-style floor mosaics have also been excavated in synagogues from Late Antiquity in Israel and Palestine, especially of the signs of the Zodiac, which was apparently acceptable in a low-status position on the floor. Some, such as that at Naaran, show evidence of a reaction against images of living creatures around 600 CE. The decoration of sarcophagi and walls at the cave cemetery at Beit She&#x27;arim shows a mixture of Jewish and Hellenistic motifs.

Middle Age Rabbinical and Kabbalistic literature also contain textual and graphic art, most famously illuminated haggadahs such as the Sarajevo Haggadah, and other manuscripts like the Nuremberg Mahzor. Some of these were illustrated by Jewish artists and some by Christians; equally some Jewish artists and craftsmen in various media worked on Christian commissions. Outside of Europe, Yemenite Jewish silversmiths developed a distinctive style of finely wrought silver that is admired for its artistry. Johnson again summarizes this sudden change from a limited participation by Jews in visual art (as in many other arts) to a large movement by them into this branch of European cultural life:
Again, the arrival of the Jewish artist was a strange phenomenon. It is true that, over the centuries, there had been many animals (though few humans) depicted in Jewish art: lions on Torah curtains, owls on Judaic coins, animals on the Capernaum capitals, birds on the rim of the fountain-basis in the 5th century Naro synagogue in Tunis; there were carved animals, too, on timber synagogues in eastern Europe – indeed the Jewish wood-carver was the prototype of the modern Jewish plastic artist. A book of Yiddish folk-ornament, printed at Vitebsk in 1920, was similar to Chagall&#x27;s own bestiary. But the resistance of pious Jews to portraying the living human image was still strong at the beginning of the 20th century.

There were few Jewish &quot;secular&quot; artists in Europe prior to the Emancipation that spread throughout Europe with the Napoleonic conquests. There were exceptions, and Salomon Adler was a prominent portrait painter in 18th-century Milan. The delay in participation in the visual arts parallels the lack of Jewish participation in European classical music until the nineteenth century, and which was progressively overcome with the rise of Modernism in the 20th century. There were many Jewish artists in the 19th century, but Jewish artistic activity boomed during the end of World War I. The Jewish artistic Renaissance has its roots in the 1901 Fifth Zionist Congress, which included an art exhibition featuring Jewish artists E.M. Lilien and Hermann Struck. The exhibition helped legitimize art as an expression of Jewish culture. According to Nadine Nieszawer, &quot;Until 1905, Jews were always plunged into their books but from the first Russian Revolution, they became emancipated, committed themselves in politics and became artists. A real Jewish cultural rebirth&quot;. Individual Jews figured in the modern artistic movements of Europe— With the exception of those living in isolated Jewish communities, most Jews listed here as contributing to secular Jewish culture also participated in the cultures of the peoples they lived with and nations they lived in. In most cases, however, the work and lives of these people did not exist in two distinct cultural spheres but rather in one that incorporated elements of both.

During the early 20th century, Jews figured particularly prominently in the École de Paris centered in the Montparnasse movement (including Chaim Soutine, Marc Chagall, Jules Pascin, Yitzhak Frenkel Frenel and Michel Kikoine), and after World War II among the abstract expressionists: Alexander Bogen, Helen Frankenthaler, Adolph Gottlieb, Philip Guston, Al Held, Lee Krasner, Barnett Newman, Milton Resnick, Jack Tworkov, Mark Rothko, and Louis Schanker, as well as among Contemporary artists, Modernists and Postmodernists. Many Russian Jews were prominent in the art of scenic design, particularly the aforementioned Chagall and Aronson, as well as the revolutionary Léon Bakst, who like the other two also painted. One Mexican Jewish artist was Pedro Friedeberg; historians disagree as to whether Frida Kahlo&#x27;s father was Jewish or Lutheran. A prominent Slovak artist Dominik Skutecký was also jewish. Among major artists Chagall may be the most specifically Jewish in his themes. But as art fades into graphic design, Jewish names and themes become more prominent: Leonard Baskin, Al Hirschfeld, Peter Max, Ben Shahn, Art Spiegelman and Saul Steinberg.

The collage artist Wallace Berman&#x27;s engagement with Hebrew reflected the Beat Generation&#x27;s wider exploration of esoteric spiritual practices such as Zen, palm reading, astrology, kabbalah and psychedelic drugs. Born on Staten Island, Berman moved to Los Angeles where the Hebrew letters on storefront windows and in Yiddish-language newspapers fascinated him. According to historian Richard Candida Smith, &quot;Berman&#x27;s interest in the Hebrew alphabet and its functions in Jewish mysticism was part of an effort to reclaim his ethnic identity.&quot; In 1989, the painter R.B. Kitaj published his &quot;First Diasporist Manifesto&quot;, a short book in which he analysed how his art was based on his alienation as a Jew born in Cleveland, Ohio and living in London. In 2007, a second illustrated stream of consciousness book followed, &quot;The Second Diasporist Manifesto.&quot;

Jews have also played a very important role in media other than painting; their involvement in sculpture came rather later, perhaps due to lingering feelings against &quot;graven images&quot;. But there were many notable Jewish sculptors in the later 19th and 20th centuries, including Moses Jacob Ezekiel (American, d 1917), Sir Jacob Epstein (American-British, d 1959), Ossip Zadkine (French, d 1967) Naum Gabo (Russian, d 1977), Oscar Nemon (Croatian, d 1985), Louise Nevelson (American, d 1988), Herbert Ferber (American, d 1991).

In photography some notable figures are André Kertész, Robert Frank, Helmut Newton, Garry Winogrand, Cindy Sherman, Steve Lehman, and Adi Nes; in installation art and street art some notable figures are Sigalit Landau, Dede, and Michal Rovner.
==Comics, cartoons, and animation==

Graphic art, as expressed in the art of comics, has been a key field for Jewish artists as well. In the Golden and Silver ages of American comic books, the Jewish role was overwhelming and a large number of the medium&#x27;s foremost creators have been Jewish.

Max Gaines was a pioneering figure in the creation of the modern comic book when in 1935 he published the first one called &quot;Famous Funnies&quot;. In 1939, he founded, with Jack Liebowitz and Harry Donenfeld, All-American Publications (the AA Group). The publication is known for the creation of several superheroes such as the original &quot;Atom, Flash, Green Lantern, Hawkman&quot;, and &quot;Wonder Woman&quot;. Donenfeld and Liebowitz were also the owners of National Allied Publications which distributed &quot;Detective Comics&quot; and &quot;Action Comics&quot;. That company was also a precursor of DC Comics.

In 1939, the pulp magazine publisher Martin Goodman formed Timely Publications, a company to be known, since the 1960s, as Marvel Comics. At Marvel, Artists such as Stan Lee, Jack Kirby, Larry Lieber and Joe Simon created a large variety of characters and cultural icons including &quot;Spider-Man, Hulk, Captain America, Iron Man, Thor, Daredevil&quot;, and the teams &quot;Fantastic Four, Avengers&quot;, &quot;X-Men&quot; (including many of its characters) and &quot;S.H.I.E.L.D.&quot;. Stan Lee attributed the Jewish role in comics to the Jewish culture.

At DC Comics Jewish role was significant as well; the character of &quot;Superman&quot;, which was created by the Jewish artists Joe Shuster and Jerry Siegel, is partly based on the biblical figure of Samson. It was also suggested the Superman is partly influenced by Moses, and other Jewish elements.
More at DC Comics are Bob Kane, Bill Finger and Martin Nodell, creators of &quot;Green Lantern, Batman&quot; and many related characters as &quot;Robin, The Joker, Riddler, Scarecrow&quot; and &quot;Catwoman&quot;; Gil Kane, co-creator of &quot;Atom&quot; and &quot;Iron Fist&quot;.
Many of those involved in the later ages of comics are also Jewish, such as Julius Schwartz, Joe Kubert, Jenette Kahn, Len Wein, Peter David, Neil Gaiman, Chris Claremont and Brian Michael Bendis. There is also a large number of Jewish characters among comics superheroes such as &quot;Magneto, Quicksilver, Kitty Pryde, The Thing, Sasquatch, Sabra, Ragman, Legion&quot;, and &quot;Moon Knight&quot;, of whom were and are influenced by events in Jewish history and elements of Jewish life.

In 1944, Max Gaines founded &quot;EC Comics&quot;. The company is known for specializing in horror fiction, crime fiction, satire, military fiction and science fiction from the 1940s through the mid-1950s, notably the &quot;Tales from the Crypt&quot; series, &quot;The Haunt of Fear&quot;, &quot;The Vault of Horror&quot;, &quot;Crime SuspenStories&quot; and &quot;Shock SuspenStories&quot;. Jewish artists that are associated with the publisher include Al Feldstein, Dave Berg, and Jack Kamen.

Will Eisner was an American cartoonist and was known as one of the earliest cartoonists to work in the American comic book industry. He is the creator of the &quot;Spirit&quot; comics series and the graphic novel &quot;A Contract with God&quot;. The Eisner Award was named in his honor, and is given to recognize achievements each year in the comics medium.

In 1952, William Gaines and Harvey Kurtzman founded &quot;Mad&quot;, an American humor magazine. It was widely imitated and influential, affecting satirical media as well as the cultural landscape of the 20th century, with editor Al Feldstein increasing readership to more than two million during its 1970s circulation peak. Other known cartoonists are Lee Falk creator of &quot;The Phantom&quot; and &quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot;; The Hebrew comics of Michael Netzer creator of Uri-On and Uri Fink creator of Zbeng!; William Steig, creator of &quot;Shrek!&quot;; Daniel Clowes, creator of &quot;Eightball&quot;; Art Spiegelman creator of graphic novel &quot;Maus&quot; and &quot;Raw&quot; (with Françoise Mouly).

In animation, there were many Jewish animators: Genndy Tartakovsky is the creator of several animation TV series such as &quot;Dexter&#x27;s Laboratory&quot; and &quot;Samurai Jack&quot;; Matt Stone co-creator of &quot;South Park&quot;; David Hilberman who helped animate &quot;Bambi&quot; and &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot;; Friz Freleng, &quot;Looney Tunes&quot;;C. H. Greenblatt,&quot;Chowder&quot;; and &quot;Harvey Beaks&quot;; Ralph Bakshi, &quot;Fritz the Cat, Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures, Wizards, The Lord of the Rings, Heavy Traffic, Coonskin, Hey Good Lookin&#x27;, Fire and Ice&quot;, and &quot;Cool World&quot;; Alex Hirsch, creator of &quot;Gravity Falls&quot;; Dave Fleischer and Lou Fleischer, founders of &quot;Fleischer Studios&quot;; Max Fleischer, animation of &quot;Betty Boop&quot;, &quot;Popeye&quot; and &quot;Superman&quot;; Rebecca Sugar, creator of Steven Universe. Several companies producing animation were founded by Jews, such as &quot;DreamWorks&quot;, which its products include &quot;Shrek, Madagascar, Kung Fu Panda&quot; and &quot;The Prince of Egypt&quot;; &quot;Warner Bros.&quot;, whose animation division is known for cartoons such as &quot;Looney Tunes, Tiny Toon Adventures, Animaniacs, Pinky and the Brain&quot; and &quot;Freakazoid!&quot; .

== Cuisine ==
Jewish cooking combines the food of many cultures in which Jews have lived, including Middle Eastern, Mediterranean, Spanish, German and Eastern European styles of cooking, all influenced by the need for food to be kosher. Thus, &quot;Jewish&quot; foods like bagels, hummus, stuffed cabbage, and blintzes all come from various other cultures. The amalgam of these foods, plus uniquely Jewish contributions like tzimmis, cholent, Malawach and Matzah balls, make up a variety of Jewish cuisine.

== Philo-Semitism ==

Philo-Semitism (also spelled &quot;philosemitism&quot;) or &quot;Judeophilia&quot; is an interest in, respect for and an appreciation, or in some cases a fetishization, of Jewish people, their history, and their culture and the influence of Judaism, particularly on the part of a gentile. Within the Jewish community, philo-Semitism includes an interest in Jewish culture and a love of things that are considered Jewish.

Very few Jews live in East Asian countries, but Jews are viewed in an especially positive light in some of them, partly owing to their shared wartime experiences during the Second World War. Examples include South Korea and China. In general, Jews are positively stereotyped as being intelligent, business savvy and committed to family values and responsibilities, but in the Western world, the first of the two aforementioned stereotypes more frequently have the negatively interpreted equivalents of guile and greed. In South Korean primary schools, students are required to read the Talmud.

==See also==
* Culture of Israel
* Visual arts in Israel
* Humanistic Judaism
* Jewish folklore
* Jewish studies
* Jews and Christmas
*&quot;Secular Culture &amp; Ideas&quot;
* Traditional Jewish chronology
* Islam in Jerusalem
* Yiddishkeit
* Islamic–Jewish relations

== References ==
==Sources==

==Further reading==
* Landa, M.J. (1926). &quot;The Jew in Drama&quot;. New York: Ktav Publishing House (1969).
* Stevens, Matthew. &quot;Jewish Film Directory: a guide to more than 1200 films of Jewish interest from 32 countries over 85 years&quot;. Trowbridge: Flicks Books, 1992 298p.
* Gabler, Neal. &quot;An Empire of Their Own: How the Jews Invented Hollywood&quot;. The Crown Publishing Group, 1988. .
* Veidlinger, Jeffrey. &quot; Jewish Public Culture in the Late Russian Empire.&quot; Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009.

==External links==

* The center for Jewish Art Collection
* The City Congregation for Humanistic Judaism
* Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations
* Global Directory of Jewish Museums
* News and reviews about Jewish literature and books
* Festival of Jewish Theater and Ideas 
* The Bezalel Narkiss Index of Jewish Art 
* Heeb – an online magazine about Jewish culture
* Gesher Galicia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q548478" start="0" end="14" title="Jewish culture" label="Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="37" end="50" title="Jewish people" label="Jewish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427367" start="171" end="181" title="orthopraxy" label="orthopraxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="186" end="199" title="Ethnoreligious group" label="ethnoreligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936584" start="347" end="350" title="Visual arts in Israel" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q470987" start="381" end="398" title="Jewish religious clothing" label="traditional dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190131" start="806" end="820" title="Jewish secularism" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190131" start="829" end="843" title="Jewish secularism" label="secular Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185305" start="948" end="963" title="Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy)" label="united monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="976" end="985" title="Israelite" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="1040" end="1055" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="1091" end="1105" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1129" end="1136" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="1161" end="1174" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="1240" end="1260" title="Mediterranean region" label="Mediterranean region"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="1262" end="1274" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="1308" end="1320" title="Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762046" start="1361" end="1373" title="History of the Jews in Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907971" start="1375" end="1383" title="History of the Jews in Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q628490" start="1389" end="1397" title="Mountain Jews" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q573598" start="1403" end="1408" title="History of the Jews in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="1415" end="1438" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="Jewish ethnic divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="1630" end="1649" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1683" end="1697" title="Ottoman Empire#Decline and modernisation (1828–1908)" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1821" end="1837" title="Indian Jews#South Asian Jews and Baghdadi Jews" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="1953" end="1959" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1968" end="1974" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="1989" end="1995" title="Dhimmi" label="dhimma"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="2077" end="2089" title="Idolatry" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2131" end="2139" title="Middle Ages" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2284" end="2297" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="2334" end="2342" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="2359" end="2366" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2739" end="2757" title="Constantin Măciucă" label="Constantin Măciucă"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="2935" end="2946" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="2970" end="2987" title="Nationalism" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q647460" start="3047" end="3073" title="General Jewish Labour Bund" label="General Jewish Labour Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="3296" end="3304" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713635" start="3323" end="3342" title="Jewish Emancipation" label="Jewish Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="3470" end="3476" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="3659" end="3672" title="The Holocaust" label="The Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q118118392" start="4339" end="4370" title="History of the State of Israel" label="creation of the State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="4390" end="4419" title="Jewish exodus from Arab lands" label="Jewish exodus from Arab lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="4782" end="4798" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110085034" start="4801" end="4811" title="Gary Tobin" label="Gary Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4825" end="4868" title="Institute for Jewish and Community Research" label="Institute for Jewish and Community Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q852395" start="5305" end="5319" title="Passover Seder" label="Passover Seder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046296" start="5440" end="5453" title="Yaakov Malkin" label="Yaakov Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319239" start="5495" end="5514" title="Tel Aviv University" label="Tel Aviv University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5556" end="5593" title="Meitar College for Judaism as Culture" label="Meitar College for Judaism as Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="6293" end="6303" title="humanism" label="humanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276240" start="6600" end="6630" title="Society for Humanistic Judaism" label="Society for Humanistic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6642" end="6682" title="Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations" label="Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859648" start="6695" end="6714" title="Workmen&amp;#x27;s Circle" label="The Workers Circle."/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="6911" end="6925" title="Jewish history" label="Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="7000" end="7008" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="7254" end="7261" title="Monotheism" label="one god"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="7325" end="7334" title="Pantheism" label="Pantheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="7344" end="7365" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="creation of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="7427" end="7433" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="7591" end="7603" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="7678" end="7690" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="7844" end="7866" title="Deuterocanonical books" label="Deuterocanonical books"/>
<link wikidata="Q155980" start="7875" end="7881" title="Sirach" label="Sirach"/>
<link wikidata="Q202135" start="7886" end="7900" title="Book of Wisdom" label="Book of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="7914" end="7929" title="Hellenistic era" label="Hellenistic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="7931" end="7950" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenistic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="8060" end="8065" title="Philo" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="8127" end="8143" title="Greek philosophy" label="Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="8408" end="8416" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="8453" end="8467" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="8515" end="8520" title="Logos" label="Logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="8571" end="8582" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="8654" end="8672" title="Early Christianity" label="Early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="8715" end="8726" title="Ancient era" label="Ancient era"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8735" end="8746" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="8801" end="8820" title="Rabbinic literature" label="Rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="8846" end="8852" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="8857" end="8864" title="Midrash" label="Midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="8885" end="8896" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777400" start="8912" end="8928" title="Emunoth ve-Deoth" label="Emunoth ve-Deoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="9006" end="9012" title="dogmas" label="dogmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508898" start="9029" end="9066" title="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain" label="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q719393" start="9121" end="9135" title="Moses ibn Ezra" label="Moses ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="9137" end="9153" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q239355" start="9155" end="9174" title="Solomon ibn Gabirol" label="Solomon ibn Gabirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q299200" start="9176" end="9189" title="Yehuda Halevi" label="Yehuda Halevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319902" start="9191" end="9206" title="Isaac Abravanel" label="Isaac Abravanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="9208" end="9218" title="Nahmanides" label="Nahmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q559622" start="9220" end="9231" title="Joseph Albo" label="Joseph Albo"/>
<link wikidata="Q330821" start="9233" end="9249" title="Abraham ibn Daud" label="Abraham ibn Daud"/>
<link wikidata="Q723531" start="9251" end="9267" title="Nissim of Gerona" label="Nissim of Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q762229" start="9269" end="9285" title="Bahya ibn Paquda" label="Bahya ibn Paquda"/>
<link wikidata="Q31439" start="9287" end="9304" title="Abraham bar Hiyya" label="Abraham bar Hiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q958426" start="9306" end="9324" title="Joseph ibn Tzaddik" label="Joseph ibn Tzaddik"/>
<link wikidata="Q528415" start="9326" end="9340" title="Hasdai Crescas" label="Hasdai Crescas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689684" start="9345" end="9366" title="Isaac ben Moses Arama" label="Isaac ben Moses Arama"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="9388" end="9398" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968384" start="9556" end="9580" title="Natan&amp;#x27;el al-Fayyumi" label="Natan&amp;#x27;el al-Fayyumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q463405" start="9582" end="9597" title="Elia del Medigo" label="Elia del Medigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q959910" start="9599" end="9626" title="Jedaiah ben Abraham Bedersi" label="Jedaiah ben Abraham Bedersi"/>
<link wikidata="Q353633" start="9631" end="9641" title="Gersonides" label="Gersonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="9666" end="9676" title="Modern era" label="Modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="9734" end="9748" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="9760" end="9769" title="Spinozism" label="Spinozism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="9798" end="9809" title="Rationalism" label="Rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="9814" end="9832" title="Biblical criticism" label="Biblical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="9880" end="9893" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="9941" end="9959" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q472987" start="10003" end="10025" title="Isaac Orobio de Castro" label="Isaac Orobio de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q244519" start="10027" end="10041" title="Tzvi Ashkenazi" label="Tzvi Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q467535" start="10043" end="10054" title="David Nieto" label="David Nieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203493" start="10056" end="10069" title="Isaac Cardoso" label="Isaac Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4054689" start="10071" end="10085" title="Jacob Abendana" label="Jacob Abendana"/>
<link wikidata="Q347893" start="10087" end="10101" title="Uriel da Costa" label="Uriel da Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q973196" start="10103" end="10120" title="Francisco Sanches" label="Francisco Sanches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915684" start="10125" end="10140" title="Moses Almosnino" label="Moses Almosnino"/>
<link wikidata="Q76997" start="10198" end="10215" title="Moses Mendelssohn" label="Moses Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="10359" end="10364" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="10386" end="10402" title="Moses Maimonides" label="Moses Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="10422" end="10432" title="German Jew" label="German Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="10497" end="10505" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="10780" end="10787" title="German people" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q557673" start="10843" end="10864" title="Menachem Mendel Lefin" label="Menachem Mendel Lefin"/>
<link wikidata="Q465763" start="10866" end="10880" title="Salomon Maimon" label="Salomon Maimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q504682" start="10885" end="10898" title="Isaac Satanow" label="Isaac Satanow"/>
<link wikidata="Q578" start="10909" end="10921" title="century" label="19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q783344" start="11004" end="11021" title="Elijah Benamozegh" label="Elijah Benamozegh"/>
<link wikidata="Q76709" start="11023" end="11036" title="Hermann Cohen" label="Hermann Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q213565" start="11038" end="11048" title="Moses Hess" label="Moses Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="11050" end="11071" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q97334" start="11073" end="11086" title="Samuel Hirsch" label="Samuel Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q85942" start="11088" end="11104" title="Nachman Krochmal" label="Nachman Krochmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391533" start="11106" end="11127" title="Samuel David Luzzatto" label="Samuel David Luzzatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q467182" start="11133" end="11151" title="Nachman of Breslov" label="Nachman of Breslov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915139" start="11163" end="11170" title="Breslov (Hasidic group)" label="Breslov"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="11223" end="11238" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="11240" end="11251" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q153034" start="11253" end="11269" title="Emmanuel Levinas" label="Emmanuel Levinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="11271" end="11290" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="11292" end="11305" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207534" start="11307" end="11320" title="Alfred Tarski" label="Alfred Tarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="11322" end="11341" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q243757" start="11343" end="11353" title="A. J. Ayer" label="A. J. Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="11355" end="11370" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Walter Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160640" start="11372" end="11384" title="Raymond Aron" label="Raymond Aron"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="11386" end="11403" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Theodor W. Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q205162" start="11405" end="11418" title="Isaiah Berlin" label="Isaiah Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42156" start="11423" end="11436" title="Henri Bergson" label="Henri Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="11813" end="11827" title="left-wing politics" label="political left"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="11890" end="11904" title="labor movement" label="labor movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="11909" end="11918" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79969" start="11950" end="11962" title="Emma Goldman" label="Emma Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="11967" end="11980" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000675" start="12211" end="12220" title="Jewish views of religious pluralism" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="12271" end="12286" title="right-wing politics" label="political right"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12359" end="12370" title="Missionary#Judaism" label="proselytize"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="12385" end="12392" title="Halakha" label="Halakha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12581" end="12587" title="Sanhedrin#Dissolution" label="363 CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="12708" end="12719" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="12932" end="12945" title="social stigma" label="social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="13133" end="13147" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41490" start="13265" end="13274" title="Leviticus" label="Leviticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="13293" end="13298" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="13405" end="13412" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="13441" end="13450" title="Canon law (Catholic Church)" label="Canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="13552" end="13559" title="usury" label="usurers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="13721" end="13736" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662608" start="14054" end="14070" title="Aaron of Lincoln" label="Aaron of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423311" start="14083" end="14099" title="Ezmel de Ablitas" label="Ezmel de Ablitas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14112" end="14128" title=":fr:Famille Héliot de Vesoul" label="Heliot de Vesoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890703" start="14142" end="14161" title="Benveniste de Porta" label="Benveniste de Porta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="14638" end="14645" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q319219" start="14936" end="14942" title="Hillel the Elder" label="Hillel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624907" start="15343" end="15355" title="Jewish quota" label="Jewish quota"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="15810" end="15817" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="15826" end="15835" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="15847" end="15869" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="15904" end="15920" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="15929" end="15941" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="15964" end="15976" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="16070" end="16082" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="16135" end="16149" title="physical world" label="physical world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566489" start="16151" end="16169" title="Biblical cosmology" label="Biblical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="16361" end="16387" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="Genesis creation narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188961" start="16580" end="16585" title="Tzaraath" label="leper"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="16891" end="16896" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q853859" start="16908" end="16921" title="Intercropping" label="Intercropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606845" start="17034" end="17054" title="agricultural science" label="agricultural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q330740" start="17310" end="17324" title="Abraham Zacuto" label="Abraham Zacuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="17351" end="17357" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="17419" end="17431" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="17560" end="17573" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="17586" end="17606" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="17612" end="17624" title="lunar crater" label="lunar crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q140418" start="17631" end="17636" title="Zagut (crater)" label="Zagut"/>
<link wikidata="Q31439" start="17711" end="17728" title="Abraham bar Hiyya" label="Abraham bar Hiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8763" start="17869" end="17887" title="Leonardo Fibonacci" label="Leonardo Fibonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q586686" start="17913" end="17935" title="method of indivisibles" label="method of indivisibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493994" start="18063" end="18077" title="Garcia de Orta" label="Garcia de Orta"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="18079" end="18089" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="18090" end="18101" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365243" start="18137" end="18154" title="Tropical medicine" label="Tropical medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150429" start="18178" end="18217" title="Colóquios dos simples e drogas da India" label="Colóquios dos simples e drogas da India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243217" start="18526" end="18541" title="Bonet de Lattes" label="Bonet de Lattes"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="18768" end="18784" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q319050" start="18814" end="18822" title="Abenezra (crater)" label="Abenezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174512" start="18842" end="18852" title="David Gans" label="David Gans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302182" start="18854" end="18869" title="Judah ibn Verga" label="Judah ibn Verga"/>
<link wikidata="Q945425" start="18871" end="18891" title="Mashallah ibn Athari" label="Mashallah ibn Athari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344521" start="18924" end="18931" title="Messala (crater)" label="Messala"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="18971" end="18986" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="19184" end="19201" title="relativity theory" label="relativity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="19226" end="19233" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="19238" end="19247" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="19332" end="19351" title="Classical mechanics" label="theory of mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="19373" end="19385" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="19447" end="19467" title="elementary particles" label="elementary particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q757669" start="19531" end="19542" title="atomic age" label="nuclear age"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="19561" end="19570" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="19575" end="19587" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="19612" end="19634" title="astronomy" label="astronomical phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="19643" end="19656" title="neutron stars" label="neutron stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="19658" end="19669" title="black holes" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="19675" end="19694" title="gravitational waves" label="gravitational waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="19731" end="19754" title="Mass–energy equivalence" label="Mass–energy equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="19795" end="19815" title="photoelectric effect" label="photoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="19906" end="19914" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="19939" end="19957" title="General relativity" label="General relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="19969" end="19985" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="19988" end="20005" title="Quantum mechanics" label="Quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="20010" end="20024" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="20031" end="20048" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="20112" end="20124" title="atomic bombs" label="atomic bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20132" end="20144" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="20215" end="20236" title="theoretical physicist" label="theoretical physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="20237" end="20255" title="Robert Oppenheimer" label="Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="20363" end="20393" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q153238" start="20417" end="20428" title="Leó Szilárd" label="Leó Szilárd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="20449" end="20471" title="nuclear chain reaction" label="nuclear chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="20473" end="20486" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="20512" end="20525" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q234357" start="20536" end="20550" title="Stanislaw Ulam" label="Stanislaw Ulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q155790" start="20552" end="20565" title="Eugene Wigner" label="Eugene Wigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="20591" end="20605" title="Atomic nucleus" label="Atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="20610" end="20629" title="Elementary particle" label="Elementary particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="20631" end="20641" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="20662" end="20685" title="Stellar nucleosynthesis" label="Stellar nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="20764" end="20779" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="20781" end="20791" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q441154" start="20793" end="20809" title="Victor Weisskopf" label="Victor Weisskopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q219982" start="20814" end="20828" title="Joseph Rotblat" label="Joseph Rotblat"/>
<link wikidata="Q205981" start="20863" end="20882" title="Alexander Friedmann" label="Alexander Friedmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="20909" end="20931" title="expanding universe" label="universe was expanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q467736" start="20993" end="21012" title="Friedmann equations" label="Friedmann equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q172877" start="21014" end="21032" title="Arno Allan Penzias" label="Arno Allan Penzias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="21052" end="21068" title="radio astronomer" label="radio astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="21090" end="21117" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="21156" end="21164" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339278" start="21188" end="21201" title="Robert Herman" label="Robert Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q142049" start="21206" end="21218" title="Ralph Alpher" label="Ralph Alpher"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="21253" end="21270" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="21384" end="21394" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="21415" end="21419" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q58978" start="21431" end="21439" title="Max Born" label="Max Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="21441" end="21461" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="21464" end="21478" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="21480" end="21495" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q238170" start="21497" end="21519" title="Quantum chromodynamics" label="Quantum chromodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q57938" start="21522" end="21534" title="Fritz London" label="Fritz London"/>
<link wikidata="Q519418" start="21543" end="21566" title="London dispersion force" label="London dispersion force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338834" start="21571" end="21587" title="London equations" label="London equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q60287" start="21589" end="21603" title="Walter Heitler" label="Walter Heitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q186465" start="21608" end="21624" title="Julian Schwinger" label="Julian Schwinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="21633" end="21656" title="Quantum electrodynamics" label="Quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q340101" start="21658" end="21669" title="Asher Peres" label="Asher Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122243" start="21683" end="21702" title="Quantum information" label="Quantum information"/>
<link wikidata="Q310765" start="21704" end="21714" title="David Bohm" label="David Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399993" start="21716" end="21733" title="Quantum potential" label="Quantum potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="21737" end="21750" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="21775" end="21789" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q624758" start="21913" end="21928" title="psychopathology" label="psychopathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054460" start="22043" end="22059" title="free association (psychology)" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q334231" start="22075" end="22087" title="transference" label="transference"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="22239" end="22254" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipus complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="22320" end="22325" title="dream" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q941796" start="22442" end="22452" title="Psychological repression" label="repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="22501" end="22512" title="unconscious mind" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q178066" start="22600" end="22606" title="libido" label="libido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570600" start="22720" end="22731" title="death drive" label="death drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="22780" end="22788" title="Neurosis" label="neurotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="22797" end="22813" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q833585" start="22904" end="22930" title="foundations of mathematics" label="foundations of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="22932" end="22951" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="22953" end="22967" title="ergodic theory" label="ergodic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="22969" end="22977" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="22979" end="22987" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="22989" end="23007" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="23028" end="23041" title="Fluid dynamics" label="hydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="23046" end="23057" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="23090" end="23099" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="23166" end="23187" title="computer architecture" label="computer architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="23195" end="23219" title="Von Neumann architecture" label="Von Neumann architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q202843" start="23234" end="23252" title="linear programming" label="linear programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766038" start="23254" end="23279" title="Von Neumann universal constructor" label="self-replicating machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933705" start="23281" end="23301" title="stochastic computing" label="stochastic computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099" start="23320" end="23332" title="Emmy Noether" label="Emmy Noether"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="23412" end="23428" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="23433" end="23452" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="23587" end="23592" title="ring (mathematics)" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="23594" end="23600" title="field (mathematics)" label="fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="23606" end="23614" title="algebra over a field" label="algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q578555" start="23628" end="23650" title="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455736" start="23695" end="23703" title="symmetry in physics" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q205805" start="23708" end="23724" title="Conservation law (physics)" label="conservation law"/>
<link wikidata="Q41257" start="23765" end="23779" title="Heinrich Hertz" label="Heinrich Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179282" start="23784" end="23799" title="Steven Weinberg" label="Steven Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="23803" end="23819" title="Electromagnetism" label="Electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="23821" end="23831" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="23917" end="23922" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="23985" end="24006" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q75856" start="24008" end="24023" title="Felix Hausdorff" label="Felix Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="24036" end="24044" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q201513" start="24047" end="24060" title="Edward Witten" label="Edward Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q232184" start="24062" end="24070" title="M-theory" label="M-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q104668" start="24073" end="24088" title="Vitaly Ginzburg" label="Vitaly Ginzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q133267" start="24093" end="24103" title="Lev Landau" label="Lev Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q900905" start="24105" end="24127" title="Ginzburg–Landau theory" label="Ginzburg–Landau theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q721892" start="24130" end="24144" title="Yakir Aharonov" label="Yakir Aharonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q400083" start="24146" end="24166" title="Aharonov–Bohm effect" label="Aharonov–Bohm effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q560982" start="24169" end="24183" title="Boris Podolsky" label="Boris Podolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q370226" start="24188" end="24200" title="Nathan Rosen" label="Nathan Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q214975" start="24202" end="24213" title="EPR paradox" label="EPR paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949243" start="24216" end="24229" title="Moshe Carmeli" label="Moshe Carmeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="24231" end="24243" title="Gauge theory" label="Gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q77322" start="24246" end="24262" title="Rudolf Lipschitz" label="Rudolf Lipschitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q652707" start="24264" end="24284" title="Lipschitz continuity" label="Lipschitz continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q216809" start="24287" end="24297" title="Paul Cohen (mathematician)" label="Paul Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="24299" end="24319" title="Continuum hypothesis" label="Continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="24321" end="24336" title="Axiom of choice" label="Axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q212081" start="24339" end="24355" title="Laurent Schwartz" label="Laurent Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q865811" start="24357" end="24379" title="Distribution (mathematics)" label="theory of distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q325705" start="24382" end="24398" title="Grigory Margulis" label="Grigory Margulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="24400" end="24409" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q92612" start="24412" end="24427" title="Richard M. Karp" label="Richard M. Karp"/>
<link wikidata="Q844718" start="24429" end="24450" title="Theory of computation" label="Theory of computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q320624" start="24453" end="24463" title="Adi Shamir" label="Adi Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="24465" end="24468" title="RSA (cryptosystem)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="24470" end="24482" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q92824" start="24485" end="24496" title="Judea Pearl" label="Judea Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="24498" end="24521" title="Artificial intelligence" label="Artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q812540" start="24523" end="24539" title="Bayesian network" label="Bayesian network"/>
<link wikidata="Q707155" start="24542" end="24552" title="Max Newman" label="Max Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q770597" start="24554" end="24571" title="Colossus computer" label="Colossus computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76564" start="24574" end="24598" title="Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi" label="Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473526" start="24600" end="24625" title="Jacobi elliptic functions" label="Jacobi elliptic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q506041" start="24627" end="24658" title="Jacobian matrix and determinant" label="Jacobian matrix and determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q241015" start="24660" end="24673" title="Jacobi symbol" label="Jacobi symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q102266" start="24676" end="24689" title="Sidney Altman" label="Sidney Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="24691" end="24708" title="Molecular biology" label="Molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="24710" end="24713" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49347" start="24716" end="24729" title="Melvin Calvin" label="Melvin Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220389" start="24731" end="24743" title="Calvin Cycle" label="Calvin Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57127" start="24746" end="24758" title="Otto Wallach" label="Otto Wallach"/>
<link wikidata="Q155368" start="24760" end="24778" title="Alicyclic compound" label="Alicyclic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q102379" start="24781" end="24790" title="Paul Berg" label="Paul Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="24808" end="24821" title="nucleic acids" label="nucleic acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q706769" start="24824" end="24838" title="Lazăr Edeleanu" label="Lazăr Edeleanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="24853" end="24864" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426" start="24867" end="24877" title="Ada Yonath" label="Ada Yonath"/>
<link wikidata="Q160398" start="24879" end="24894" title="Crystallography" label="Crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="24913" end="24921" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44111" start="24924" end="24937" title="Dan Shechtman" label="Dan Shechtman"/>
<link wikidata="Q263214" start="24939" end="24951" title="Quasicrystal" label="Quasicrystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110106" start="24954" end="24968" title="Julius Axelrod" label="Julius Axelrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4517" start="24973" end="24985" title="Bernard Katz" label="Bernard Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="24987" end="25003" title="Neurotransmitter" label="Neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q172254" start="25006" end="25022" title="Elie Metchnikoff" label="Elie Metchnikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="25037" end="25047" title="Macrophage" label="Macrophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q232308" start="25050" end="25064" title="Selman Waksman" label="Selman Waksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q192717" start="25079" end="25091" title="Streptomycin" label="Streptomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474" start="25094" end="25111" title="Rosalind Franklin" label="Rosalind Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="25113" end="25116" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q78608" start="25119" end="25132" title="Carl Djerassi" label="Carl Djerassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="25134" end="25142" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill" label="the pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="25145" end="25162" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="25164" end="25184" title="Evolutionary biology" label="Evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q105830" start="25187" end="25209" title="Baruch Samuel Blumberg" label="Baruch Samuel Blumberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="25211" end="25222" title="Hepatitis B" label="Hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q200101" start="25231" end="25241" title="Jonas Salk" label="Jonas Salk"/>
<link wikidata="Q164790" start="25246" end="25258" title="Albert Sabin" label="Albert Sabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519099" start="25278" end="25292" title="Polio vaccines" label="Polio vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="25295" end="25307" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="25326" end="25345" title="Blood–brain barrier" label="Blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="25366" end="25376" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="25381" end="25390" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q84172" start="25392" end="25401" title="Otto Rank" label="Otto Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q154723" start="25403" end="25416" title="Viktor Frankl" label="Viktor Frankl"/>
<link wikidata="Q208236" start="25418" end="25433" title="Stanley Milgram" label="Stanley Milgram"/>
<link wikidata="Q316142" start="25438" end="25450" title="Solomon Asch" label="Solomon Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="25452" end="25463" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="25465" end="25477" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="25479" end="25489" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="25491" end="25505" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="25507" end="25519" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q309997" start="25521" end="25537" title="Joseph Greenberg" label="Joseph Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="25554" end="25568" title="Theodor Adorno" label="Theodor Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q930197" start="25570" end="25583" title="Nathan Glazer" label="Nathan Glazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q314471" start="25585" end="25599" title="Erving Goffman" label="Erving Goffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q76849" start="25601" end="25613" title="Georg Simmel" label="Georg Simmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q31167" start="25777" end="25793" title="Siegfried Marcus" label="Siegfried Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124068" start="25879" end="25908" title="Francois Isaac de Rivaz" label="first internal combustion car"/>
<link wikidata="Q71004" start="25911" end="25925" title="Emile Berliner" label="Emile Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="25944" end="25955" title="disc record" label="disc record"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="25956" end="25966" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q353552" start="25968" end="25984" title="Mikhail Gurevich (aircraft designer)" label="Mikhail Gurevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q188508" start="26005" end="26017" title="Mikoyan" label="MIG aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="26019" end="26034" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="26052" end="26057" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q93664" start="26059" end="26071" title="Robert Adler" label="Robert Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q185091" start="26089" end="26112" title="TV remote" label="wireless remote control"/>
<link wikidata="Q380134" start="26130" end="26143" title="Edwin H. Land" label="Edwin H. Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856492" start="26158" end="26169" title="Land Camera" label="Land Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="26171" end="26179" title="Bob Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="26193" end="26196" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="26201" end="26203" title="Internet Protocol" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q318489" start="26205" end="26215" title="Bram Cohen" label="Bram Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="26228" end="26237" title="Bittorent" label="Bittorent"/>
<link wikidata="Q92764" start="26239" end="26250" title="Sergei Brin" label="Sergei Brin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934" start="26255" end="26265" title="Larry Page" label="Larry Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q312680" start="26287" end="26298" title="Laszlo Biro" label="Laszlo Biro"/>
<link wikidata="Q160137" start="26301" end="26314" title="Ballpoint pen" label="Ballpoint pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911493" start="26316" end="26328" title="Simcha Blass" label="Simcha Blass"/>
<link wikidata="Q746694" start="26330" end="26345" title="Drip irrigation" label="Drip irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93044" start="26347" end="26362" title="Lee Felsenstein" label="Lee Felsenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129603" start="26377" end="26386" title="Osborne 1" label="Osborne 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q64050" start="26388" end="26400" title="Zeev Suraski" label="Zeev Suraski"/>
<link wikidata="Q466178" start="26405" end="26417" title="Andi Gutmans" label="Andi Gutmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="26433" end="26436" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q189477" start="26453" end="26470" title="Zend Technologies" label="Zend Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q70997" start="26472" end="26485" title="Ralph H. Baer" label="Ralph H. Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="26771" end="26777" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="27179" end="27185" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="27187" end="27194" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56495" start="27196" end="27205" title="Judeo-Tat" label="Judeo-Tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="27209" end="27215" title="Ladino language" label="Ladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="27560" end="27567" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="27702" end="27711" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q609042" start="27814" end="27821" title="shtetls" label="shtetls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="27840" end="27855" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="27909" end="27916" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642350" start="28110" end="28127" title="Jewish literature" label="Jewish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q238090" start="28279" end="28294" title="Sholem Aleichem" label="Sholem Aleichem"/>
<link wikidata="Q75612" start="28346" end="28367" title="Isaac Bashevis Singer" label="Isaac Bashevis Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="28540" end="28551" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="28553" end="28564" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="28723" end="28737" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545259" start="28825" end="28829" title="Howl (poem)" label="Howl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345302" start="28846" end="28853" title="Kaddish (poem)" label="Kaddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="28942" end="28956" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q442801" start="28971" end="28985" title="Miklós Radnóti" label="Miklós Radnóti"/>
<link wikidata="Q452282" start="29003" end="29019" title="Mordecai Richler" label="Mordecai Richler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49080" start="29038" end="29049" title="Isaac Babel" label="Isaac Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="29067" end="29078" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q927" start="29095" end="29108" title="Harry Mulisch" label="Harry Mulisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212173" start="29128" end="29151" title="The Discovery of Heaven" label="The Discovery of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046296" start="29275" end="29288" title="Yaakov Malkin" label="Yaakov Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319239" start="29330" end="29349" title="Tel Aviv University" label="Tel Aviv University"/>
<link wikidata="Q238090" start="29756" end="29771" title="Sholem Aleichem" label="Sholem Aleichem"/>
<link wikidata="Q113310" start="29773" end="29785" title="Itzik Manger" label="Itzik Manger"/>
<link wikidata="Q75612" start="29787" end="29808" title="Isaac Bashevis Singer" label="Isaac Bashevis Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="29810" end="29821" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="29823" end="29834" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q133042" start="29836" end="29846" title="S.Y. Agnon" label="S.Y. Agnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49080" start="29848" end="29859" title="Isaac Babel" label="Isaac Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84423" start="29861" end="29873" title="Martin Buber" label="Martin Buber"/>
<link wikidata="Q205162" start="29875" end="29888" title="Isaiah Berlin" label="Isaiah Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q359705" start="29890" end="29908" title="Haim Nahman Bialik" label="Haim Nahman Bialik"/>
<link wikidata="Q58612" start="29910" end="29924" title="Yehuda Amichai" label="Yehuda Amichai"/>
<link wikidata="Q151872" start="29926" end="29933" title="Amos Oz" label="Amos Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q329758" start="29935" end="29948" title="A.B. Yehoshua" label="A.B. Yehoshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q160263" start="29954" end="29968" title="David Grossman" label="David Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="30108" end="30122" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="30124" end="30137" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="30139" end="30156" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q93284" start="30158" end="30170" title="Marc Chagall" label="Marc Chagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q354779" start="30172" end="30185" title="Jacob Epstein" label="Jacob Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q695239" start="30187" end="30196" title="Ben Shahn" label="Ben Shahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q120993" start="30198" end="30215" title="Amedeo Modigliani" label="Amedeo Modigliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="30217" end="30228" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="30230" end="30253" title="Max Reinhardt (theatre director)" label="Max Reinhardt (Goldman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51562" start="30255" end="30269" title="Ernst Lubitsch" label="Ernst Lubitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="30275" end="30286" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="30326" end="30338" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="30359" end="30376" title="Foundation (book series)" label="Foundation series"/>
<link wikidata="Q393018" start="30408" end="30416" title="I, robot" label="I, robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138091" start="30430" end="30439" title="Nightfall (Asimov short story and novel)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q389750" start="30456" end="30475" title="The Gods Themselves" label="The Gods Themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q208101" start="30483" end="30496" title="Joseph Heller" label="Joseph Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q278208" start="30504" end="30512" title="Catch-22" label="Catch-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q333123" start="30521" end="30531" title="R.L. Stine" label="R.L. Stine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260367" start="30539" end="30549" title="Goosebumps" label="Goosebumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="30565" end="30579" title="J. D. Salinger" label="J. D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q183883" start="30587" end="30609" title="The Catcher in the Rye" label="The Catcher in the Rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q313466" start="30618" end="30632" title="Michael Chabon" label="Michael Chabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705230" start="30640" end="30685" title="The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp;amp; Clay" label="The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp;amp; Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q603645" start="30699" end="30733" title="The Yiddish Policemen&amp;#x27;s Union" label="The Yiddish Policemen&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="30742" end="30755" title="Marcel Proust" label="Marcel Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="30763" end="30785" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="In Search of Lost Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="30794" end="30807" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q820862" start="30815" end="30834" title="Death of a Salesman" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183443" start="30851" end="30863" title="The Crucible" label="The Crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q309850" start="30872" end="30883" title="Will Eisner" label="Will Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085034" start="30891" end="30910" title="A Contract with God" label="A Contract with God"/>
<link wikidata="Q361257" start="30919" end="30935" title="Shel Silverstein" label="Shel Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915384" start="30943" end="30958" title="The Giving Tree" label="The Giving Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494" start="30967" end="30982" title="Arthur Koestler" label="Arthur Koestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q73580" start="30990" end="31006" title="Darkness at Noon" label="Darkness at Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198458" start="31020" end="31040" title="The Thirteenth Tribe" label="The Thirteenth Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="31049" end="31060" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424503" start="31068" end="31074" title="Herzog (novel)" label="Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q684593" start="31117" end="31135" title="The Accursed Kings" label="The Accursed Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q223949" start="31145" end="31158" title="Maurice Druon" label="Maurice Druon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181677" start="31181" end="31200" title="George R. R. Martin" label="George R. R. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45875" start="31214" end="31236" title="A Song of Ice and Fire" label="A Song of Ice and Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="31271" end="31296" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781249" start="31388" end="31404" title="Musar literature" label="Musar literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q106760248" start="31486" end="31499" title="Hebrew poetry (disambiguation)" label="Hebrew poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903301" start="31570" end="31585" title="Biblical poetry" label="Biblical poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="31652" end="31664" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q781402" start="31750" end="31756" title="piyyut" label="piyyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q299200" start="31785" end="31798" title="Yehuda Halevi" label="Yehuda Halevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q467161" start="31800" end="31821" title="Samuel ibn Naghrillah" label="Samuel ibn Naghrillah"/>
<link wikidata="Q239355" start="31823" end="31842" title="Solomon ibn Gabirol" label="Solomon ibn Gabirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q719393" start="31844" end="31858" title="Moses ibn Ezra" label="Moses ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="31860" end="31876" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q720129" start="31881" end="31898" title="Dunash ben Labrat" label="Dunash ben Labrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888692" start="31900" end="31920" title="Modern Hebrew poetry" label="Modern Hebrew poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917554" start="31967" end="31997" title="revival of the Hebrew language" label="revival of the Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q982845" start="32012" end="32032" title="Moshe Chaim Luzzatto" label="Moshe Chaim Luzzatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="32040" end="32048" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q359705" start="32084" end="32103" title="Hayim Nahman Bialik" label="Hayim Nahman Bialik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340536" start="32105" end="32120" title="Nathan Alterman" label="Nathan Alterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q521410" start="32125" end="32145" title="Shaul Tchernichovsky" label="Shaul Tchernichovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="32187" end="32196" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q330024" start="32201" end="32218" title="Abraham Goldfaden" label="Abraham Goldfaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="32250" end="32266" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="32285" end="32289" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="32291" end="32298" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="32364" end="32373" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="32523" end="32532" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053526" start="32645" end="32669" title="Yiddish Theater District" label="Yiddish Theater District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915504" start="32823" end="32833" title="The Dybbuk" label="The Dybbuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q713443" start="32850" end="32858" title="Shloime Ansky" label="S. Ansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="33009" end="33023" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="33257" end="33265" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q124914" start="33276" end="33289" title="Second Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Second Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4304078" start="33808" end="33835" title="Moscow State Jewish Theater" label="Moscow State Jewish Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q467096" start="33848" end="33864" title="Solomon Mikhoels" label="Solomon Mikhoels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564959" start="34010" end="34031" title="Rootless cosmopolitan" label="Rootless cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q469733" start="34033" end="34060" title="Night of the Murdered Poets" label="Night of the Murdered Poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527580" start="34080" end="34110" title="Dora Wasserman Yiddish Theatre" label="Dora Wasserman Yiddish Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713635" start="34197" end="34209" title="Jewish Emancipation" label="Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="34329" end="34338" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="34422" end="34431" title="Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="34837" end="34844" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="34849" end="34854" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q45997" start="35007" end="35019" title="Paul Johnson (writer)" label="Paul Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q265581" start="35083" end="35096" title="Fin de siècle" label="Fin de siècle"/>
<link wikidata="Q61662" start="35212" end="35226" title="Carl Sternheim" label="Carl Sternheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q44331" start="35228" end="35245" title="Arthur Schnitzler" label="Arthur Schnitzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q57266" start="35247" end="35259" title="Ernst Toller" label="Ernst Toller"/>
<link wikidata="Q60978" start="35261" end="35275" title="Erwin Piscator" label="Erwin Piscator"/>
<link wikidata="Q62628" start="35277" end="35295" title="Walter Hasenclever" label="Walter Hasenclever"/>
<link wikidata="Q296809" start="35297" end="35310" title="Ferenc Molnár" label="Ferenc Molnár"/>
<link wikidata="Q76820" start="35315" end="35329" title="Carl Zuckmayer" label="Carl Zuckmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="35362" end="35375" title="Max Reinhardt (theatre director)" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="35457" end="35471" title="Republicanism" label="pro-republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="35803" end="35810" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="35886" end="35901" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9485200" start="36436" end="36454" title="theatrical realism" label="theatrical realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089649" start="36472" end="36482" title="Stanislavski&amp;#x27;s system" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="36486" end="36509" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Konstantin Stanislavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="36632" end="36644" title="Stella Adler" label="Stella Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="36886" end="36905" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q110732099" start="36916" end="36936" title="Stephen J. Whitfield" label="Stephen J. Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="37179" end="37198" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q124405230" start="37209" end="37224" title="Laurence Maslon" label="Laurence Maslon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37688" end="37697" title="List of Jewish American entertainers#Comedians" label="comedians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37718" end="37729" title="List of Jewish American entertainers#Singers and songwriters" label="songwriters"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="37764" end="37770" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="37794" end="37809" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="37811" end="37817" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="37863" end="37869" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="38543" end="38551" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q158650" start="38630" end="38642" title="Paul Abraham (composer)" label="Paul Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q104813403" start="38644" end="38654" title="List of operettas" label="Leo Ascher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38656" end="38669" title="List of Austrian Jews#Composers" label="Edmund Eysler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38671" end="38679" title="List of Austrian Jews#Musicians" label="Leo Fall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38681" end="38702" title="List of operettas#Bruno Granichstaedten" label="Bruno Granichstaedten"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="38704" end="38721" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q153818" start="38723" end="38738" title="Emmerich Kalman" label="Emmerich Kalman"/>
<link wikidata="Q742945" start="38740" end="38755" title="Sigmund Romberg" label="Sigmund Romberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q206667" start="38757" end="38769" title="Oscar Straus (composer)" label="Oscar Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48363" start="38774" end="38786" title="Rudolf Friml" label="Rudolf Friml"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="38901" end="38912" title="libretto" label="librettists"/>
<link wikidata="Q56158" start="38917" end="38922" title="Georges Bizet" label="Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q185968" start="38936" end="38942" title="Carmen" label="Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q785479" start="39006" end="39019" title="Opéra comique" label="Opéra comique"/>
<link wikidata="Q723585" start="39041" end="39055" title="Ludovic Halévy" label="Ludovic Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313917" start="39075" end="39091" title="Fromental Halévy" label="Fromental Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="39676" end="39686" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q148732" start="39796" end="39806" title="Jack Benny" label="Jack Benny"/>
<link wikidata="Q153358" start="39808" end="39819" title="Fanny Brice" label="Fanny Brice"/>
<link wikidata="Q350472" start="39821" end="39833" title="Eddie Cantor" label="Eddie Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="39835" end="39852" title="The Marx Brothers" label="The Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q454030" start="39854" end="39863" title="Anna Held" label="Anna Held"/>
<link wikidata="Q128532" start="39865" end="39874" title="Al Jolson" label="Al Jolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q467563" start="39876" end="39887" title="Molly Picon" label="Molly Picon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152520" start="39889" end="39902" title="Sophie Tucker" label="Sophie Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q259537" start="39907" end="39914" title="Ed Wynn" label="Ed Wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="39967" end="39973" title="revues" label="revues"/>
<link wikidata="Q95024" start="40018" end="40034" title="Florenz Ziegfeld" label="Florenz Ziegfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q152521" start="40075" end="40082" title="Ziegfeld Follies" label="Follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q313270" start="40647" end="40658" title="Jerome Kern" label="Jerome Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q319693" start="40660" end="40680" title="Oscar Hammerstein II" label="Oscar Hammerstein II"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="40682" end="40688" title="George Gershwin" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q61059" start="40693" end="40705" title="Ira Gershwin" label="Ira Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163662" start="40707" end="40724" title="George S. Kaufman" label="George S. Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q323516" start="40729" end="40743" title="Morrie Ryskind" label="Morrie Ryskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q215120" start="40912" end="40923" title="Cole Porter" label="Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275079" start="41051" end="41074" title="Rodgers and Hammerstein" label="Rodgers and Hammerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q966018" start="41076" end="41089" title="Frank Loesser" label="Frank Loesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820298" start="41091" end="41107" title="Lerner and Loewe" label="Lerner and Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="41109" end="41125" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="41127" end="41144" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q542484" start="41146" end="41162" title="Stephen Schwartz (composer)" label="Stephen Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797748" start="41164" end="41178" title="Kander and Ebb" label="Kander and Ebb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41211" end="41233" title="Musical theater#The Golden Age (1940s/1950s/1960s)" label="&amp;quot;Golden Age&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478089" start="41276" end="41310" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score" label="Tony Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="41486" end="41494" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q712004" start="41509" end="41532" title="Claude-Michel Schönberg" label="Claude-Michel Schönberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q326299" start="41537" end="41548" title="Lionel Bart" label="Lionel Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716019" start="41685" end="41707" title="Jewish music" label="Jewish religious music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067977" start="41749" end="41755" title="Hazzan" label="cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="41874" end="41886" title="cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q448644" start="42223" end="42235" title="Harold Arlen" label="Harold Arlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273621" start="42240" end="42251" title="Yip Harburg" label="Yip Harburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166879" start="42386" end="42395" title="Show Boat" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q740920" start="42409" end="42423" title="Porgy and Bess" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028308" start="42437" end="42458" title="Finian&amp;#x27;s Rainbow" label="Finian&amp;#x27;s Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535240" start="42472" end="42485" title="South Pacific (musical)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="42502" end="42516" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q487330" start="42645" end="42664" title="Fiddler on the Roof" label="Fiddler on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283223" start="42681" end="42685" title="Rags (musical)" label="Rags"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926937" start="42711" end="42717" title="Blitz!" label="Blitz!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683976" start="42774" end="42792" title="Jason Robert Brown" label="Jason Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q766468" start="42797" end="42808" title="Alfred Uhry" label="Alfred Uhry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134092" start="42822" end="42828" title="Parade (musical)" label="Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="42870" end="42882" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="42954" end="42969" title="West Side Story (musical)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="42991" end="43006" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="43082" end="43089" title="Italian-American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="43090" end="43098" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069851" start="43186" end="43199" title="Boris Aronson" label="Boris Aronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q562719" start="43201" end="43214" title="David Belasco" label="David Belasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q316641" start="43216" end="43225" title="Joel Grey" label="Joel Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q191952" start="43248" end="43259" title="Zero Mostel" label="Zero Mostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480583" start="43261" end="43272" title="Joseph Papp" label="Joseph Papp"/>
<link wikidata="Q267097" start="43274" end="43288" title="Mandy Patinkin" label="Mandy Patinkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q605924" start="43314" end="43327" title="Harold Prince" label="Harold Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="43329" end="43342" title="Max Reinhardt (theatre director)" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q353019" start="43344" end="43358" title="Jerome Robbins" label="Jerome Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091785" start="43364" end="43378" title="Shubert family" label="Shubert family"/>
<link wikidata="Q240490" start="43383" end="43395" title="Julie Taymor" label="Julie Taymor"/>
<link wikidata="Q283496" start="43500" end="43511" title="Edna Ferber" label="Edna Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q728876" start="43513" end="43522" title="Moss Hart" label="Moss Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q233701" start="43524" end="43539" title="Lillian Hellman" label="Lillian Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="43541" end="43554" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q315808" start="43559" end="43569" title="Neil Simon" label="Neil Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="43714" end="43738" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809464" start="43791" end="43821" title="Association for Jewish Theater" label="Association for Jewish Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="44056" end="44071" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q549576" start="44107" end="44121" title="History of the Jews in Italy" label="Jewish-Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="44134" end="44140" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="44170" end="44176" title="rabbis" label="rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="44181" end="44191" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="44208" end="44217" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="44427" end="44433" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q208555" start="44436" end="44443" title="parable" label="parable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44533" end="44547" title="History of theatre#Western theatre history" label="European plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="44565" end="44576" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="44578" end="44585" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="44590" end="44598" title="Schiller" label="Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44775" end="44788" title="Hebrew language#Modern Hebrew" label="Modern Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45207" end="45213" title="Culture of Israel#Theatre" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340536" start="45235" end="45249" title="Natan Alterman" label="Natan Alterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q359705" start="45251" end="45271" title="Hayyim Nahman Bialik" label="Hayyim Nahman Bialik"/>
<link wikidata="Q138007" start="45273" end="45286" title="Leah Goldberg" label="Leah Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q167429" start="45288" end="45302" title="Ephraim Kishon" label="Ephraim Kishon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576676" start="45304" end="45316" title="Hanoch Levin" label="Hanoch Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q400059" start="45318" end="45331" title="Aharon Megged" label="Aharon Megged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948944" start="45333" end="45345" title="Moshe Shamir" label="Moshe Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q373167" start="45347" end="45363" title="Avraham Shlonsky" label="Avraham Shlonsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686565" start="45365" end="45379" title="Yehoshua Sobol" label="Yehoshua Sobol"/>
<link wikidata="Q329758" start="45384" end="45398" title="A. B. Yehoshua" label="A. B. Yehoshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="45491" end="45500" title="Shoah" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="45506" end="45527" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q555750" start="45707" end="45713" title="Habima Theater" label="Habima"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="45785" end="45794" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028633" start="45883" end="45897" title="Cameri Theater" label="Cameri Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q628490" start="46027" end="46040" title="Mountain Jews" label="Mountain Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="46106" end="46113" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="46166" end="46172" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q131416" start="46332" end="46339" title="Derbent" label="Derbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="46341" end="46353" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="46364" end="46369" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="46482" end="46489" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="46509" end="46513" title="Turkish people" label="Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="46774" end="46782" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="46792" end="46804" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157215" start="47167" end="47180" title="Dagestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Dagestan ASSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q56495" start="47242" end="47248" title="Juhuri" label="Juhuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056488" start="47355" end="47372" title="Hizgil Avshalumov" label="Hizgil Avshalumov"/>
<link wikidata="Q55104726" start="47473" end="47488" title="Abram Avdalimov" label="Abram Avdalimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157215" start="47527" end="47540" title="Dagestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Dagestan ASSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q109677980" start="47596" end="47608" title="Roman Izyaev" label="Roman Izyaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q960966" start="47630" end="47658" title="Order of the Badge of Honour" label="Order of the Badge of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q109050472" start="47707" end="47724" title="Judeo-Tat Theatre" label="Judeo-Tat theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48543" end="48552" title="Shulamith (1931 film)" label="Shulamith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772213" start="48607" end="48628" title="His Wife&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="His Wife&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303710" start="48649" end="48673" title="A Daughter of Her People" label="A Daughter of Her People"/>
<link wikidata="Q464017" start="48713" end="48730" title="Wandering Jew" label="The Wandering Jew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48755" end="48772" title="Yiddish King Lear (film)" label="Yiddish King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q113131137" start="48793" end="48806" title="Shir Hashirim (film)" label="Shir Hashirim"/>
<link wikidata="Q570320" start="48868" end="48882" title="Yidl Mitn Fidl" label="Yidl Mitn Fidl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48903" end="48921" title="Where Is My Child?" label="Where Is My Child?"/>
<link wikidata="Q10291483" start="48942" end="48954" title="Green Fields" label="Green Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915504" start="48975" end="48980" title="The Dybbuk (play)" label="Dybuk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49001" end="49023" title="The Singing Blacksmith" label="The Singing Blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707179" start="49044" end="49049" title="Tevya (film)" label="Tevya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873139" start="49070" end="49082" title="Mirele Efros" label="Mirele Efros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804851" start="49103" end="49119" title="Lang ist der Weg" label="Lang ist der Weg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49144" end="49162" title="God, Man and Devil" label="God, Man and Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q72579" start="49274" end="49288" title="Samuel Goldwyn" label="Samuel Goldwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="49290" end="49304" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047131" start="49306" end="49325" title="the Warner Brothers" label="the Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q72291" start="49327" end="49344" title="David O. Selznick" label="David O. Selznick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373662" start="49346" end="49357" title="Marcus Loew" label="Marcus Loew"/>
<link wikidata="Q361208" start="49363" end="49375" title="Adolph Zukor" label="Adolph Zukor"/>
<link wikidata="Q134382" start="49377" end="49380" title="William Fox (producer)" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q653333" start="49475" end="49488" title="Michael Ovitz" label="Michael Ovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q727953" start="49490" end="49504" title="Michael Eisner" label="Michael Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361763" start="49506" end="49519" title="Lew Wasserman" label="Lew Wasserman"/>
<link wikidata="Q550426" start="49521" end="49539" title="Jeffrey Katzenberg" label="Jeffrey Katzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="49541" end="49557" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q115055" start="49563" end="49575" title="David Geffen" label="David Geffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34933" start="49762" end="49775" title="Eric Hobsbawm" label="Eric Hobsbawm"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="49884" end="49897" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q104266" start="49899" end="49909" title="Mel Brooks" label="Mel Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="49914" end="49925" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="50012" end="50028" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q780469" start="50043" end="50048" title="Yentl (film)" label="Yentl"/>
<link wikidata="Q262820" start="50066" end="50084" title="John Frankenheimer" label="John Frankenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304965" start="50098" end="50107" title="The Fixer (1968 film)" label="The Fixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136757" start="50137" end="50169" title="Call Me by Your Name (film)" label="&amp;quot;Call Me By Your Name&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947950" start="50408" end="50418" title="Boston Jewish Film Festival" label="Boston JFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414059" start="50420" end="50437" title="San Francisco Jewish Film Festival" label="San Francisco JFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="50514" end="50542" title="RCA" label="Radio Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="50551" end="50579" title="Columbia Broadcasting System" label="Columbia Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="50601" end="50616" title="American Jews" label="Jewish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q360106" start="50617" end="50630" title="David Sarnoff" label="David Sarnoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288608" start="50635" end="50651" title="William S. Paley" label="William S. Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q849194" start="50768" end="50773" title="color television" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="50851" end="50867" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973883" start="51015" end="51041" title="National Jewish Television" label="National Jewish Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q555226" start="51175" end="51185" title="Sid Caesar" label="Sid Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q558933" start="51190" end="51202" title="Milton Berle" label="Milton Berle"/>
<link wikidata="Q240933" start="51206" end="51217" title="Joan Rivers" label="Joan Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q266808" start="51219" end="51231" title="Gilda Radner" label="Gilda Radner"/>
<link wikidata="Q299983" start="51237" end="51249" title="Andy Kaufman" label="Andy Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="51253" end="51266" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215506" start="51270" end="51284" title="Jerry Seinfeld" label="Jerry Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q350472" start="51425" end="51437" title="Eddie Cantor" label="Eddie Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128532" start="51439" end="51448" title="Al Jolson" label="Al Jolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q148732" start="51450" end="51460" title="Jack Benny" label="Jack Benny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097952" start="51462" end="51477" title="Walter Winchell" label="Walter Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408937" start="51482" end="51496" title="David Susskind" label="David Susskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q213430" start="51515" end="51525" title="Larry King" label="Larry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292044" start="51527" end="51541" title="Michael Savage" label="Michael Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q348603" start="51546" end="51558" title="Howard Stern" label="Howard Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="51682" end="51697" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q223802" start="51779" end="51790" title="tabula rasa" label="tabula rasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="51887" end="51892" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="51979" end="51997" title="situation comedy" label="situation comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561866" start="52005" end="52018" title="The Goldbergs (broadcast series)" label="The Goldbergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="52068" end="52077" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881953" start="52232" end="52247" title="Brooklyn Bridge (TV series)" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966725" start="52270" end="52290" title="Bridget Loves Bernie" label="Bridget Loves Bernie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="52386" end="52397" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104266" start="52399" end="52409" title="Mel Brooks" label="Mel Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519638" start="52411" end="52424" title="Selma Diamond" label="Selma Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806065" start="52426" end="52439" title="Larry Gelbart" label="Larry Gelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q287793" start="52441" end="52452" title="Carl Reiner" label="Carl Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q315808" start="52458" end="52468" title="Neil Simon" label="Neil Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="52513" end="52523" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270283" start="52536" end="52547" title="Norman Lear" label="Norman Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048856" start="52557" end="52574" title="All in the Family" label="All in the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="52602" end="52614" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="52635" end="52644" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q23728" start="52647" end="52658" title="Larry David" label="Larry David"/>
<link wikidata="Q215506" start="52663" end="52677" title="Jerry Seinfeld" label="Jerry Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="52707" end="52715" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q521221" start="52723" end="52737" title="Lorne Michaels" label="Lorne Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q319084" start="52739" end="52749" title="Al Franken" label="Al Franken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368916" start="52751" end="52764" title="Rosie Shuster" label="Rosie Shuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830623" start="52770" end="52782" title="Alan Zweibel" label="Alan Zweibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="52792" end="52811" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q478360" start="52983" end="52991" title="The Wire" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="53008" end="53020" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q720435" start="53138" end="53149" title="David Simon" label="David Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440873" start="53209" end="53220" title="show runner" label="show runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q924283" start="53222" end="53236" title="Matthew Weiner" label="Matthew Weiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q223977" start="53326" end="53333" title="Mad Men" label="Mad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q503997" start="53374" end="53387" title="David Benioff" label="David Benioff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151388" start="53392" end="53403" title="D. B. Weiss" label="D. B. Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="53423" end="53438" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q676743" start="53456" end="53467" title="Ron Leavitt" label="Ron Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208647" start="53488" end="53512" title="Married... with Children" label="Married... with Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q310556" start="53520" end="53534" title="Damon Lindelof" label="Damon Lindelof"/>
<link wikidata="Q188137" start="53539" end="53551" title="J. J. Abrams" label="J. J. Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q23567" start="53574" end="53578" title="Lost (2004 TV series)" label="Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q335672" start="53586" end="53597" title="David Crane (producer)" label="David Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q237454" start="53602" end="53616" title="Marta Kauffman" label="Marta Kauffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="53636" end="53643" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q319389" start="53651" end="53660" title="Tim Kring" label="Tim Kring"/>
<link wikidata="Q83401" start="53678" end="53684" title="Heroes (U.S. TV series)" label="Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280214" start="53692" end="53705" title="Sydney Newman" label="Sydney Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="53726" end="53736" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q452063" start="53744" end="53755" title="Darren Star" label="Darren Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q35791" start="53771" end="53787" title="Sex and the City" label="Sex and the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q550238" start="53804" end="53817" title="Melrose Place" label="Melrose Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q295080" start="53825" end="53839" title="Aaron Spelling" label="Aaron Spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q117590" start="53861" end="53881" title="Beverly Hills, 90210" label="Beverly Hills, 90210"/>
<link wikidata="Q430844" start="53889" end="53900" title="Chuck Lorre" label="Chuck Lorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539" start="53922" end="53941" title="The Big Bang Theory" label="The Big Bang Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189267" start="53958" end="53976" title="Two and a Half Men" label="Two and a Half Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559656" start="53984" end="53995" title="Gideon Raff" label="Gideon Raff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085782" start="54014" end="54030" title="Prisoners of War (TV series)" label="Prisoners of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23594" start="54049" end="54057" title="Homeland (TV series)" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662381" start="54077" end="54088" title="Aaron Ruben" label="Aaron Ruben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545340" start="54093" end="54108" title="Sheldon Leonard" label="Sheldon Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q526035" start="54130" end="54152" title="The Andy Griffith Show" label="The Andy Griffith Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q561963" start="54160" end="54170" title="Don Hewitt" label="Don Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="54188" end="54198" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374481" start="54206" end="54221" title="Garry Shandling" label="Garry Shandling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248938" start="54243" end="54265" title="The Larry Sanders Show" label="The Larry Sanders Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334467" start="54273" end="54287" title="Ed. Weinberger" label="Ed. Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q463999" start="54309" end="54323" title="The Cosby Show" label="The Cosby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175673" start="54331" end="54342" title="David Milch" label="David Milch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050603" start="54361" end="54369" title="Deadwood (TV series)" label="Deadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q542414" start="54377" end="54391" title="Steven Levitan" label="Steven Levitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16756" start="54413" end="54426" title="Modern Family" label="Modern Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q550381" start="54434" end="54443" title="Dick Wolf" label="Dick Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="54462" end="54477" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q434272" start="54485" end="54496" title="David Shore" label="David Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23558" start="54512" end="54517" title="House (TV series)" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285959" start="54525" end="54538" title="Max Mutchnick" label="Max Mutchnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q375016" start="54543" end="54554" title="David Kohan" label="David Kohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212135" start="54573" end="54589" title="Will &amp;amp; Grace" label="Will &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395333" start="54597" end="54610" title="Adam Horowitz" label="Adam Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q713912" start="54615" end="54628" title="Edward Kitsis" label="Edward Kitsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23673" start="54647" end="54675" title="Once Upon a Time (TV Series)" label="Once Upon a Time (TV Series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q170530" start="54752" end="54772" title="Sarah Jessica Parker" label="Sarah Jessica Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="54774" end="54789" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16345" start="54791" end="54804" title="Leonard Nimoy" label="Leonard Nimoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37628" start="54806" end="54816" title="Mila Kunis" label="Mila Kunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45229" start="54818" end="54827" title="Zac Efron" label="Zac Efron"/>
<link wikidata="Q202056" start="54829" end="54840" title="Hank Azaria" label="Hank Azaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q484365" start="54842" end="54856" title="David Duchovny" label="David Duchovny"/>
<link wikidata="Q447392" start="54858" end="54869" title="Fred Savage" label="Fred Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q139330" start="54871" end="54881" title="Zach Braff" label="Zach Braff"/>
<link wikidata="Q315208" start="54883" end="54892" title="Noah Wyle" label="Noah Wyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q294372" start="54894" end="54904" title="Adam Brody" label="Adam Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q229244" start="54906" end="54917" title="Katey Sagal" label="Katey Sagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180665" start="54919" end="54940" title="Sarah Michelle Gellar" label="Sarah Michelle Gellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q199927" start="54942" end="54957" title="Alyson Hannigan" label="Alyson Hannigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q229528" start="54959" end="54980" title="Michelle Trachtenberg" label="Michelle Trachtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188792" start="54982" end="54997" title="David Schwimmer" label="David Schwimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179041" start="54999" end="55010" title="Lisa Kudrow" label="Lisa Kudrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q231093" start="55015" end="55027" title="Mayim Bialik" label="Mayim Bialik"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="55172" end="55181" title="European classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="55186" end="55199" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858" start="55306" end="55319" title="Music of Israel" label="Israeli music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858" start="55321" end="55333" title="Israeli folk" label="Israeli folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q212944" start="55341" end="55348" title="Klezmer" label="Klezmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271589" start="55350" end="55376" title="Sephardic music" label="Sephardic and Ladino music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738544" start="55382" end="55395" title="Mizrahi music" label="Mizrahi music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713635" start="55427" end="55439" title="Jewish Emancipation" label="Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716019" start="55482" end="55494" title="Jewish music" label="sacred music"/>
<link wikidata="Q212944" start="55538" end="55547" title="klezmer" label="klezmorim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="55631" end="55655" title="European classical music" label="European classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q713436" start="55770" end="55784" title="Salamone Rossi" label="Salamone Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q315708" start="55789" end="55802" title="Claude Daquin" label="Claude Daquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204760" start="55999" end="56005" title="France in the nineteenth century" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="56007" end="56022" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="56028" end="56041" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="56047" end="56053" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217068" start="56283" end="56305" title="Charles-Valentin Alkan" label="Charles-Valentin Alkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215556" start="56307" end="56317" title="Paul Dukas" label="Paul Dukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q313917" start="56322" end="56338" title="Fromental Halevy" label="Fromental Halevy"/>
<link wikidata="Q322065" start="56352" end="56366" title="Josef Dessauer" label="Josef Dessauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q239214" start="56368" end="56381" title="Karl Goldmark" label="Karl Goldmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="56386" end="56399" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563006" start="56419" end="56432" title="List of Austrian Jews" label="Austrian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="56483" end="56490" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="56531" end="56548" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="56553" end="56570" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q87567" start="56589" end="56594" title="Anton Rubinstein" label="Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q311791" start="56599" end="56617" title="Nikolai Rubinstein" label="Nikolai Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699393" start="56648" end="56659" title="John Braham (tenor)" label="John Braham"/>
<link wikidata="Q240963" start="56664" end="56678" title="Giuditta Pasta" label="Giuditta Pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q159976" start="56755" end="56769" title="Joseph Joachim" label="Joseph Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q215083" start="56771" end="56786" title="Ferdinand David (musician)" label="Ferdinand David"/>
<link wikidata="Q636941" start="56788" end="56799" title="Carl Tausig" label="Carl Tausig"/>
<link wikidata="Q572547" start="56801" end="56811" title="Henri Herz" label="Henri Herz"/>
<link wikidata="Q368583" start="56813" end="56825" title="Leopold Auer" label="Leopold Auer"/>
<link wikidata="Q243472" start="56827" end="56841" title="Jascha Heifetz" label="Jascha Heifetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q159551" start="56847" end="56862" title="Ignaz Moscheles" label="Ignaz Moscheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="57044" end="57061" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78524" start="57066" end="57089" title="Alexander von Zemlinsky" label="Alexander von Zemlinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q78704" start="57104" end="57116" title="Hanns Eisler" label="Hanns Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="57121" end="57131" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q78530" start="57146" end="57160" title="Viktor Ullmann" label="Viktor Ullmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q215828" start="57165" end="57183" title="Jaromír Weinberger" label="Jaromír Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="57211" end="57225" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="57254" end="57263" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="57286" end="57301" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="57306" end="57319" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="57344" end="57358" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q550218" start="57363" end="57380" title="Alexandre Tansman" label="Alexandre Tansman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158078" start="57394" end="57410" title="Alfred Schnittke" label="Alfred Schnittke"/>
<link wikidata="Q241503" start="57415" end="57428" title="Lera Auerbach" label="Lera Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q247293" start="57442" end="57455" title="Lalo Schifrin" label="Lalo Schifrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q322790" start="57460" end="57476" title="Mario Davidovsky" label="Mario Davidovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q215982" start="57496" end="57509" title="Paul Ben-Haim" label="Paul Ben-Haim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889606" start="57514" end="57526" title="Shulamit Ran" label="Shulamit Ran"/>
<link wikidata="Q599099" start="57692" end="57703" title="Grand Opera" label="Grand Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="57756" end="57773" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313917" start="57775" end="57791" title="Fromental Halévy" label="Fromental Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="57807" end="57824" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q339043" start="57846" end="57854" title="La Juive" label="La Juive"/>
<link wikidata="Q319261" start="57874" end="57887" title="Eugène Scribe" label="Scribe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="57888" end="57896" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q212944" start="58202" end="58209" title="klezmer" label="klezmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="58291" end="58304" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Mahler&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q163553" start="58305" end="58319" title="Symphony No. 1 (Mahler)" label="Symphony No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="58489" end="58501" title="cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173090" start="58618" end="58629" title="David Amram" label="David Amram"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="58686" end="58703" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q223491" start="58711" end="58727" title="Symphony No. 3 (Bernstein)" label="Kaddish Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042113" start="58741" end="58758" title="Chichester Psalms" label="Chichester Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q123234" start="58767" end="58779" title="Ernest Bloch" label="Ernest Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475319" start="58787" end="58795" title="Schelomo" label="Schelomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="58804" end="58821" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q377558" start="58823" end="58848" title="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco" label="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="58885" end="58895" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58903" end="58919" title="Kurt Weill#Works 1936-1950" label="The Eternal Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934607" start="58931" end="58944" title="Hugo Weisgall" label="Hugo Weisgall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59188" end="59219" title="Great American Songbook#Songwriters and songs" label="great songwriters and lyricists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196752" start="59232" end="59257" title="traditional popular music" label="traditional popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q591990" start="59262" end="59276" title="jazz standards" label="jazz standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q448644" start="59314" end="59326" title="Harold Arlen" label="Harold Arlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313270" start="59328" end="59339" title="Jerome Kern" label="Jerome Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="59341" end="59356" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q966018" start="59358" end="59371" title="Frank Loesser" label="Frank Loesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q269094" start="59373" end="59388" title="Richard Rodgers" label="Richard Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="59393" end="59406" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738544" start="59515" end="59528" title="Mizrahi music" label="Mizrahi Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918713" start="59567" end="59576" title="Omer Adam" label="Omer Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43139030" start="59578" end="59587" title="Noa Kirel" label="Noa Kirel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59589" end="59601" title="Avior Malasa" label="Avior Malasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21844934" start="59603" end="59607" title="A-WA" label="A-WA"/>
<link wikidata="Q64775156" start="59609" end="59619" title="Eden Alene" label="Eden Alene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382405" start="59621" end="59631" title="Eyal Golan" label="Eyal Golan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895942" start="59633" end="59648" title="Debbie Friedman" label="Debbie Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="59650" end="59666" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="59837" end="59853" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diasporic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="59960" end="59974" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q212944" start="60066" end="60073" title="klezmer" label="klezmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q609042" start="60152" end="60158" title="shtetl" label="shtetl"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="60210" end="60217" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q126284786" start="60902" end="60929" title="Jews in baseball" label="Jewish presence in baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116205" start="61122" end="61134" title="Jewish humor" label="Jewish humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="61196" end="61201" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="61210" end="61217" title="Midrash" label="Midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="61442" end="61452" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q215506" start="61626" end="61640" title="Jerry Seinfeld" label="Jerry Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q23728" start="61642" end="61653" title="Larry David" label="Larry David"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="61655" end="61669" title="Sammy Davis Jr." label="Sammy Davis Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q261977" start="61671" end="61684" title="Rachel Dratch" label="Rachel Dratch"/>
<link wikidata="Q221464" start="61686" end="61703" title="Gilbert Gottfried" label="Gilbert Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730037" start="61705" end="61717" title="Ilana Glazer" label="Ilana Glazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161726" start="61719" end="61729" title="Jan Murray" label="Jan Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308314" start="61731" end="61745" title="Julie Klausner" label="Julie Klausner"/>
<link wikidata="Q269890" start="61747" end="61758" title="Don Rickles" label="Don Rickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q314640" start="61760" end="61772" title="Andy Samberg" label="Andy Samberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q191966" start="61774" end="61785" title="Gene Wilder" label="Gene Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="61787" end="61799" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q114193440" start="61801" end="61817" title="Gianmarco Soresi" label="Gianmarco Soresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886423" start="61819" end="61830" title="Ben Schwartz" label="Ben Shwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="62005" end="62011" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="62042" end="62051" title="ancient history" label="Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="62060" end="62071" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q255481" start="62077" end="62087" title="Tabernacle" label="Tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="62100" end="62120" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="Temples in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="62212" end="62222" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="62289" end="62302" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="62311" end="62316" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="62339" end="62345" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577089" start="62389" end="62411" title="Dura Europas Synagogue" label="Dura Europas Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="62463" end="62467" title="ISIL" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="62499" end="62508" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839525" start="62548" end="62558" title="gold glass" label="gold glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="62615" end="62626" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="62639" end="62645" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="62749" end="62768" title="signs of the Zodiac" label="signs of the Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q20083909" start="62863" end="62869" title="Naaran" label="Naaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="62967" end="62977" title="sarcophagi" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q830805" start="63012" end="63030" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;arim National Park" label="Beit She&amp;#x27;arim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516783" start="63082" end="63092" title="Jews in the Middle Ages" label="Middle Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="63093" end="63103" title="Rabbinical literature" label="Rabbinical"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="63108" end="63119" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268253" start="63217" end="63234" title="Sarajevo Haggadah" label="Sarajevo Haggadah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070091" start="63267" end="63283" title="Nuremberg Mahzor" label="Nuremberg Mahzor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34545239" start="63469" end="63496" title="Yemeni silver" label="Yemenite Jewish silversmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="63962" end="63967" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q59174" start="64015" end="64024" title="Capernaum" label="Capernaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q432009" start="64093" end="64097" title="Naro" label="Naro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="64111" end="64116" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="64209" end="64220" title="woodcarving" label="wood-carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078913" start="64260" end="64274" title="Plastic arts" label="plastic artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q335261" start="64299" end="64307" title="Ornament (architecture)" label="ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q102217" start="64320" end="64327" title="Vitebsk" label="Vitebsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q830560" start="64371" end="64379" title="bestiary" label="bestiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713635" start="64580" end="64592" title="Jewish Emancipation" label="Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q557380" start="64681" end="64694" title="Salomon Adler" label="Salomon Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="64744" end="64749" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="64952" end="64961" title="Modernism (art)" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q273506" start="66121" end="66135" title="School of Paris" label="École de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q211604" start="66152" end="66164" title="Montparnasse" label="Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q160141" start="66185" end="66198" title="Chaïm Soutine" label="Chaim Soutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q93284" start="66200" end="66212" title="Marc Chagall" label="Marc Chagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q469063" start="66214" end="66226" title="Jules Pascin" label="Jules Pascin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062502" start="66228" end="66250" title="Yitzhak Frenkel" label="Yitzhak Frenkel Frenel"/>
<link wikidata="Q684675" start="66255" end="66269" title="Michel Kikoine" label="Michel Kikoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="66305" end="66328" title="abstract expressionism" label="abstract expressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993263" start="66330" end="66345" title="Alexander Bogen" label="Alexander Bogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q235281" start="66347" end="66366" title="Helen Frankenthaler" label="Helen Frankenthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q365388" start="66368" end="66383" title="Adolph Gottlieb" label="Adolph Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q701952" start="66385" end="66398" title="Philip Guston" label="Philip Guston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301849" start="66400" end="66407" title="Al Held" label="Al Held"/>
<link wikidata="Q237959" start="66409" end="66420" title="Lee Krasner" label="Lee Krasner"/>
<link wikidata="Q374504" start="66422" end="66436" title="Barnett Newman" label="Barnett Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858097" start="66438" end="66452" title="Milton Resnick" label="Milton Resnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q320821" start="66454" end="66466" title="Jack Tworkov" label="Jack Tworkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q160149" start="66468" end="66479" title="Mark Rothko" label="Mark Rothko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688131" start="66485" end="66499" title="Louis Schanker" label="Louis Schanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810140" start="66518" end="66538" title="List of contemporary artists" label="Contemporary artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628885" start="66540" end="66550" title="List of modern artists" label="Modernists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318563" start="66555" end="66569" title="Postmodern art" label="Postmodernists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="66576" end="66588" title="History of the Jews in Russia" label="Russian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q987061" start="66618" end="66631" title="scenic design" label="scenic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q214666" start="66715" end="66725" title="Léon Bakst" label="Léon Bakst"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722396" start="66768" end="66782" title="List of Mexican Jews" label="Mexican Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159594" start="66794" end="66810" title="Pedro Friedeberg" label="Pedro Friedeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588" start="66846" end="66857" title="Frida Kahlo" label="Frida Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422775" start="66922" end="66938" title="Dominik Skutecký" label="Dominik Skutecký"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="67057" end="67071" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601617" start="67120" end="67134" title="Leonard Baskin" label="Leonard Baskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532260" start="67136" end="67149" title="Al Hirschfeld" label="Al Hirschfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q215805" start="67151" end="67160" title="Peter Max" label="Peter Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q695239" start="67162" end="67171" title="Ben Shahn" label="Ben Shahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q325945" start="67173" end="67187" title="Art Spiegelman" label="Art Spiegelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q432856" start="67192" end="67206" title="Saul Steinberg" label="Saul Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962743" start="67228" end="67242" title="Wallace Berman" label="Wallace Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q569505" start="67796" end="67806" title="R.B. Kitaj" label="R.B. Kitaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q328580" start="68391" end="68410" title="Moses Jacob Ezekiel" label="Moses Jacob Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q354779" start="68435" end="68448" title="Jacob Epstein" label="Jacob Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q160172" start="68477" end="68490" title="Ossip Zadkine" label="Ossip Zadkine"/>
<link wikidata="Q309482" start="68508" end="68517" title="Naum Gabo" label="Naum Gabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966976" start="68537" end="68548" title="Oscar Nemon" label="Oscar Nemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531" start="68569" end="68584" title="Louise Nevelson" label="Louise Nevelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q765387" start="68605" end="68619" title="Herbert Ferber" label="Herbert Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q241754" start="68681" end="68694" title="André Kertész" label="André Kertész"/>
<link wikidata="Q467574" start="68696" end="68708" title="Robert Frank" label="Robert Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q57395" start="68710" end="68723" title="Helmut Newton" label="Helmut Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q121903" start="68725" end="68740" title="Garry Winogrand" label="Garry Winogrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q229455" start="68742" end="68755" title="Cindy Sherman" label="Cindy Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062488" start="68757" end="68769" title="Steve Lehman (photographer)" label="Steve Lehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389615" start="68775" end="68782" title="Adi Nes" label="Adi Nes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914856" start="68844" end="68858" title="Sigalit Landau" label="Sigalit Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16128550" start="68860" end="68864" title="Dede (artist)" label="Dede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930439" start="68870" end="68883" title="Michal Rovner" label="Michal Rovner"/>
<link wikidata="Q911059" start="68922" end="68933" title="Graphic arts" label="Graphic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q784877" start="69026" end="69032" title="Golden Age of Comic Books" label="Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q430544" start="69037" end="69048" title="Silver Age of Comic Books" label="Silver ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066682" start="69184" end="69194" title="Max Gaines" label="Max Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066283" start="69313" end="69327" title="Famous Funnies" label="Famous Funnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113684" start="69361" end="69375" title="Jack Liebowitz" label="Jack Liebowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668434" start="69380" end="69395" title="Harry Donenfeld" label="Harry Donenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611907" start="69397" end="69422" title="All-American Publications" label="All-American Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607053" start="69531" end="69535" title="Atom (Al Pratt)" label="Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120560" start="69537" end="69542" title="Flash (Jay Garrick)" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q32884" start="69544" end="69557" title="Green Lantern" label="Green Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359610" start="69559" end="69566" title="Hawkman" label="Hawkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="69584" end="69596" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799866" start="69705" end="69721" title="Detective Comics" label="Detective Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="69738" end="69751" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="69796" end="69805" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="69821" end="69834" title="pulp magazine" label="pulp magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169061" start="69845" end="69859" title="Martin Goodman (publisher)" label="Martin Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358070" start="69867" end="69886" title="Timely Comics" label="Timely Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="69931" end="69944" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="69973" end="69981" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="69983" end="69993" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009797" start="69995" end="70007" title="Larry Lieber" label="Larry Lieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q725384" start="70012" end="70021" title="Joe Simon" label="Joe Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="70095" end="70105" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="70107" end="70111" title="Hulk" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q190679" start="70113" end="70128" title="Captain America" label="Captain America"/>
<link wikidata="Q180704" start="70130" end="70138" title="Iron Man" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="70140" end="70144" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q327553" start="70146" end="70155" title="Daredevil (Marvel Comics character)" label="Daredevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q152098" start="70183" end="70197" title="Fantastic Four" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q322646" start="70199" end="70207" title="Avengers (comics)" label="Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="70221" end="70226" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q911971" start="70278" end="70290" title="S.H.I.E.L.D." label="S.H.I.E.L.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="70371" end="70380" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="70441" end="70449" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q471619" start="70497" end="70508" title="Joe Shuster" label="Joe Shuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q380113" start="70513" end="70525" title="Jerry Siegel" label="Jerry Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214648" start="70569" end="70575" title="Samson" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="70636" end="70641" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q313048" start="70692" end="70700" title="Bob Kane" label="Bob Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q464282" start="70702" end="70713" title="Bill Finger" label="Bill Finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370746" start="70718" end="70731" title="Martin Nodell" label="Martin Nodell"/>
<link wikidata="Q32884" start="70751" end="70764" title="Green Lantern" label="Green Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="70766" end="70772" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59996" start="70816" end="70821" title="Robin (comics)" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217533" start="70823" end="70832" title="Joker (comics)" label="The Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q836789" start="70834" end="70841" title="Riddler" label="Riddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q295375" start="70843" end="70852" title="Scarecrow (DC Comics)" label="Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q158952" start="70869" end="70877" title="Catwoman" label="Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365108" start="70885" end="70893" title="Gil Kane" label="Gil Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685120" start="70915" end="70919" title="Atom (Ray Palmer)" label="Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194243" start="70936" end="70945" title="Iron Fist (character)" label="Iron Fist"/>
<link wikidata="Q282102" start="71029" end="71044" title="Julius Schwartz" label="Julius Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q224644" start="71046" end="71056" title="Joe Kubert" label="Joe Kubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q535728" start="71058" end="71070" title="Jenette Kahn" label="Jenette Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q51057" start="71072" end="71080" title="Len Wein" label="Len Wein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351554" start="71082" end="71093" title="Peter David" label="Peter David"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="71095" end="71106" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q631369" start="71108" end="71123" title="Chris Claremont" label="Chris Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q720012" start="71128" end="71148" title="Brian Michael Bendis" label="Brian Michael Bendis"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="71239" end="71246" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q929273" start="71248" end="71259" title="Quicksilver (comics)" label="Quicksilver"/>
<link wikidata="Q547306" start="71261" end="71272" title="Kitty Pryde" label="Kitty Pryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q910204" start="71274" end="71283" title="Thing (comics)" label="The Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q744104" start="71285" end="71294" title="Sasquatch (comics)" label="Sasquatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777040" start="71296" end="71301" title="Sabra (comics)" label="Sabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17619357" start="71303" end="71309" title="Ragman (comics)" label="Ragman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607791" start="71311" end="71317" title="Legion (Marvel Comics)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037532" start="71335" end="71346" title="Moon Knight" label="Moon Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274252" start="71478" end="71487" title="EC Comics" label="EC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027419" start="71668" end="71688" title="Tales from the Crypt (comics)" label="Tales from the Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521220" start="71709" end="71726" title="The Haunt of Fear" label="The Haunt of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523194" start="71740" end="71759" title="The Vault of Horror (comics)" label="The Vault of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002604" start="71773" end="71792" title="Crime SuspenStories" label="Crime SuspenStories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482431" start="71809" end="71828" title="Shock SuspenStories" label="Shock SuspenStories"/>
<link wikidata="Q462714" start="71898" end="71910" title="Al Feldstein" label="Al Feldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173121" start="71912" end="71921" title="Dave Berg (cartoonist)" label="Dave Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157226" start="71927" end="71937" title="Jack Kamen" label="Jack Kamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q309850" start="71940" end="71951" title="Will Eisner" label="Will Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q59999" start="72104" end="72110" title="Spirit (comics)" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="72139" end="72152" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085034" start="72159" end="72178" title="A Contract with God" label="A Contract with God"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="72190" end="72202" title="Eisner Award" label="Eisner Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q323066" start="72308" end="72322" title="William Gaines" label="William Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q732474" start="72327" end="72342" title="Harvey Kurtzman" label="Harvey Kurtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="72357" end="72360" title="Mad (magazine)" label="Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="72446" end="72455" title="satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q462714" start="72529" end="72541" title="Al Feldstein" label="Al Feldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q554900" start="72652" end="72660" title="Lee Falk" label="Lee Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q947755" start="72678" end="72689" title="The Phantom" label="The Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q59694" start="72706" end="72727" title="Mandrake the Magician" label="Mandrake the Magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q115730" start="72756" end="72770" title="Michael Netzer" label="Michael Netzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900507" start="72782" end="72788" title="Uri-On" label="Uri-On"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900524" start="72793" end="72801" title="Uri Fink" label="Uri Fink"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067704" start="72813" end="72819" title="Zbeng!" label="Zbeng!"/>
<link wikidata="Q552255" start="72821" end="72834" title="William Steig" label="William Steig"/>
<link wikidata="Q920424" start="72853" end="72859" title="Shrek!" label="Shrek!"/>
<link wikidata="Q712675" start="72867" end="72880" title="Daniel Clowes" label="Daniel Clowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349042" start="72899" end="72908" title="Eightball (comics)" label="Eightball"/>
<link wikidata="Q325945" start="72916" end="72930" title="Art Spiegelman" label="Art Spiegelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59696" start="72962" end="72966" title="Maus" label="Maus"/>
<link wikidata="Q615267" start="72983" end="72986" title="Raw (comics magazine)" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q941550" start="72999" end="73014" title="Françoise Mouly" label="Françoise Mouly"/>
<link wikidata="Q347111" start="73066" end="73084" title="Genndy Tartakovsky" label="Genndy Tartakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q904733" start="73145" end="73169" title="Dexter&amp;#x27;s Laboratory" label="Dexter&amp;#x27;s Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q694101" start="73186" end="73198" title="Samurai Jack" label="Samurai Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="73206" end="73216" title="Matt Stone" label="Matt Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="73237" end="73247" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234989" start="73255" end="73270" title="David Hilberman" label="David Hilberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43051" start="73296" end="73301" title="Bambi" label="Bambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="73318" end="73349" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q457864" start="73357" end="73369" title="Friz Freleng" label="Friz Freleng"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="73377" end="73389" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022489" start="73396" end="73412" title="C. H. Greenblatt" label="C. H. Greenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q756428" start="73419" end="73426" title="Chowder (TV series)" label="Chowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q19263671" start="73444" end="73456" title="Harvey Beaks" label="Harvey Beaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q315441" start="73464" end="73476" title="Ralph Bakshi" label="Ralph Bakshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418615" start="73484" end="73497" title="Fritz the Cat (film)" label="Fritz the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73499" end="73531" title="Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures" label="Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235590" start="73533" end="73540" title="Wizards (film)" label="Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q378913" start="73542" end="73563" title="The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592638" start="73565" end="73578" title="Heavy Traffic" label="Heavy Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q254671" start="73580" end="73588" title="Coonskin (film)" label="Coonskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616888" start="73590" end="73611" title="Hey Good Lookin&amp;#x27; (film)" label="Hey Good Lookin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q240478" start="73613" end="73625" title="Fire and Ice (1983 film)" label="Fire and Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26265" start="73643" end="73653" title="Cool World" label="Cool World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717190" start="73661" end="73672" title="Alex Hirsch" label="Alex Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q550555" start="73691" end="73704" title="Gravity Falls" label="Gravity Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173200" start="73712" end="73726" title="Dave Fleischer" label="Dave Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685491" start="73731" end="73744" title="Lou Fleischer" label="Lou Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427842" start="73764" end="73781" title="Fleischer Studios" label="Fleischer Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q93788" start="73789" end="73802" title="Max Fleischer" label="Max Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q583810" start="73823" end="73833" title="Betty Boop" label="Betty Boop"/>
<link wikidata="Q199796" start="73847" end="73853" title="Popeye" label="Popeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="73870" end="73878" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12569944" start="73886" end="73899" title="Rebecca Sugar" label="Rebecca Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615342" start="73912" end="73927" title="Steven Universe" label="Steven Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="74003" end="74013" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="DreamWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="74054" end="74059" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261392" start="74061" end="74071" title="Madagascar (franchise)" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q129193" start="74073" end="74086" title="Kung Fu Panda (film)" label="Kung Fu Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q245227" start="74103" end="74122" title="The Prince of Egypt" label="The Prince of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="74136" end="74148" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q13416804" start="74162" end="74180" title="Warner Bros. Animation" label="animation division"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="74217" end="74229" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q387943" start="74231" end="74251" title="Tiny Toon Adventures" label="Tiny Toon Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q547744" start="74253" end="74263" title="Animaniacs" label="Animaniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500726" start="74265" end="74284" title="Pinky and the Brain" label="Pinky and the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q917608" start="74301" end="74312" title="Freakazoid!" label="Freakazoid!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547037" start="74422" end="74436" title="Middle Eastern cuisine" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q622512" start="74453" end="74460" title="Spanish cuisine" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47629" start="74462" end="74468" title="German cuisine" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q12672014" start="74473" end="74489" title="Eastern European cuisine" label="Eastern European"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="74551" end="74557" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q272502" start="74595" end="74601" title="bagels" label="bagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q241987" start="74603" end="74609" title="hummus" label="hummus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499669" start="74611" end="74626" title="stuffed cabbage" label="stuffed cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715760" start="74632" end="74638" title="blintz" label="blintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203886" start="74747" end="74754" title="tzimmis" label="tzimmis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433558" start="74756" end="74763" title="cholent" label="cholent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907412" start="74765" end="74773" title="Malawach" label="Malawach"/>
<link wikidata="Q559201" start="74778" end="74789" title="Matzah ball" label="Matzah ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q284288" start="74813" end="74827" title="Jewish cuisine" label="Jewish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428856" start="74852" end="74866" title="Philo-Semitism" label="Philo-Semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182116" start="75006" end="75019" title="Fetishism" label="fetishization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="75024" end="75037" title="Jews" label="Jewish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="75039" end="75052" title="Jewish history" label="their history"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="75132" end="75139" title="gentile" label="gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="75296" end="75305" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="75447" end="75463" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q210192" start="75482" end="75493" title="History of the Jews in South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137454" start="75498" end="75503" title="History of the Jews in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611291" start="75537" end="75548" title="Stereotypes of Jews" label="stereotyped"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="75650" end="75663" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="75860" end="75866" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q385334" start="75884" end="75901" title="Culture of Israel" label="Culture of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936584" start="75904" end="75925" title="Visual arts in Israel" label="Visual arts in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q951353" start="75928" end="75946" title="Humanistic Judaism" label="Humanistic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748613" start="75949" end="75964" title="Jewish folklore" label="Jewish folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q42002" start="75967" end="75981" title="Jewish studies" label="Jewish studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q110682345" start="75984" end="76002" title="Jews and Christmas" label="Jews and Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444760" start="76010" end="76037" title="Secular Culture &amp;amp; Ideas" label="Secular Culture &amp;amp; Ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q110722850" start="76046" end="76075" title="Traditional Jewish chronology" label="Traditional Jewish chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005993" start="76078" end="76096" title="Islam in Jerusalem" label="Islam in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915732" start="76099" end="76110" title="Yiddishkeit" label="Yiddishkeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525701" start="76113" end="76137" title="Islamic–Jewish relations" label="Islamic–Jewish relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984100" start="76459" end="76471" title="Neal Gabler" label="Gabler, Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749895" start="76479" end="76534" title="An Empire of Their Own" label="An Empire of Their Own: How the Jews Invented Hollywood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262065" wikidata="Q2571504" url="?curid=1262065" title="Joe Escalante">
<text>Joseph Patrick Escalante (born January 30, 1963) is an American musician, television writer, film and television director, radio host, and former television executive. He is known professionally as the bassist and songwriter for the punk rock band The Vandals, and creator and episodic director of the paranormal travel series &quot;Monsters Across America&quot; on Fox Nation.

==Early life==
Escalante was born the youngest of 7 children in Long Beach, California to a Mexican father and Irish mother and grew up in Rossmoor, California, an unincorporated area of Orange County. His father was a pioneer in the electric sign industry, founding Superior Signs, Intl. and designing several iconic atomic age flashing signs that have dotted prominent American city skylines. His mother worked as a bowling alley clerk in Seal Beach, California.

===Education===
Escalante received his Bachelor degree from UCLA studying Viking civilization under Professor Jesse Byock and his Juris Doctor from Loyola Law School. He graduated from Los Alamitos High School in the class of 1981 and was elected to the Los Alamitos High Hall of Fame in 2014. Escalante studied at University of Iceland at Reykjavik Graduate Program in 1985.

== Career ==
===Career with The Vandals===
In 1981, at age 18, Escalante joined the punk rock band The Vandals, becoming their first permanent drummer, and would remain the sole constant member throughout the rest of their career. The Vandals released their debut EP &quot;Peace thru Vandalism&quot; in 1982 through Epitaph Records. In 1984 Escalante and the other band members appeared in the Roger Corman film &quot;Suburbia,&quot; directed by Penelope Spheeris and released their first album &quot;When in Rome Do as the Vandals&quot;
In 1987 they appeared in another Spheeris film, &quot;Dudes&quot;. By 1989 Escalante had moved from the drums into the bass guitar position. The current iteration of singer Dave Quackenbush, guitarist Warren Fitzgerald, and drummer Josh Freese released the album &quot;Fear of a Punk Planet&quot;, establishing themselves amongst an emerging new crop of southern California punk rock bands. This lineup would remain consistent throughout the rest of the band&#x27;s career and would release numerous albums and tour extensively. 

===Television career===
After graduating law school in 1992, Escalante worked as an executive in the department of business affairs for CBS. During his time with the network, he negotiated actor, writer, and director deals on programs like &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot;, &quot;Rescue 911&quot;, and &quot;Walker, Texas Ranger&quot;, for which he co-produced the theme song “Eyes of a Ranger” after convincing Chuck Norris to sing the theme song to his own series.

After four years, he left CBS to consult with the United Paramount Network, tour with The Vandals, and operate his record label Kung Fu Records where he also produced concert films and low-budget features. In 1999, one of the first streaming TV series, &quot;Fear of A Punk Planet,&quot; was ordered by the Digital Entertainment Network (DEN), and was later released as a comic book in 2017.

In 2015, Escalante was hired by the Discovery I.D./Discovery Channel to produce scripted true crime TV series &quot;True Nightmares&quot; where he wrote scripts and served as the production re-writer for the 1st and 2nd seasons. In 2017 he began working as a writer for History Channel&#x27;s sci-fi documentary series &quot;Ancient Aliens&quot;. As a freelance writer, Escalante has penned scripts for such shows as Oxygen Channel&#x27;s &quot;Buried in the Back Yard&quot;, Travel Channel&#x27;s &quot;In Search of Monsters&quot;, and History&#x27;s &quot;Curse of Oak Island&quot;.

In 2018, Escalante wrote the pilot script for the reboot of the 1960s hit TV series &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Heroes&quot; for original creator and 2 time best picture winner Albert S. Ruddy, which as of 2022 is still in development with Albert S. Ruddy Productions. This time, the series is set in Guantanamo Bay.

Escalante sold the paranormal show &quot;Monsters Across America&quot; starring Kacie McDonnell to Fox Nation in 2020.

===Nitro and Kung Fu Records===
In 1995 the Vandals signed a record deal with Nitro Records owned by The Offspring&#x27;s Dexter Holland and released the album &quot;Live Fast, Diarrhea&quot;. The album brought increased attention to the band and Escalante toured with them internationally. He directed their music video for &quot;I Have a Date,&quot; and would continue to direct the band&#x27;s videos throughout the rest of their career. The band released 3 more albums on Nitro over the next 5 years, with Escalante participating on all of them.

In 1996 Escalante and Warren Fitzgerald started the record label Kung Fu Records, initially to release a debut album by the Assorted Jelly Beans. Escalante named the label after his study of Kung Fu San Soo. Eventually, Escalante left CBS Television and took over operations of the label, signing acts such as The Ataris, Ozma, Tsunami Bomb, Kenneth Keith Kallenbach, Longmont Potion Castle, and The Vandals. Kung Fu&#x27;s most successful release was Buddha, the debut album by the band Blink-182. Escalante ran the U.S. and European operations for 20 years, then sold the label to Cleopatra Records, who continue to maintain it as a separate imprint.

=== Directing and producing ===
Using his experience in the television industry, Escalante formed Kung Fu Films in 2000 as an offshoot of the record label, and produced and starred in the independent film &quot;That Darn Punk&quot; and the early streaming series &quot;Fear of a Punk Planet&quot;. He also continued to produce and direct music videos for The Vandals and for other acts on the Kung Fu label. In 2002 he launched the DVD live concert series &quot;The Show Must Go Off!&quot; for which produced and/or directed over 20 long form concert films. In 2005, he directed the independent film, shot on film, &quot;Cake Boy&quot; featuring Scott Aukerman, Warren Fitzgerald, Bob Odenkirk, Patton Oswalt, Brian Posehn, and Cherry 2000&#x27;s Pamela Gidley.

===Sweet and Tender Hooligans===
In 2004 Escalante joined the Sweet and Tender Hooligans, a Smiths/Morrissey tribute band composed primarily of Latino members. In 2006 he traveled with them to the United Kingdom to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Smiths album &quot;The Queen Is Dead&quot;.

===Radio hosting===
In 2005, Escalante was hired to host a weekly radio program originally &quot;Barely Legal Radio&quot; on the Los Angeles/Orange County radio station Indie 103.1 FM, where he dispensed entertainment and legal advice to aspiring musicians. In May 2006, he became the host of the station&#x27;s morning drive-time program &quot;The Last of the Famous International Morning Shows&quot;, replacing Mighty Mighty Bosstones singer Dicky Barrett.

Escalante&#x27;s morning show included daily appearances by film director David Lynch, who served as weatherman, and actor Timothy Olyphant, who served as a sports commentator. The show also featured a weekly wine tasting and education hour called &quot;Wino Wednesday&quot;, and hosted a number of celebrity guests including Crispin Glover, Christina Ricci, Pat Buchanan, Will Ferrell, Maynard James Keenan, Werner Herzog, Phil Donahue, Kristen Stewart, Harry Shearer, Dennis Hopper, and Andy Dick. The show was endorsed by companies and products such as iPod, iTunes, and AT&amp;T. Indie pulled the plug on the show in November 2008. Two months later, the entire station went off the air and switched to Spanish ranchero music.

Joe&#x27;s call-in entertainment law show stayed on the web version on Indie 1031 until it finally landed on Clear Channel/Iheart Media&#x27;s KEIB AM 1150 in 2009, where it can still be heard today live on Sundays at 5pm to 7pm, PST. In April 2019, the name was changed to &quot;Joe Escalante, Live from Hollywood.&quot;

== Personal life ==
===Marriage===
Escalante married in 1996. His wife, Sandra Escalante, appeared briefly in the 2005 film &quot;Cake Boy&quot; which he directed. The two now live together in Seal Beach, California.

=== Family ===
Escalante&#x27;s brother Greg Escalante founded Juxtapoz magazine and the Gregorio Escalante Gallery. Escalante&#x27;s step brother Mike Fries is CEO and Vice Chairman of Liberty Global. Escalante&#x27;s brother in law is actor/composer Paul Williams.

===Religious and political views===
Escalante teaches Catechism at St. Peter Chanel Catholic Church in Hawaiian Gardens where he is a daily communicant. His views have been described as conservative, although he has no stated political party affiliation.

From 2008 to 2012, Escalante worked as a volunteer temporary judge for the Los Angeles superior court, and later placed himself on the ballot for a paid position in a non-partisan race. Street artist Shepard Fairey created a campaign poster for Escalante, his first candidate poster since his iconic representation of President Barack Obama. Escalante raised $15,000 for his campaign with the posters and received 18.41% of the vote. His opponent spent a record $450,000 to defeat him.

==Discography==

;Studio albums
*1984: &quot;When in Rome Do as the Vandals&quot;
*1989: &quot;Slippery When Ill&quot;
*1990: &quot;Fear of a Punk Planet&quot;
*1995: &quot;Live Fast, Diarrhea&quot;
*1996: &quot;The Quickening&quot;
*1996: &quot;Oi to the World!&quot;
*1998: &quot;Hitler Bad, Vandals Good&quot;
*2000: &quot;Look What I Almost Stepped In...&quot;
*2002: &quot;Internet Dating Superstuds&quot;
*2004: &quot;Hollywood Potato Chip&quot;

==Filmography==

===Acting===
I Escalante&#x27;s scenes in &quot;Punk Rock Holocaust&quot; were deleted from the final version of the film.

===Direction and production===

==References==
==External links==
* Barely Legal Radio
* Professional website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2571504" start="0" end="24" title="Joe Escalante" label="Joseph Patrick Escalante"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="233" end="242" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570297" start="248" end="259" title="The Vandals" label="The Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="443" end="465" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="471" end="478" title="Mexicans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649551" start="518" end="538" title="Rossmoor, California" label="Rossmoor, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="566" end="579" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q593039" start="820" end="842" title="Seal Beach, California" label="Seal Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="884" end="899" title="Bachelor degree" label="Bachelor degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="905" end="909" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="975" end="987" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694579" start="993" end="1010" title="Loyola Law School" label="Loyola Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018907" start="1030" end="1054" title="Los Alamitos High School" label="Los Alamitos High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q196559" start="1160" end="1181" title="University of Iceland" label="University of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1306" end="1315" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570297" start="1321" end="1332" title="The Vandals" label="The Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="1486" end="1488" title="extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157559" start="1495" end="1515" title="Peace thru Vandalism" label="Peace thru Vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q726153" start="1538" end="1553" title="Epitaph Records" label="Epitaph Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="1616" end="1628" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502714" start="1640" end="1648" title="Suburbia (film)" label="Suburbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q441578" start="1668" end="1685" title="Penelope Spheeris" label="Penelope Spheeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019392" start="1723" end="1753" title="When in Rome Do as the Vandals" label="When in Rome Do as the Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570297" start="1933" end="1949" title="Dave Quackenbush" label="Dave Quackenbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464721" start="1961" end="1978" title="Warren Fitzgerald" label="Warren Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q451076" start="1992" end="2003" title="Josh Freese" label="Josh Freese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740581" start="2029" end="2050" title="Fear of a Punk Planet (album)" label="Fear of a Punk Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2427" end="2430" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="2537" end="2560" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270887" start="2574" end="2584" title="Rescue 911" label="Rescue 911"/>
<link wikidata="Q426432" start="2602" end="2622" title="Walker, Texas Ranger" label="Walker, Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q537118" start="2890" end="2905" title="Kung Fu Records" label="Kung Fu Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275856" start="3069" end="3098" title="Digital Entertainment Network" label="Digital Entertainment Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="3206" end="3223" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317589" start="3631" end="3652" title="Travel Channel" label="Travel Channel&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="3692" end="3699" title="History (American TV network)" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q431917" start="3831" end="3850" title="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Heroes" label="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q280490" start="3909" end="3924" title="Albert S. Ruddy" label="Albert S. Ruddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q88463530" start="4130" end="4145" title="Kacie McDonnell" label="Kacie McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q265169" start="4248" end="4261" title="Nitro Records" label="Nitro Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="4271" end="4284" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q317095" start="4292" end="4306" title="Dexter Holland" label="Dexter Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835185" start="4336" end="4355" title="Live Fast, Diarrhea" label="Live Fast, Diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464721" start="4743" end="4760" title="Warren Fitzgerald" label="Warren Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q537118" start="4786" end="4801" title="Kung Fu Records" label="Kung Fu Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325606" start="4845" end="4865" title="Assorted Jelly Beans" label="Assorted Jelly Beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415332" start="4912" end="4927" title="Kung Fu San Soo" label="Kung Fu San Soo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373222" start="5031" end="5041" title="The Ataris" label="The Ataris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277429" start="5043" end="5047" title="Ozma (band)" label="Ozma"/>
<link wikidata="Q493098" start="5049" end="5061" title="Tsunami Bomb" label="Tsunami Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="5209" end="5218" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397901" start="5304" end="5321" title="Cleopatra Records" label="Cleopatra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764014" start="5837" end="5858" title="The Show Must Go Off!" label="The Show Must Go Off!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435918" start="6021" end="6035" title="Scott Aukerman" label="Scott Aukerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464721" start="6037" end="6054" title="Warren Fitzgerald" label="Warren Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q888178" start="6056" end="6068" title="Bob Odenkirk" label="Bob Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="6070" end="6083" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="6085" end="6097" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q446195" start="6122" end="6135" title="Pamela Gidley" label="Pamela Gidley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="6230" end="6236" title="The Smiths" label="Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="6237" end="6246" title="Morrissey" label="Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190668" start="6247" end="6259" title="tribute band" label="tribute band"/>
<link wikidata="Q853308" start="6410" end="6427" title="The Queen Is Dead" label="The Queen Is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="6565" end="6576" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="6577" end="6590" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327905" start="6605" end="6616" title="KDLD" label="Indie 103.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="6617" end="6619" title="FM Broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327973" start="6849" end="6872" title="The Mighty Mighty Bosstones" label="Mighty Mighty Bosstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273833" start="6880" end="6893" title="Dicky Barrett" label="Dicky Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="6970" end="6981" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q309835" start="7019" end="7035" title="Timothy Olyphant" label="Timothy Olyphant"/>
<link wikidata="Q310060" start="7222" end="7236" title="Crispin Glover" label="Crispin Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q184103" start="7238" end="7253" title="Christina Ricci" label="Christina Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q149127" start="7255" end="7267" title="Patrick Buchanan" label="Pat Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q218503" start="7269" end="7281" title="Will Ferrell" label="Will Ferrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q311621" start="7283" end="7303" title="Maynard James Keenan" label="Maynard James Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="7305" end="7318" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336253" start="7320" end="7332" title="Phil Donahue" label="Phil Donahue"/>
<link wikidata="Q126599" start="7334" end="7349" title="Kristen Stewart" label="Kristen Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q345325" start="7351" end="7364" title="Harry Shearer" label="Harry Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102711" start="7366" end="7379" title="Dennis Hopper" label="Dennis Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q367094" start="7385" end="7394" title="Andy Dick" label="Andy Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9479" start="7452" end="7456" title="iPod" label="iPod"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="7458" end="7464" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="7470" end="7478" title="AT&amp;amp;T Inc." label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q593039" start="8143" end="8165" title="Seal Beach, California" label="Seal Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6319143" start="8231" end="8248" title="Juxtapoz magazine" label="Juxtapoz magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194543" start="8315" end="8325" title="Mike Fries" label="Mike Fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q571779" start="8354" end="8368" title="Liberty Global" label="Liberty Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q927415" start="8420" end="8433" title="Paul Williams (songwriter)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332698" start="8892" end="8906" title="Shepard Fairey" label="Shepard Fairey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019392" start="9224" end="9254" title="When in Rome Do as the Vandals" label="When in Rome Do as the Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962804" start="9274" end="9291" title="Slippery When Ill" label="Slippery When Ill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740581" start="9311" end="9332" title="Fear of a Punk Planet (album)" label="Fear of a Punk Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835185" start="9352" end="9371" title="Live Fast, Diarrhea" label="Live Fast, Diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988903" start="9391" end="9405" title="The Quickening (The Vandals album)" label="The Quickening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655346" start="9425" end="9441" title="Oi to the World!" label="Oi to the World!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785954" start="9461" end="9485" title="Hitler Bad, Vandals Good" label="Hitler Bad, Vandals Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145583" start="9505" end="9537" title="Look What I Almost Stepped In..." label="Look What I Almost Stepped In..."/>
<link wikidata="Q3800496" start="9557" end="9583" title="Internet Dating Superstuds" label="Internet Dating Superstuds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786339" start="9603" end="9624" title="Hollywood Potato Chip" label="Hollywood Potato Chip"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262067" wikidata="Q1177068" url="?curid=1262067" title="David Walsh">
<text>David or Dave or Davy Walsh may refer to:
==Politicians==
*David Walsh (politician), Irish senator
*David I. Walsh (1872–1947), American politician, governor of Massachusetts, and U.S. Senator

==Sportspeople==
===Footballers===
*David Walsh (Donegal Gaelic footballer), Donegal player
*David Walsh (Tipperary Gaelic footballer) (born 1966), Irish Gaelic footballer
*Dave Walsh (Australian footballer) (1898–1975), Australian rules footballer
*David Walsh (rugby league) (born 1970), Australian rugby league footballer
*David Walsh (Welsh footballer) (born 1979), former football goalkeeper
*Davy Walsh (1923–2016), Irish footballer

===Other sports===
*Dave Walsh (baseball) (born 1960), baseball pitcher
*David Walsh (cricketer) (born 1946), English former cricketer and current cricket administrator
*Dave Walsh (esports player) (born 1984), American professional gamer
*David Walsh (referee) (1889–1975), American basketball referee
*David Walsh (speedway rider) (born 1963), English speedway rider

==Others==
*David Walsh (actor), American voice actor
*David Walsh (art collector) (born 1961), owner of the Museum of Old and New Art (MONA) in Hobart
*David Walsh (journalist) (born 1955), Irish sports reporter
*David Walsh (mining) (1945–1998), Canadian businessman, founder and CEO of the mining company Bre-X
*David Walsh (psychologist), founder of the National Institute on Media and the Family
*David Walsh (writer) (born 1949), American film critic and political writer for the World Socialist Web Site
*David M. Walsh (born 1931), American cinematographer

==Fictional==
*David Walsh (&quot;EastEnders&quot;), fictional character</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1177068" start="0" end="5" title="David Walsh" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177068" start="9" end="13" title="David Walsh" label="Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177068" start="17" end="27" title="David Walsh" label="Davy Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228794" start="59" end="83" title="David Walsh (politician)" label="David Walsh (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q881431" start="100" end="114" title="David I. Walsh" label="David I. Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240805" start="230" end="269" title="David Walsh (Donegal Gaelic footballer)" label="David Walsh (Donegal Gaelic footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063805" start="287" end="328" title="David Walsh (Tipperary Gaelic footballer)" label="David Walsh (Tipperary Gaelic footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007895" start="367" end="401" title="Dave Walsh (Australian footballer)" label="Dave Walsh (Australian footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65030326" start="444" end="470" title="David Walsh (rugby league)" label="David Walsh (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43170848" start="520" end="550" title="David Walsh (Welsh footballer)" label="David Walsh (Welsh footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242226" start="592" end="602" title="Davy Walsh" label="Davy Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230058" start="654" end="675" title="Dave Walsh (baseball)" label="Dave Walsh (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107543" start="707" end="730" title="David Walsh (cricketer)" label="David Walsh (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230059" start="804" end="831" title="Dave Walsh (esports player)" label="Dave Walsh (esports player)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703365" start="874" end="895" title="David Walsh (referee)" label="David Walsh (referee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107724800" start="938" end="966" title="David Walsh (speedway rider)" label="David Walsh (speedway rider)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240806" start="1016" end="1035" title="David Walsh (actor)" label="David Walsh (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240807" start="1059" end="1086" title="David Walsh (art collector)" label="David Walsh (art collector)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177071" start="1157" end="1181" title="David Walsh (journalist)" label="David Walsh (journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177074" start="1218" end="1238" title="David Walsh (mining)" label="David Walsh (mining)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240809" start="1319" end="1345" title="David Walsh (psychologist)" label="David Walsh (psychologist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177070" start="1406" end="1426" title="David Walsh (writer)" label="David Walsh (writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175411" start="1516" end="1530" title="David M. Walsh" label="David M. Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569679" start="1585" end="1621" title="David Walsh (EastEnders)" label="David Walsh (&amp;quot;EastEnders&amp;quot;)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262070" wikidata="Q4637677" url="?curid=1262070" title="41st New Zealand Parliament">
<text>The 41st New Zealand Parliament was a term of the Parliament of New Zealand. Its composition was determined by the 1984 elections, and it sat until the 1987 elections.

The 41st Parliament was the first term of the fourth Labour Party government. It marked the end of three terms of National Party administration under Robert Muldoon. David Lange become Prime Minister and Roger Douglas became Minister of Finance — the economic reforms undertaken by Douglas, nicknamed &quot;Rogernomics&quot;, would prove to be a defining feature of the fourth Labour government, and were deeply unpopular with Labour&#x27;s traditional support base. The National Party, now in opposition, experienced a number of leadership disputes, replacing Muldoon first with Jim McLay and then with Jim Bolger.

The 41st Parliament consisted of ninety-five representatives, the highest number since the 10th Parliament (elected in 1887). All of these representatives were chosen by single-member geographical electorates, including four Māori electorates.

== Electoral boundaries for the 41st Parliament ==
==Overview of seats==
The table below shows the number of MPs in each party following the 1984 election and at dissolution:

Notes
*The Working Government majority is calculated as all Government MPs less all other parties.

== Initial composition of the 41st Parliament ==

== By-elections during 41st Parliament ==
There were a number of changes during the term of the 41st Parliament.

=== Summary of changes during term ===
* Basil Arthur, the long-serving Labour MP for Timaru, died in 1985. The by-election in Timaru was won by Maurice McTigue of the National Party.

==Notes==
== References ==
*
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4637677" start="4" end="31" title="41st New Zealand Parliament" label="41st New Zealand Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="50" end="75" title="New Zealand Parliament" label="Parliament of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055253" start="115" end="129" title="1984 New Zealand general election" label="1984 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016158" start="152" end="166" title="1987 New Zealand general election" label="1987 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="222" end="234" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="283" end="297" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="319" end="333" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q367589" start="335" end="346" title="David Lange" label="David Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="354" end="368" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q352998" start="373" end="386" title="Roger Douglas" label="Roger Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866129" start="394" end="413" title="Minister of Finance (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q745640" start="476" end="487" title="Rogernomics" label="Rogernomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135999" start="749" end="758" title="Jim McLay" label="Jim McLay"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="773" end="783" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547120" start="877" end="892" title="10th New Zealand Parliament" label="10th Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016096" start="905" end="909" title="1887 New Zealand general election" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959427" start="1011" end="1028" title="Māori electorates" label="Māori electorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867099" start="1512" end="1524" title="Basil Arthur" label="Basil Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804577" start="1557" end="1563" title="Timaru (New Zealand electorate)" label="Timaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804582" start="1583" end="1604" title="1985 Timaru by-election" label="by-election in Timaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301157" start="1616" end="1631" title="Maurice McTigue" label="Maurice McTigue"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262073" wikidata="Q6190064" url="?curid=1262073" title="Jewish leadership">
<text>Jewish leadership () has evolved over time. Since the destruction of the Second Temple in Jerusalem in 70 CE, there has been no single body that has a leadership position over the entire Jewish diaspora. Various branches of Judaism, as well as Jewish religious or secular communities and political movements around the world elect or appoint their governing bodies, often subdivided by country or region.

== Historic leadership ==
===Biblical leadership (before 70 CE)===

During the era of the Tanakh, various forms of leadership developed. There were the heads of the original Hebrew tribes, and then also prophets such as Moses, Jeremiah and Samuel and whose words inspire people to this day, judges such as Samson, kings such as David and Solomon, priests of the Temple in Jerusalem, and the Sanhedrin which was the judiciary.

===Mishnaic, Talmudic, Middle Ages leadership (70 to 17th century)===

With the demise of ancient kingdoms of Israel and Judah and coinciding with the revolt of the Maccabees against ancient Greece and later Jewish-Roman wars, the sages of the Mishnah and subsequently the Talmud, referred to as the Oral Law in Judaism, took on a growing and central leadership role. After the destruction of the Second Temple and the subsequent exile for almost two thousand years, the Jews scattered throughout the world turned to their most learned rabbis for local leadership and council.

During Bar Kokhba&#x27;s revolt against Roman Empire (132-135), the supreme religious authority Rabbi Akiva sanctioned Simon bar Kokhba to be a war leader, whereas during the 2nd century Judah haNasi was not only the supreme temporal leader sanctioned by Rome, but also edited the original work of the Mishnah which became the &quot;de facto constitution&quot; of the world&#x27;s Jewry. The final editions of the Talmud became the core curriculum of the majority of Jews.

In Babylonia the Exilarch was almost always a rabbinical personality. The Geonim such as Saadia Gaon (892-942) were not only great sages but also political guides. The writings and rulings of those such as Rashi (1040–1105), Maimonides (1135–1204), Yosef Karo (1488–1575) who published the most widely accepted code of Jewish law the Shulkhan Arukh, Isaac Luria (1534–1572), the Vilna Gaon (1720–1797), the Chafetz Chaim (1838–1933) and many others have shaped Jewish law for almost two thousand years, as their religious rulings were published, distributed, studied, and observed until the present time.

===Early modern leadership (18th and 19th centuries)===

The loose collection of learned rabbis that governed the dispersed Jewish community held sway for a long time. Great parts of Central Europe accepted the leadership of the rabbinical Council of Four Lands from the 16th to the late 18th centuries. In the Eastern Europe, in spite of the rivalry between the schools of thought of the Vilna Gaon (or the GRA, Rabbi Elijah ben Solomon, 1720–1797) of the Mitnagdim, who spoke against Hasidic Judaism and Baal Shem Tov (Rabbi Israel ben Eliezer, 1700–1760), the founder of Hasidic Judaism, rabbis were regarded as the final arbiters of community decisions. Tens of thousands of Responsa and many works were published and studied wherever Jews lived in organized communities. In Western Europe, especially in monarchies, where no equal rights were granted for the Jewish population, radical Maskilim defined the new role of religion as an education of just citizens — like Moses Mendelssohn in his book &quot;Jerusalem or On Religious Power and Judaism&quot; which was a response to the Prussian reformer Christian Wilhelm von Dohm. The radical tendency of the pedagogic movement went so far, that Mendelssohn&#x27;s student David Friedländer identified Judaism with the seclusion of modern European culture and secular Judaism could end up in conversion to the religion of the unsecularized state. In contradiction to his teacher early modern leadership turned out to be misled leadership, whose followers ended up as &quot;Jewish citizens without any conscience&quot;.

==Modern religious leadership (post–19th century)==

===Decline of rabbinic influence===
With the growth of the Renaissance and the development of the secular modern world, and as Jews were welcomed into non-Jewish society particularly during the times of Napoleon in the 18th and 19th centuries, Jews began to leave the Jewish ghettos in Europe, and simultaneously rejected the traditional roles of the rabbis as communal and religious leaders. New leaders such as Israel Jacobson, father of the German Reform Judaism movement, launched an egalitarian, modernist stance that challenged the Orthodoxy. The resulting fractures in Jewish society has translated into a situation whereby there is no single religious governing body for the entire Jewish community at the present time.

===Modern synagogue leadership===
In individual religious congregations or synagogues, the spiritual leader is generally the rabbi. Rabbis are expected to be taught in both the Talmud and the &quot;Shulkhan Arukh&quot; (Code of Jewish Law) as well as many other classical texts of Jewish scholarship. Rabbis go through formal training in Rabbinical texts and responsa, either at a yeshiva or similar institution. &quot;Rabbi&quot; is not a universal term, however, as many Sephardic rabbinic Jewish communities refer to their leaders as &quot;Hakham&quot; (&quot;wise man&quot;). Among Yemenite Jews, known as &quot;Teimanim&quot;, the term &quot;Mori&quot; (&quot;my teacher&quot;) is used. Each religious tradition has its own qualifications for rabbis; for more information, see Semicha (&quot;ordination&quot;). Some synagogues also employ a cantor (&quot;hazzan&quot; or &quot;chazzan&quot;) to lead the chanting of liturgical prayer. Cantors in the Reform movement have a multi-faceted role. They chant prayers, lead congressional singing, and introduce new melodies, blending ancient and modern music. Cantors in Reform congregations or synagogues are part of the clergy. Music and leading liturgical prayer is their primary role, but they may also lead religious school classes and perform pastoral duties. 

===Orthodox and Haredi rabbinic leadership===

In Israel the office of Chief Rabbi has always been very influential. Various Orthodox movements, such as Agudath Israel of America and the Shas party in Israel strictly follow the rulings of their Rosh yeshivas who are often famous Talmud scholars. The last Rebbe of Lubavitch, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the late Rabbi Elazar Menachem Shach, and Rabbi Ovadia Yosef in Israel are examples of powerful contemporary Haredi rabbis. The Haredi Agudah movements receive and follow the policy guidelines of their own &quot;Council of Torah Sages&quot;. In the Hassidic movements, leadership is usually hereditary.

===Reform, Progressive, Liberal, Conservative, and Reconstructionist leadership===
:&quot;Main articles: Conservative rabbis, Reform rabbis, Reconstructionist rabbis&quot;
In both the Reform and Conservative of Judaism, rabbis are often trained at religious universities, such as the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City for the Conservative movement, Hebrew Union College for the American Reform movement, and Leo Baeck College for the UK Liberal and Reform Movements. The Reform, Conservative, and Reconstructionist traditions each have their own governing group or individual leaders. Membership in these governing groups are selected by representatives of the Jewish community they serve, with Jewish scholarship considered to be the key factors for determining leaders. These governing bodies make decisions on the nature of religious practice within their tradition, as well as ordaining and assigning rabbis and other religious leaders.

The Union of Reform Judaism (URJ), the synagogue arm of the Reform Movement in North America, is governed by a 253-member Board of Trustees in close partnership with URJ Chair Daryl Messinger, URJ President Rabbi Rick Jacobs, and the senior leadership team. Delegates from URJ congregations meet once every two years for the URJ General Assembly to pass resolutions that guide the organization&#x27;s future direction.

The body of Conservative rabbis is the Rabbinical Assembly, which maintains a Committee on Jewish Law and Standards. The body of Reform rabbis is the Central Conference of American Rabbis.

==Secular leadership==
Following the Renaissance and the Enlightenment in Europe (with its Jewish &quot;extension&quot; the Haskalah movement, which led to much modern-day assimilation into the cultures of their native countries), the variety of Jewish practice grew, with a widespread adoption of secular values and life-styles. Many modern Jewish communities are served by a variety of secular organizations at the local, national, and international levels. These organizations have no official role in religious life, but often play an important part in the Jewish community. Most of the largest groups, such as Hadassah and the United Jewish Communities, have an elected leadership. No one secular group represents the entire Jewish community, and there is often significant internal debate among Jews about the stances these organizations take on affairs dealing with the Jewish community as a whole, such as antisemitism and Israeli policies.

In the United States and Canada today, the mainly secular United Jewish Communities (UJC), formerly known as the United Jewish Appeal (UJA), represents over 150 Jewish Federations and 400 independent communities across North America. Every major American city has its local &quot;Jewish Federation&quot;, and many have sophisticated community centers and provide services, mainly health care-related. They raise record sums of money for philanthropic and humanitarian causes in North America and Israel. Additional local organizations include Jewish Family Services, Jewish nursing homes and Jewish community foundations. Other organizations such as the Anti-Defamation League, American Jewish Congress, American Jewish Committee, and the B&#x27;nai B&#x27;rith represent different segments of the American Jewish community on a variety of issues.

==Karaite leadership==
A Karaite synagogue is run by a board of directors, and its spiritual leader is often called a &quot;Hakham&quot;, the equivalent of a &quot;rabbi&quot;, and matches one in function. The &quot;Gabbai&quot; is the treasurer, the &quot;Shammash&quot; is the custodian, the &quot;Hazzan&quot; leads prayers, and in some the &quot;Ba&#x27;al Qeri&#x27;ah&quot; leads in the reading of the Torah. In America, Karaites are represented by &quot;the Karaite Jews of America&quot;, and in Israel they are represented.

==See also==
* Rabbi
** Chief Rabbi
* Sanhedrin
* Biblical judges
* List of Jewish leaders in the Land of Israel
* Exilarch
* Kohen
* List of 21st-century religious leaders#Judaism

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6190064" start="0" end="17" title="Jewish leadership" label="Jewish leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="54" end="86" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70)" label="destruction of the Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="90" end="99" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="187" end="202" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001185" start="212" end="220" title="Jewish religious movements" label="branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="224" end="231" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="496" end="502" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="580" end="592" title="Hebrew tribe" label="Hebrew tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q216383" start="609" end="617" title="Nevi&amp;#x27;im" label="prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="626" end="631" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="633" end="641" title="Jeremiah (prophet)" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577515" start="646" end="652" title="Samuel (Bible)" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q621421" start="697" end="703" title="Biblical judges" label="judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q214648" start="712" end="718" title="Samson" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="720" end="725" title="Books of Kings" label="kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="734" end="739" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="744" end="751" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q728973" start="753" end="760" title="Kohen" label="priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="768" end="787" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="Temple in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208481" start="797" end="806" title="Sanhedrin" label="Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="821" end="830" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="923" end="959" title="History of ancient Israel and Judah" label="ancient kingdoms of Israel and Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q400019" start="998" end="1007" title="Maccabees" label="Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1016" end="1030" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205368" start="1041" end="1058" title="Jewish-Roman wars" label="Jewish-Roman wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="1077" end="1084" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="1106" end="1112" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144567" start="1133" end="1141" title="Oral Law" label="Oral Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="1230" end="1243" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="1369" end="1374" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="1418" end="1442" title="Bar Kokhba&amp;#x27;s revolt" label="Bar Kokhba&amp;#x27;s revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1451" end="1463" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q310821" start="1507" end="1518" title="Rabbi Akiva" label="Rabbi Akiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q273117" start="1530" end="1546" title="Simon bar Kokhba" label="Simon bar Kokhba"/>
<link wikidata="Q380427" start="1598" end="1610" title="Judah haNasi" label="Judah haNasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="1713" end="1720" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="1753" end="1765" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="1825" end="1831" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q207137" start="1848" end="1858" title="curriculum" label="curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="1888" end="1897" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265579" start="1902" end="1910" title="Exilarch" label="Exilarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="1959" end="1965" title="Geonim" label="Geonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="1974" end="1985" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456" start="2091" end="2096" title="Rashi" label="Rashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="2110" end="2120" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q467148" start="2134" end="2144" title="Yosef Karo" label="Yosef Karo"/>
<link wikidata="Q822206" start="2219" end="2233" title="Shulkhan Arukh" label="Shulkhan Arukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q339509" start="2235" end="2246" title="Isaac Luria" label="Isaac Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q279359" start="2264" end="2274" title="Vilna Gaon" label="Vilna Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q733140" start="2292" end="2305" title="Yisrael Meir Kagan" label="Chafetz Chaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="2346" end="2356" title="Halakha" label="Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="2674" end="2688" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431729" start="2731" end="2752" title="Council of Four Lands" label="Council of Four Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="2802" end="2816" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q279359" start="2910" end="2928" title="Elijah ben Solomon" label="Elijah ben Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q742796" start="2948" end="2957" title="Mitnagdim" label="Mitnagdim"/>
<link wikidata="Q319062" start="2997" end="3010" title="Baal Shem Tov" label="Baal Shem Tov"/>
<link wikidata="Q319062" start="3018" end="3036" title="Israel ben Eliezer" label="Israel ben Eliezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="3065" end="3080" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890313" start="3170" end="3178" title="Responsa" label="Responsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="3270" end="3284" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="3382" end="3390" title="Haskalah" label="Maskilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q76997" start="3464" end="3481" title="Moses Mendelssohn" label="Moses Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185071" start="3500" end="3543" title="Jerusalem (Mendelssohn)" label="Jerusalem or On Religious Power and Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214983" start="3596" end="3622" title="Christian Wilhelm von Dohm" label="Christian Wilhelm von Dohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q67711" start="3716" end="3733" title="David Friedländer" label="David Friedländer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4175" end="4186" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="4214" end="4221" title="secular" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="4222" end="4234" title="modern world" label="modern world"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="4319" end="4327" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4384" end="4408" title="Ghetto#Jewish ghettos in Europe" label="Jewish ghettos in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q66435" start="4529" end="4544" title="Israel Jacobson" label="Israel Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="4567" end="4581" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="4920" end="4930" title="synagogues" label="synagogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="4970" end="4975" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="5022" end="5028" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q822206" start="5043" end="5057" title="Shulkhan Arukh" label="Shulkhan Arukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890313" start="5204" end="5212" title="responsa" label="responsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="5226" end="5233" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788287" start="5627" end="5634" title="Semicha" label="Semicha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067977" start="5705" end="5711" title="hazzan" label="hazzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501412" start="6233" end="6244" title="Chief Rabbi" label="Chief Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694525" start="6315" end="6340" title="Agudath Israel of America" label="Agudath Israel of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q904635" start="6349" end="6353" title="Shas" label="Shas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308372" start="6407" end="6419" title="Rosh yeshiva" label="Rosh yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q359351" start="6468" end="6473" title="Rebbe" label="Rebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="6477" end="6486" title="Lubavitch" label="Lubavitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q381397" start="6494" end="6520" title="Menachem Mendel Schneerson" label="Menachem Mendel Schneerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324942" start="6537" end="6558" title="Elazar Menachem Shach" label="Elazar Menachem Shach"/>
<link wikidata="Q467172" start="6570" end="6582" title="Ovadia Yosef" label="Ovadia Yosef"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6650" end="6663" title="Haredi Agudah" label="Haredi Agudah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083556" start="6734" end="6756" title="Moetzes Gedolei HaTorah" label="Council of Torah Sages"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="6771" end="6779" title="Hassidic" label="Hassidic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6931" end="6950" title="List of rabbis#Conservative rabbis, 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries" label="Conservative rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6952" end="6965" title="List of rabbis#Reform rabbis, 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries" label="Reform rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6967" end="6991" title="List of rabbis#Reconstructionist rabbis, 20th and 21st centuries" label="Reconstructionist rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="7110" end="7137" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526305" start="7186" end="7206" title="Hebrew Union College" label="Hebrew Union College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508696" start="7245" end="7262" title="Leo Baeck College" label="Leo Baeck College"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="7742" end="7748" title="rabbis" label="rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278551" start="8238" end="8257" title="Rabbinical Assembly" label="Rabbinical Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153075" start="8277" end="8314" title="Committee on Jewish Law and Standards" label="Committee on Jewish Law and Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060634" start="8349" end="8386" title="Central Conference of American Rabbis" label="Central Conference of American Rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8426" end="8437" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="8446" end="8459" title="The Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8463" end="8469" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="8513" end="8521" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="8687" end="8694" title="secular" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="8695" end="8701" title="values" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q473752" start="9004" end="9012" title="Hadassah Women&amp;#x27;s Zionist Organization of America" label="Hadassah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189838" start="9397" end="9422" title="United Jewish Communities" label="United Jewish Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887892" start="9452" end="9472" title="United Jewish Appeal" label="United Jewish Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410496" start="9500" end="9518" title="Jewish Federations" label="Jewish Federations"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="9558" end="9571" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="9776" end="9789" title="philanthropy" label="philanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q775858" start="9794" end="9806" title="humanitarian" label="humanitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="9993" end="10015" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465330" start="10017" end="10041" title="American Jewish Congress" label="American Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q465308" start="10043" end="10068" title="American Jewish Committee" label="American Jewish Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q248686" start="10078" end="10100" title="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith" label="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="10213" end="10220" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="10736" end="10741" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501412" start="10745" end="10756" title="Chief Rabbi" label="Chief Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208481" start="10759" end="10768" title="Sanhedrin" label="Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q621421" start="10771" end="10786" title="Biblical judges" label="Biblical judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q169431" start="10789" end="10833" title="List of Jewish leaders in the Land of Israel" label="List of Jewish leaders in the Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265579" start="10836" end="10844" title="Exilarch" label="Exilarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q728973" start="10847" end="10852" title="Kohen" label="Kohen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10855" end="10901" title="List of 21st-century religious leaders#Judaism" label="List of 21st-century religious leaders#Judaism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262075" wikidata="Q3010274" url="?curid=1262075" title="Troika Pottery">
<text>Troika was an art pottery that operated in Cornwall from 1962 to 1983. It was founded by three people, Leslie Illsley, Jan Thompson and Benny Sirota who took over the Powell and Wells Pottery at Wheal Dream, where Sirota had previously worked as a decorator and driver. The name is from the Russian , meaning &quot;a set of three&quot;, or triumvirate.

==History==
Troika was set up in February 1962 by Leslie Illsley, Jan Thompson and Benny Sirota who took over the Powell and Wells Pottery at Wheal Dream, St Ives, Cornwall, where Benny Sirota had previously worked. They wanted to pursue their vision of pottery as art, without regard to function. This ran counter to the aims of much of the studio pottery movement at the time, as epitomised by the work of Bernard Leach. They initially relied on the ceramics of Leslie&#x27;s wife, Caroline (Kingston School of Art). This included the novel double egg cup and the Love plaque.

The venture rapidly became successful, gaining both critical praise and very high sales through a combination of the summer tourist trade and contracts with department stores such as Heals and Liberty in London. Vases, lamp bases and tableware were made using plaster moulds; tiles and wall plaques were also made in the early years.

The Troika pottery was based at the Wheal Dream site in St Ives from 1962 to 1970, when it moved to Fragden Place in Newlyn. Benny Sirota left in 1980, and with declining sales, the business closed in 1983.

From 19 January to 9 March 2013, an exhibition, &quot;Troika 1963-1983&quot;, was held at the Penlee House Gallery and Museum Penzance, celebrating 50 years since the inception of Troika, which included a number of prototypes by Leslie Illsley. Benny Sirota attended the opening, and explained the origin of the company&#x27;s name: &quot;my grandfather escaped from Russia dressed as a woman on a troika – a sledge with three horses...there were three of us who started the firm – and it just gelled.&quot;

==Ranges==
Troika had two distinct ranges of ceramics — the rough textured wares and the smooth glazed wares. Although there was some crossover in shapes and styles between these ranges, they each had different characters and different successes. A number of examples can be found in the V&amp;A collection.

==References==
==Further reading==

*Cashmore, Carol (1994). &quot;Troika Pottery St Ives&quot;. 
* Perrott, George (2003). &quot;Troika Ceramics of Cornwall&quot;. Gemini Publications. 
* Harris, Ben and Illsley, Lawrence (2013). Troika 63–83. It&#x27;s Pronounced Aitch Publishing. 

==External links==

*Cornish Ceramics information on Troika
*Troika pottery marks and history
*Detailed photographs of Troika pottery
*Largest Troika Pottery Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3010274" start="0" end="6" title="Troika Pottery" label="Troika"/>
<link wikidata="Q87339533" start="14" end="25" title="art pottery" label="art pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="43" end="51" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q26997995" start="103" end="117" title="Leslie Illsley" label="Leslie Illsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83204" start="340" end="351" title="triumvirate" label="triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q724182" start="509" end="526" title="St Ives, Cornwall" label="St Ives, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17106098" start="696" end="710" title="studio pottery" label="studio pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898210" start="762" end="775" title="Bernard Leach" label="Bernard Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690163" start="1117" end="1122" title="Heals (retailer)" label="Heals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237793" start="1127" end="1134" title="Liberty (department store)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13443285" start="1386" end="1392" title="Newlyn" label="Newlyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069041" start="1571" end="1583" title="Penlee House" label="Penlee House"/>
<link wikidata="Q916073" start="1875" end="1881" title="Troika (driving)" label="troika"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="2274" end="2281" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="V&amp;amp;A"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262081" wikidata="Q1432540" url="?curid=1262081" title="Trallalero">
<text>Trallalero is a kind of polyphonic folk music from the Ligurian region of Genoa, in northern Italy. It is traditionally performed by men, though there have been some female performers in the modern era. The name derives from the monosyllabic vocables (non-lexical vocalizations), &quot;tra-la-le-ro&quot;, which feature heavily in the repertoire of the groups or &quot;Squadre&quot;. These are typically sections of songs without words during which the melody is sung on nonsense syllables.

In the 1950s, American musicologist Alan Lomax and Diego Carpitella recorded trallalero. Lomax later claimed he was blown away, and called it the most significant work in his long and storied career. Edward Neill worked to revitalize the tradition in the middle of the 20th century, with a wide range of works by musicologist Mauro Balma making up the majority of modern academic study on the subject.

Trallalero groups consist of tenor, baritone and bass parts, accompanied by a contralto and a singer whose voice imitates a guitar (&quot;chitarra&quot;). As the names of parts suggest, the imitation of instrumental styles replaces traditional vocal polyphony: this is a distinguishing feature of this genre. Nine singers are considered a normal line-up: one each of chitarra, tenor, contralto, baritone and five basses, although sometimes groups can be significantly larger.

In these larger groups basses are often divides into three sections: the &quot;bassi profondi&quot; or &#x27;deep basses&#x27; who are usually limited to the long sounds or drones, the &quot;bassi alti&quot;or &#x27;high basses&#x27; who are similar to the deep basses but, as the name suggests, sing a slightly higher melody during certain sections of the songs, and the &#x27;bassi cantabili&#x27; or &#x27;singable basses&#x27; who typically sing a higher, more complex melody and often provide a rhythmic counterpoint to the other bass parts.

Group harmony in Liguria is historically associated with mountain villages, where two voices (usually a tenor and a baritone) sung over accompaniment by bass or drone. A repertoire of traditional songs evolved over time, and the style moved to the docks of Genoa, a noted port city. There, metal-workers, longshoremen and stevedores sang Trallalero, with the practice peaking in the first three decades of the 20th century. Some Trallalero groups are still practicing in Genoa and Liguria, and can be usually seen performing at the annual &quot;Le vie dei canti&quot; festival in the winter months.

==References==
==External links==
* recordings by Alan Lomax, with much background information.
* For the &quot;Le vie dei canti&quot; festival see: https://www.leviedeicantifestival.it/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1432540" start="0" end="10" title="Trallalero" label="Trallalero"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="24" end="34" title="polyphony" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="55" end="62" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="74" end="79" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="93" end="98" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125888137" start="242" end="249" title="vocable" label="vocable"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="515" end="527" title="musicology" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q558104" start="528" end="538" title="Alan Lomax" label="Alan Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707151" start="543" end="559" title="Diego Carpitella" label="Diego Carpitella"/>
<link wikidata="" start="692" end="704" title=":it:Edward Neill" label="Edward Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="924" end="929" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="931" end="939" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="944" end="948" title="bass (music)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q37137" start="973" end="982" title="contralto" label="contralto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="1019" end="1025" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2073" end="2077" title="bass (musical instrument)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q893474" start="2081" end="2086" title="Drone (music)" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q558104" start="2570" end="2580" title="Alan Lomax" label="Alan Lomax"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262082" wikidata="Q838858" url="?curid=1262082" title="Cistern">
<text>A cistern (; , ; ) is a waterproof receptacle for holding liquids, usually water. Cisterns are often built to catch and store rainwater. To prevent leakage, the interior of the cistern is often lined with hydraulic plaster.

Cisterns are distinguished from wells by their waterproof linings. Modern cisterns range in capacity from a few litres to thousands of cubic meters, effectively forming covered reservoirs.

== Origins ==
=== Early domestic and agricultural use ===

Waterproof lime plaster cisterns in the floors of houses are features of Neolithic village sites of the Levant at, for instance, Ramad and Lebwe, and by the late fourth millennium BC, as at Jawa in northeastern Lebanon, cisterns are essential elements of emerging water management techniques in dry-land farming communities.

Early examples of ancient cisterns, found in Israel, include a significant discovery at Tel Hazor, where a large cistern was carved into bedrock beneath a palace dating to the Late Bronze Age. Similar systems were uncovered at Ta&#x27;anakh. In the Iron Age, underground water systems were constructed in royal centers and settlements throughout ancient Israel, marking some of the earliest instances of engineering activity in urban planning.

The Ancient Roman impluvium, a standard feature of the domus house, generally had a cistern underneath. The impluvium and associated structures collected, filtered, cooled, and stored the water, and also cooled and ventilated the house.

=== Castle cisterns ===

In the Middle Ages, cisterns were often constructed in hill castles in Europe, especially where wells could not be dug deeply enough. There were two types: the tank cistern and the filter cistern. Such a filter cistern was built at the Riegersburg in Austrian Styria, where a cistern was hewn out of the lava rock. Rain water passed through a sand filter and collected in the cistern. The filter cleaned the rain water and enriched it with minerals.

== Present-day use ==
Cisterns are commonly prevalent in areas where water is scarce, either because it is rare or has been depleted due to heavy use. Historically, the water was used for many purposes including cooking, irrigation, and washing. Present-day cisterns are often used only for irrigation due to concerns over water quality. Cisterns today can also be outfitted with filters or other water purification methods when the water is intended for consumption. It is not uncommon for a cistern to be open in some manner in order to catch rain or to include more elaborate rainwater harvesting systems. It is important in these cases to have a system that does not leave the water open to algae or to mosquitoes, which are attracted to the water and then potentially carry disease to nearby humans.

One particularly unique modern utilization of cisterns is found in San Francisco, which has historically been subject to devastating fires. As a precautionary measure, in 1850, funds were allocated to construct over 100 cisterns across the city to be utilized in case of fire. The city&#x27;s firefighting network, the Auxiliary Water Supply System (AWSS) maintains a network of 177 independent underground water cisterns, with sizes varying from 75,000 US gallons (280,000 L) to over 200,000 US gallons (760,000 L) depending on location with a total storage capacity of over 11 million U.S. gallons (42 million liters) of water. These cisterns are easily spotted at street level with manholes labeled &quot;CISTERN S.F.F.D&quot; surrounded by red brick circles or rectangles. The cisterns are completely separate from the rest of the city’s water supply, ensuring that in the event of an earthquake, additional backup is available regardless of the condition of the city&#x27;s mainline water system.

Some cisterns sit on the top of houses or on the ground higher than the house, and supply the running water needs for the house. They are often supplied by wells with electric pumps, or are filled manually or by truck delivery, rather than by rainwater collection. Very common throughout Brazil, for example, they were traditionally made of concrete walls (much like the houses themselves), with a similar concrete top (about 5 cm/2 inches thick), with a piece that can be removed for water filling and then reinserted to keep out debris and insects. Modern cisterns are manufactured out of plastic (in Brazil with a characteristic bright blue color, round, in capacities of about 10,000 and 50,000 liters (2641 and 13,208 gallons)). These cisterns differ from water tanks in the sense that they are not entirely enclosed and sealed with one form, rather they have a lid made of the same material as the cistern, which is removable by the user.

To keep a clean water supply, the cistern must be kept clean. It is important to inspect them regularly, keep them well enclosed, and to occasionally empty and clean them with a proper dilution of chlorine and to rinse them well. Well water must be inspected for contaminants coming from the ground source. City water has up to 1ppm (parts per million) chlorine added to the water to keep it clean. If there is any question about the water supply at any point (source to tap), then the cistern water should not be used for drinking or cooking. If it is of acceptable quality and consistency, then it can be used for (1) toilets, and housecleaning; (2) showers and handwashing; (3) washing dishes, with proper sanitation methods, and for the highest quality, (4) cooking and drinking. Water of non-acceptable quality for the aforementioned uses may still be used for irrigation. If it is free of particulates but not low enough in bacteria, then boiling may also be an effective method to prepare the water for drinking.

 Many greenhouses rely on a cistern to help meet their water needs, particularly in the United States. Some countries or regions, such as Flanders, Bermuda and the U.S. Virgin Islands, have strict laws requiring that rainwater harvesting systems be built alongside any new construction, and cisterns can be used in these cases. In Bermuda, for example, its familiar white-stepped roofs seen on houses are part of the rainwater collection system, where water is channeled by roof gutters to below-ground cisterns. Other countries, such as Japan, Germany, and Spain, also offer financial incentives or tax credit for installing cisterns. Cisterns may also be used to store water for firefighting in areas where there is an inadequate water supply. The city of San Francisco, notably, maintains fire cisterns under its streets in case the primary water supply is disrupted. In many flat areas, the use of cisterns is encouraged to absorb excess rainwater which otherwise can overload sewage or drainage systems by heavy rains (certainly in urban areas where a lot of ground is surfaced and doesn&#x27;t let the ground absorb water).

==Bathing==
In some southeast Asian countries such as Malaysia and Indonesia showers are traditionally taken by pouring water over one&#x27;s body with a dipper (this practice comes from before piped water was common). Many bathrooms even in modern houses are constructed with a small cistern to hold water for bathing by this method.

== Toilet cisterns ==

The modern toilet utilises a cistern to reserve and hold the correct amount of water required to flush the toilet bowl. In earlier toilets, the cistern was located high above the toilet bowl and connected to it by a long pipe. It was necessary to pull a hanging chain connected to a release valve located inside the cistern in order to flush the toilet. Modern toilets may be &quot;close coupled&quot;, with the cistern mounted directly on the toilet bowl and no intermediate pipe. In this arrangement, the flush mechanism (lever or push button) is usually mounted on the cistern. Concealed cistern toilets, where the cistern is built into the wall behind the toilet, are also available. A flushing trough is a type of cistern used to serve more than one WC pan at one time. These cisterns are becoming less common, however. The cistern was the genesis of the modern bidet.

At the beginning of the flush cycle, as the water level in the toilet cistern tank drops, the flush valve flapper falls back to the bottom, stopping the main flow to the flush tube. Because the tank water level has yet to reach the fill line, water continues to flow from the tank and bowl fill tubes. When the water again reaches the fill line, the float will release the fill valve shaft and water flow will stop.

== One Million Cisterns Program ==
In Northeastern Brazil, the One Million Cisterns Program (&quot;Programa 1 Milhão de Cisternas&quot; or &quot;P1MC&quot;) has assisted local people with water management. The Brazilian government adopted this new policy of rainwater harvesting in 2013. The Semi-Arid Articulation (ASA) has been providing managerial and technological support to establish cement-layered containers, called cisterns, to harvest and store rainwater for small farm-holders in 34 territories of nine states where ASA operates (Minas Gerais, Bahia, Sergipe, Alagoas, Pernambuco, Paraíba, Rio Grande do Norte, Ceará and Piauí).

The rainwater falling on the rooftops is directed through pipelines or gutters and stored in the cistern. The cistern is covered with a lid to avoid evaporation. Each cistern has a capacity of 16,000 liters. Water collected in it during 3–4 months of the rainy season can sustain the requirement for drinking, cooking, and other basic sanitation purposes for rest of the dry periods. By 2016, 1.2 million rainwater harvesting cisterns were implemented for human consumption alone. After positive results of P1MC, the government introduced another program named &quot;One Land, Two Water Program&quot; (Uma Terra, Duas Águas, P1 + 2), which provides a farmer with another slab cistern to support agricultural production.

== Notable examples ==
* Basilica Cistern in Istanbul, Turkey
* Aljibe of the in Cáceres, Spain
* Portuguese cistern (Mazagan) in El Jadida, Morocco
* Cistern in Silves, Portugal
* Matera, southern Italy 
* Asa of Judah built a cistern. The prophet Jeremiah was later thrown in it after prophesying the Babylonian invasion
* Cistern in Genesis 37:20, 22

==Gallery==
==See also==
* History of water supply and sanitation
* Ancient water conservation techniques
* List of Roman cisterns

==References==
==External links==

* Old House Web - Historic Water Conservation.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="2" end="9" title="Cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="120" end="135" title="rainwater harvesting" label="store rainwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="257" end="261" title="well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="402" end="411" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549153" start="485" end="497" title="lime plaster" label="lime plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="547" end="556" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="578" end="584" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q926906" start="769" end="785" title="dry-land farming" label="dry-land farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="845" end="851" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740138" start="888" end="897" title="Tel Hazor" label="Tel Hazor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="976" end="991" title="Bronze Age" label="Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889613" start="1027" end="1040" title="Ta&amp;#x27;anakh" label="Ta&amp;#x27;anakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1049" end="1057" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="1146" end="1160" title="History of ancient Israel and Judah" label="ancient Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="1228" end="1242" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1249" end="1262" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117244" start="1263" end="1272" title="impluvium" label="impluvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="1300" end="1305" title="domus" label="domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710038" start="1563" end="1574" title="hill castle" label="hill castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014817" start="1604" end="1609" title="castle well" label="wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q872115" start="1744" end="1755" title="Riegersburg (castle)" label="Riegersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41358" start="1768" end="1774" title="Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="1812" end="1816" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527878" start="1851" end="1862" title="sand filter" label="sand filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="2180" end="2190" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q605696" start="2339" end="2345" title="filter (water)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463025" start="2356" end="2374" title="water purification" label="water purification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="2504" end="2508" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="2538" end="2558" title="rainwater harvesting" label="rainwater harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="2654" end="2659" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="2666" end="2676" title="mosquitoes" label="mosquitoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2832" end="2845" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="2886" end="2903" title="San Francisco Fire" label="devastating fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414029" start="3084" end="3113" title="San Francisco Fire Department Auxiliary Water Supply System" label="Auxiliary Water Supply System"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="3924" end="3928" title="Water well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q134574" start="3935" end="3948" title="electric pump" label="electric pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="4299" end="4305" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501028" start="4529" end="4539" title="water tank" label="water tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="4911" end="4919" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857" start="5334" end="5340" title="toilet" label="toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="5644" end="5652" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="5741" end="5751" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="5873" end="5881" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="5952" end="5972" title="rainwater harvesting" label="rainwater harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q897825" start="6416" end="6428" title="firefighting" label="firefighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="6467" end="6479" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6493" end="6506" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="6886" end="6901" title="southeast Asian" label="southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="6920" end="6928" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="6933" end="6942" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="7060" end="7071" title="Water supply" label="piped water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857" start="7236" end="7242" title="toilet" label="toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462924" start="7915" end="7930" title="flushing trough" label="flushing trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q371213" start="8092" end="8097" title="bidet" label="bidet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="8555" end="8574" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="Northeastern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440531" start="8727" end="8747" title="Federal Government of Brazil" label="Brazilian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="8775" end="8795" title="rainwater harvesting" label="rainwater harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="9058" end="9070" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="9072" end="9077" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43783" start="9079" end="9086" title="Sergipe" label="Sergipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40885" start="9088" end="9095" title="Alagoas" label="Alagoas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="9097" end="9107" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q38088" start="9109" end="9116" title="Paraíba" label="Paraíba"/>
<link wikidata="Q43255" start="9118" end="9137" title="Rio Grande do Norte" label="Rio Grande do Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q40123" start="9139" end="9144" title="Ceará" label="Ceará"/>
<link wikidata="Q42722" start="9149" end="9154" title="Piauí" label="Piauí"/>
<link wikidata="Q216511" start="9904" end="9920" title="Basilica Cistern" label="Basilica Cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="9924" end="9932" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9934" end="9940" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678" start="9960" end="9967" title="Cáceres, Spain" label="Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="9969" end="9974" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q57451444" start="9977" end="10005" title="Portuguese cistern (Mazagan)" label="Portuguese cistern (Mazagan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q219583" start="10009" end="10018" title="El Jadida" label="El Jadida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="10020" end="10027" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q749180" start="10041" end="10057" title="Silves, Portugal" label="Silves, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13616" start="10060" end="10066" title="Matera" label="Matera"/>
<link wikidata="Q313415" start="10086" end="10098" title="Asa of Judah" label="Asa of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="10128" end="10136" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="10215" end="10222" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078604" start="10261" end="10299" title="History of water supply and sanitation" label="History of water supply and sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10302" end="10339" title="Johad#Similar" label="Ancient water conservation techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674081" start="10342" end="10364" title="List of Roman cisterns" label="List of Roman cisterns"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262085" wikidata="Q6637104" url="?curid=1262085" title="List of rulers of the Bariba state of Kwande">
<text>This is the list of rulers of the Bariba state of [[Kouande]].

==List of Rulers of the Bariba (Borgu) state of Kouande==

Territory located in present-day Benin.

The king of Kouande is called &quot;Bagana&quot; meaning Bull.

Banga = &quot;Ruler&quot;.

==See also==
*Benin
*Bariba
*Bariba (Borgu) states
**Rulers of the Bariba state of Kandi
**Rulers of the Bariba state of Nikki
**Rulers of the Bariba state of Paraku
*Lists of Incumbents

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6637104" start="12" end="61" title="List of rulers of the Bariba state of Kwande" label="list of rulers of the Bariba state of [[Kouande]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="156" end="161" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="270" end="275" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q808185" start="277" end="283" title="Bariba people" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="309" end="344" title="Rulers of the Bariba state of Kandi" label="Rulers of the Bariba state of Kandi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="347" end="382" title="Rulers of the Bariba state of Nikki" label="Rulers of the Bariba state of Nikki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="385" end="421" title="Rulers of the Bariba state of Paraku" label="Rulers of the Bariba state of Paraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q646274" start="423" end="442" title="Lists of Incumbents" label="Lists of Incumbents"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262086" wikidata="Q6190126" url="?curid=1262086" title="Jewish schisms">
<text>Schisms among the Jews are cultural as well as religious. They have happened as a product of historical accident, geography, and theology.

==Samaritans==

The Samaritans are an ethnoreligious group of the Levant originating from the Israelites (or Hebrews) of the Ancient Near East.

Ancestrally, Samaritans claim descent from the Tribe of Ephraim and Tribe of Manasseh (two sons of Joseph) as well as from the Levites, who have links to ancient Samaria from the period of their entry into Canaan, while some Orthodox Jews suggest that it was from the beginning of the Babylonian captivity up to the Samaritan polity under the rule of Baba Rabba. According to Samaritan tradition, the split between them and the Judean-led Southern Israelites began during the biblical time of the priest Eli when the Southern Israelites split off from the central Israelite tradition, as they perceive it.

They consider themselves to be &quot;B&#x27;nei Yisrael&quot; (&#x27;Children of Israel&#x27;), a term used universally by Jewish denominations for the Jewish people as a whole, but do not call themselves &quot;Yehudim&quot;. The word &quot;Yehudim&quot; comes from the Hebrew word &quot;Yehudi&quot; which means from the Tribe of Judah.

==First Temple period==
The biblical narrative describes the split by the Kingdom of Israel from the Kingdom of Judah. It points to Solomon&#x27;s unfaithfulness to the divine covenant as the reason for the schism. When Rehoboam, Solomon&#x27;s son, became king, the people requested tax reform. Rehoboam refused. This caused the break. At first, Rehoboam considered a military solution but the prophet Shemaiah told him not fight because God had caused the schism. Jeroboam, the leader of the tax revolt, became the leader of the Kingdom of Israel.

After the destruction and exile of the Kingdom of Israel by Assyria, non-Yahwistic practices continued. The narratives of Jeremiah and others interpreted this as the cause of the failure, destruction, and exile of the Kingdom of Judah by Babylonia. Nebuchadnezzar had additional reasons for taking over Judah and turning its inhabitants into exiles, including challenging its great rival Egypt.

==Second Temple period==

Conflicts between Pharisees and Sadducees took place in the context of much broader and longstanding social and religious conflicts among Jews, made worse by the Roman occupation. Another conflict was cultural, between those who favored Hellenization (the Sadducees) and those who resisted it (the Pharisees). A third was juridico-religious, between those who emphasized the importance of the Second Temple with its rites and services, and those who emphasized the importance of other Mosaic Laws. A fourth point of conflict, specifically religious, involved different interpretations of the Torah and how to apply it to current Jewish life, with Sadducees recognizing only the Written Torah (with Greek philosophy) and rejecting doctrines such as the Oral Torah, the Prophets, the Writings, and the resurrection of the dead.

According to Josephus, the Sadducees differed from the Pharisees on a number of doctrinal grounds, notably rejecting ideas of life after death. They appear to have dominated the aristocracy and the temple, but their influence over the wider Jewish population was limited.

The Essenes preached a reclusive way of life. The Zealots advocated armed rebellion against any foreign power such as Rome. All were at violent loggerheads with each other, leading to the confusion and disunity that ended with the destruction of the Second Temple and the sacking of Jerusalem by Rome.

==Split of early Christianity and Judaism==

The first Christians (whom historians refer to as Jewish Christians) were the original Jewish followers of Jesus, a Galilean preacher and, according to early Christian belief, the resurrected messiah. After his crucifixion by the Romans, his followers broke over whether they should continue to observe Jewish law, such as at the Council of Jerusalem. Those who argued that the law was abrogated (either partially or fully, either by Jesus or Paul or by the Roman destruction of the Temple) broke to form Christianity.

The eventual repudiation of Moses&#x27; Law by Jesus&#x27; disciples and their belief in his divinity, along with the development of the New Testament, ensured that Christianity and Judaism would become different and often conflicting religions. The New Testament depicts the Sadducees and Pharisees as Jesus&#x27; opponents (see Woes of the Pharisees), whereas the Jewish perspective has the Pharisees as the justified predecessors of the rabbis who upheld the Torah including the Oral law, which Christians refer to as the Mosaic Law or Pentateuch or &quot;Old Covenant&quot; in contrast to the &quot;New Covenant&quot;.

==Karaite Judaism==
Karaite Judaism is a Jewish denomination characterized by reliance on the Tanakh as the sole source of binding Jewish Law. Karaites rejected the rabbinic tenet that an Oral Torah (oral law) was transmitted to Moses at Mount Sinai along with the written scriptures. Accordingly, they rejected the central works of Rabbinic Judaism which claimed to expound and interpret this written law, including the Midrash and the Talmud, as authoritative on questions of Jewish law. They may consult or discuss various interpretations of the Tanakh, but Karaites do not consider these other sources as binding or authoritative. Karaites prefer to use the &quot;peshat&quot; method of study, seeking a meaning within the text that would have been naturally understood by the ancient Hebrews.

Karaites had a wide following between the 9th and 12th centuries (they claim that at one time they numbered perhaps 10 percent of Jewry), but over the centuries their numbers have dwindled drastically. Today they are a small group, living mostly in Israel; estimates of the number of Israeli Karaites range from as low as 10,000 to as high as 50,000.

There is a divergence of views about the historical origins of Karaite Judaism. Most scholars and some Karaites maintain that it was founded at least in part by Anan ben David, whereas other Karaites believe that they are not the historical disciples of Anan ben David at all, and point out that many of their later sages (such as Ya&#x27;acov Al-Kirkisani) argued that most of Anan&#x27;s teachings were &quot;derived from Rabbanite Lore&quot;.

The state of Israel, along with its Chief Rabbinate, ruled that Karaites are Jews, and while critical differences between Orthodox Judaism and Karaite Judaism exist, American Orthodox rabbis ruled that Karaism is much closer to Orthodoxy than the Conservative and Reform movements, which may ease issues of formal conversion.

==Sabbateans and Frankists==
In 1648 Sabbatai Zevi declared himself to be the long-awaited Jewish Messiah whilst living in the Ottoman Empire. Vast numbers of Jews, known as Sabbateans, believed him; but when under pain of a death sentence in front of the Ottoman sultan Mehmed IV he became an apostate from Judaism by becoming a Muslim, his movement crumbled. Nevertheless, for centuries, small groups of Jews believed in him, and the rabbis were always on guard against any manifestations of this schism, always suspicious of hidden &quot;Shebselekh&quot; (Yiddish for &quot;little Sabbatians&quot;, a play on the word for &quot;young dumb sheep&quot;). When the movement of Hasidism began attracting many followers, the rabbis were once again suspicious that this was Sabbatianism in different form. It would take centuries to sort out these complex divisions and schisms.

After his mysterious death somewhere in the area of Ottoman Albania, groups of Jews continued to be clandestine followers of Shabbatai Sevi even though they had outwardly converted to Islam, these Jews being known as the Donmeh. Jewish converts to Islam were, at times, therefore regarded with great suspicion by their fellow Muslims.

A few decades after Shabbatai Sevi&#x27;s death, a man by the name of Jacob Frank claiming mystical powers preached that he was Shabbatai Sevi&#x27;s successor. He attracted a following, preached against the Talmud, advocated a form of licentious worship, and was condemned by the rabbis at the time. When confronted by the Polish authorities, he converted to Catholicism in 1759 in the presence of King Augustus III of Poland, together with groups of his Jewish followers, known as &quot;Frankists&quot;. To the alarm of his opponents, he was received by reigning European monarchs who were anxious to see their Jewish subjects abandon Judaism and apostacise. The Frankists eventually joined the Polish nobility and gentry.

==Hasidim and Misnagdim==


Israel ben Eliezer (1698–1760), also known as the &quot;Baal Shem Tov&quot; (&#x27;Master [of the] Good Name&#x27;), changed much of Jewish history in Eastern Europe for what is now known as Haredi Judaism. His teachings were based on the earlier expositions of Rabbi Isaac Luria (1534–1572) who had based much of his Kabbalistic teachings on the Zohar. Baal Shem Tov came after Jews of Eastern Europe were collectively recovering from false messiahs Shabtai Tzvi (1626–1676) and Jacob Frank (1726–1791) in particular.

Baal Shem Tov witnessed Frank&#x27;s public apostasy (&quot;shmad&quot; in Hebrew) to Christianity, which compounded Tzvi&#x27;s earlier apostasy to Islam. Baal Shem Tov was thus determined to encourage his influential disciples (talmidim) to launch a spiritual revolution in Jewish life in order to reinvigorate the Jewish masses&#x27; connections with Torah Judaism and to vigorously motivate them to bind themselves to the joyous observance of the commandments, worship, Torah study, and sincere belief in God, so that the lures of Christianity and Islam, and the appeal of the rising secular Enlightenment, to the Jewish masses would be weakened and halted. To a large degree he succeeded in Eastern Europe.

Already during his lifetime, and gaining momentum following his death, Baal Shem Tov&#x27;s disciples spread out to teach his mystical creeds all over Eastern Europe. Thus was born Hasidic Judaism (Hasidism). Some of the main movements were in: Russia which saw the rise of the Chabad-Lubavitch movement; Poland which had the Gerrer Hasidim; Galicia had Bobov; Hungary had Satmar Hasidim; and Ukraine had the Breslovers, and many others that grew rapidly, gaining millions of adherents, until it became the dominant brand of Judaism.

Only when this new religious movement reached Lithuania did it meet its first stiff resistance at the hands of the Lithuanian Jews (&quot;Litvaks&quot;). It was Rabbi Elijah ben Shlomo Zalman (c. 1720 – 1797), known as the Vilna Gaon (&quot;Genius [of] Vilna&quot;), and those who followed his classic stringent Talmudic and Halakhic scholasticism, who put up the fiercest resistance to the Hasidim (&quot;devoted [ones]&quot;). They were called &quot;Mitnagdim&quot;, meaning &quot;[those who are] opposed [to the Hasidim]&quot;.

The &quot;Vilna Gaon&quot;, who was himself steeped in both Talmudic and Kabbalistic wisdom, analyzed the theological underpinnings of this new &quot;Hasidism&quot; and in his view, concluded that it was deeply flawed since it had elements of what may be roughly termed as panentheism and perhaps even outright pantheism, dangerous aspirations for bringing the Jewish Messiah that could easily be twisted in unpredictable directions for Jewry as had previously happened with the Tzvi and Frank religious &quot;revival&quot; fiascos, and an array of complex rejections of their religious ideology. The &quot;Vilna Gaon&quot;″s views were later formulated by his chief disciple Rabbi Chaim Volozhin (1741–1821) in his work &quot;Nefesh HaChaim&quot;. The new Hasidic leaders countered with their own religious counter-arguments, some of which can be found in the &quot;Tanya&quot; of Chabad-Lubavitch. 

Little of the split between Hasidim and Mitnagdim remains within the modern Haredi world. In modern-day Israel Hasidim support the Agudat Israel party in the Knesset (Israel&#x27;s parliament) and the non-Hasidic Mitnagdim support the Degel HaTorah party, led by Rabbi Chaim Kanievsky and Rabbi Gershon Eidelstein. Agudat Israel and Degel Torah have formed a political alliance, the United Torah Judaism party. There is also another large community that follows the rabbinical teachings of the Edah Charedis. These include the Satmar Hasidim and the &quot;perushim&quot; communities, which do not support any groups that participate in the Israeli government or state activities, including elections.

==Orthodox versus Reform==

From the time of the French Revolution of 1789, and the growth of Liberalism, added to the political and personal freedoms granted by Napoleon to the Jews of Europe, many Jews chose to abandon the foreboding and isolating ghettos and enter into general society. This influenced the internal conflicts about religion, culture, and politics of the Jews to this day.

Some Jews in Western Europe, and many Jews in America, joined the religiously liberal Reform Judaism movement, which drew inspiration from the writings of modernist thinkers like Moses Mendelson. They coined the name &quot;Orthodox&quot; to describe those who opposed the &quot;Reform&quot;. They were criticized by the Orthodox rabbis, such as Samson Raphael Hirsch in Germany, and condemned particularly by those known today as followers of Haredi Judaism, based mainly in Eastern Europe. (Later on, in 1880s America, Conservative Judaism split from the Reform movement.)

Thus a cultural schism was also created between the more Western German-, English- and French-speaking Western European Jews and their more religiously observant Yiddish-speaking Eastern European brethren whom they denigratingly labeled &quot;Ostjuden&quot; (&quot;Eastern Jews&quot;). These schisms and the debates surrounding them, continue with much ferocity in all Jewish communities today as the Reform and Orthodox movements continue to confront each other over a wide range of religious, social, political and ethnic issues. (Today, the largest Jewish communities are in Israel and in the United States, and the geographical separation has resulted in cultural differences, such as a tendency to identify as hiloni and haredi in Israel, as opposed to, say, Reform and Orthodox in the United States.)

==See also==

* Apostasy in Judaism
* Culture of Israel
* Heresy in Judaism
* Jewish atheism
* Jewish religious movements
* Jewish secularism
* Jewish Science
* List of Israelite civil conflicts
* Reconstructionist Judaism
* Relationships between Jewish religious movements
* Religion in Israel
* Who is a Jew?

==References==
==External links==
* History of Jewish denominations
* What&#x27;s the difference between Orthodox, Conservative and Reform?
* Jewish Identity
* Numbers Chapters 16-18: The Schism of Korah excerpt from the Tanakh, The Holy Scriptures, (Philadelphia, Jerusalem: Jewish Publication Society) 1985.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6190126" start="0" end="22" title="Jewish schisms" label="Schisms among the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="129" end="137" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="178" end="198" title="ethnoreligious group" label="ethnoreligious group"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="206" end="212" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="234" end="244" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="249" end="256" title="Hebrews" label="Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="265" end="282" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329576" start="332" end="348" title="Tribe of Ephraim" label="Tribe of Ephraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735753" start="353" end="370" title="Tribe of Manasseh" label="Tribe of Manasseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q145746" start="384" end="390" title="Joseph (Genesis)" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386590" start="412" end="418" title="Levite" label="Levite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="447" end="454" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="491" end="497" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="510" end="523" title="Orthodox Jews" label="Orthodox Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="570" end="590" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911644" start="636" end="646" title="Baba Rabba" label="Baba Rabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="713" end="719" title="Judean" label="Judean"/>
<link wikidata="Q362021" start="789" end="792" title="Eli (biblical figure)" label="Eli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1162" end="1168" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q913564" start="1214" end="1228" title="Tribe of Judah" label="Tribe of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="1305" end="1322" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="1332" end="1348" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Kingdom of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="1363" end="1370" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211663" start="1451" end="1459" title="Rehoboam" label="Rehoboam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090113" start="1634" end="1642" title="Shemaiah (prophet)" label="Shemaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q313219" start="1697" end="1705" title="Jeroboam" label="Jeroboam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="1842" end="1849" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571322" start="1855" end="1864" title="Yahwism" label="Yahwistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="1904" end="1912" title="Jeremiah (prophet)" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="2020" end="2029" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="2031" end="2045" title="Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon" label="Nebuchadnezzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2170" end="2175" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="2222" end="2231" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q182682" start="2236" end="2245" title="Sadducees" label="Sadducees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="2441" end="2454" title="Hellenization" label="Hellenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="2597" end="2610" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="2620" end="2638" title="Cult (religious practice)" label="rites and services"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="2689" end="2699" title="Mosaic Law" label="Mosaic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="2796" end="2801" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="2882" end="2895" title="Written Torah" label="Written Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="2956" end="2966" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q216383" start="2972" end="2980" title="Nevi&amp;#x27;im" label="Prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q208190" start="2986" end="2994" title="Ketuvim" label="Writings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="3004" end="3028" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="3044" end="3052" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189204" start="3308" end="3315" title="Essenes" label="Essenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189225" start="3354" end="3361" title="Zealots" label="Zealots"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3422" end="3426" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="3587" end="3596" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="3702" end="3719" title="Jewish Christians" label="Jewish Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3759" end="3764" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="3863" end="3888" title="Responsibility for the death of Jesus" label="crucifixion by the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669560" start="3935" end="3965" title="Abrogation of Old Covenant laws" label="continue to observe Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q619950" start="3982" end="4002" title="Council of Jerusalem" label="Council of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="4116" end="4141" title="destruction of the Temple" label="destruction of the Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903283" start="4200" end="4215" title="Biblical law in Christianity" label="Moses&amp;#x27; Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241519" start="4231" end="4240" title="Disciple (Christianity)" label="disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="4251" end="4273" title="Divinity of Jesus" label="belief in his divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290800" start="4290" end="4322" title="Development of the New Testament canon" label="development of the New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297875" start="4337" end="4361" title="Christianity and Judaism" label="Christianity and Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="4422" end="4435" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q625686" start="4502" end="4523" title="Woes of the Pharisees" label="Woes of the Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="4612" end="4618" title="rabbis" label="rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="4634" end="4639" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144567" start="4654" end="4662" title="Oral law" label="Oral law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903283" start="4697" end="4707" title="Biblical law in Christianity" label="Mosaic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915332" start="4731" end="4743" title="Old Covenant" label="Old Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672123" start="4775" end="4787" title="New Covenant" label="New Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001185" start="4837" end="4856" title="Jewish denominations" label="Jewish denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="4890" end="4896" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="4927" end="4937" title="halacha" label="Jewish Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="4984" end="4994" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="5061" end="5079" title="Tanakh" label="written scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="5129" end="5145" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="5217" end="5224" title="Midrash" label="Midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="5233" end="5239" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="5274" end="5284" title="halakha" label="Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q339091" start="5464" end="5470" title="peshat" label="peshat"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="5844" end="5850" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="6010" end="6025" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaite Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296753" start="6108" end="6122" title="Anan ben David" label="Anan ben David"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="6516" end="6532" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q299215" start="6758" end="6771" title="Sabbatai Zevi" label="Sabbatai Zevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="6819" end="6826" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6848" end="6862" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q269348" start="6895" end="6905" title="Sabbateans" label="Sabbateans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6977" end="6991" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170514" start="6992" end="7001" title="Mehmed IV" label="Mehmed IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="7015" end="7023" title="apostasy" label="apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="7051" end="7057" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="7157" end="7162" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="7398" end="7406" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q372199" start="7650" end="7665" title="Ottoman Albania" label="Ottoman Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7782" end="7787" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14192963" start="7819" end="7825" title="Donmeh" label="Donmeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q708525" start="8004" end="8015" title="Jacob Frank" label="Jacob Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="8142" end="8148" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="8258" end="8264" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8294" end="8305" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q53438" start="8333" end="8360" title="August III the Saxon" label="King Augustus III of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491116" start="8423" end="8432" title="Frankists (Judaism)" label="Frankists"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="8583" end="8593" title="apostasy" label="apostacise"/>
<link wikidata="Q319062" start="8744" end="8757" title="Baal Shem Tov" label="Baal Shem Tov"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="8839" end="8853" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="8879" end="8893" title="Haredi Judaism" label="Haredi Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q339509" start="8956" end="8967" title="Isaac Luria" label="Isaac Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="9006" end="9017" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="9035" end="9040" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289748" start="9124" end="9137" title="false messiah" label="false messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q299215" start="9139" end="9151" title="Shabtai Tzvi" label="Shabtai Tzvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q708525" start="9168" end="9179" title="Jacob Frank" label="Jacob Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="9252" end="9260" title="apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="9294" end="9306" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13964925" start="9562" end="9575" title="Torah Judaism" label="Torah Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637842" start="9659" end="9671" title="613 mitzvot" label="commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777205" start="9673" end="9680" title="Jewish services" label="worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068324" start="9682" end="9693" title="Torah study" label="Torah study"/>
<link wikidata="Q821090" start="9717" end="9720" title="Names of God in Judaism" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="9796" end="9803" title="Secularity" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="9804" end="9817" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="10102" end="10117" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="10166" end="10172" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="10199" end="10215" title="Chabad-Lubavitch" label="Chabad-Lubavitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="10226" end="10232" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509726" start="10247" end="10261" title="Ger (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Gerrer Hasidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="10263" end="10270" title="Galicia (Central Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915711" start="10275" end="10280" title="Bobov (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Bobov"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="10282" end="10289" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490215" start="10294" end="10308" title="Satmar (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Satmar Hasidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="10314" end="10321" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915139" start="10330" end="10340" title="Breslov (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Breslovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="10502" end="10511" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421205" start="10571" end="10586" title="Lithuanian Jews" label="Lithuanian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q279359" start="10679" end="10689" title="Vilna Gaon" label="Vilna Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="10709" end="10714" title="Vilna" label="Vilna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="10768" end="10774" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="10781" end="10789" title="Halakha" label="Halakhic"/>
<link wikidata="Q742796" start="10908" end="10917" title="Mitnagdim" label="Mitnagdim"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="11048" end="11054" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="11061" end="11072" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="11138" end="11146" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221390" start="11261" end="11272" title="panentheism" label="panentheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="11299" end="11308" title="pantheism" label="pantheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="11349" end="11363" title="Jewish Messiah" label="Jewish Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059243" start="11670" end="11684" title="Chaim Volozhin" label="Chaim Volozhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059243" start="11715" end="11729" title="Nefesh HaChaim" label="Nefesh HaChaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572924" start="11855" end="11860" title="Tanya (Judaism)" label="Tanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="11994" end="12000" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q398134" start="12021" end="12034" title="Agudat Israel" label="Agudat Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="12048" end="12055" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q922070" start="12125" end="12138" title="Degel HaTorah" label="Degel HaTorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760338" start="12153" end="12174" title="Chaim Kanievsky" label="Rabbi Chaim Kanievsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12405003" start="12179" end="12203" title="Gershon Edelstein" label="Rabbi Gershon Eidelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466053" start="12273" end="12293" title="United Torah Judaism" label="United Torah Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q779184" start="12384" end="12397" title="Edah Charedis" label="Edah Charedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490215" start="12417" end="12431" title="Satmar (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Satmar Hasidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171119" start="12446" end="12454" title="perushim" label="perushim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="12641" end="12658" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="12686" end="12696" title="Liberalism" label="Liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="12754" end="12762" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="12842" end="12848" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="12998" end="13012" title="West Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13031" end="13038" title="United States" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="13071" end="13085" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76997" start="13164" end="13179" title="Moses Mendelson" label="Moses Mendelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="13305" end="13313" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="13330" end="13351" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="13505" end="13525" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="13576" end="13582" title="schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="13625" end="13631" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13634" end="13641" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="13647" end="13653" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="13663" end="13677" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="13722" end="13729" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14156" end="14169" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q454604" start="14275" end="14281" title="hiloni" label="hiloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="14286" end="14292" title="haredi" label="haredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390763" start="14384" end="14403" title="Apostasy in Judaism" label="Apostasy in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q385334" start="14406" end="14423" title="Culture of Israel" label="Culture of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889997" start="14426" end="14443" title="Heresy in Judaism" label="Heresy in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869299" start="14446" end="14460" title="Jewish atheism" label="Jewish atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001185" start="14463" end="14489" title="Jewish religious movements" label="Jewish religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190131" start="14492" end="14509" title="Jewish secularism" label="Jewish secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189929" start="14512" end="14526" title="Jewish Science" label="Jewish Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q113350670" start="14529" end="14562" title="List of Israelite civil conflicts" label="List of Israelite civil conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q339284" start="14565" end="14590" title="Reconstructionist Judaism" label="Reconstructionist Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310764" start="14593" end="14641" title="Relationships between Jewish religious movements" label="Relationships between Jewish religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q773279" start="14644" end="14662" title="Religion in Israel" label="Religion in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147832" start="14665" end="14678" title="Who is a Jew?" label="Who is a Jew?"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262090" wikidata="Q2779256" url="?curid=1262090" title="Mesum">
<text>Mesum is a village south of Rheine, located in the district Steinfurt, part of North Rhine-Westphalia. The current population in 2004 is about 8500. Mesum was first mentioned in 1373 in a document listing the church. That old church still exists as the oldest building of the village.

The village grew in the 19th century with the textile industry. At that time, it was part of the Prussian Kingdom.

==Railway station==
The village has a railway station Rheine-Mesum, however Rheine has more services.

Link to city-homepage (German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2779256" start="0" end="5" title="Mesum" label="Mesum"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="11" end="18" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890" start="28" end="34" title="Rheine" label="Rheine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018" start="60" end="69" title="Steinfurt" label="Steinfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="79" end="101" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="332" end="339" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="383" end="390" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320349" start="456" end="468" title="Rheine-Mesum railway station" label="Rheine-Mesum"/>
<link wikidata="Q277743" start="478" end="484" title="Rheine railway station" label="Rheine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262092" wikidata="Q7191536" url="?curid=1262092" title="Piedmont Sanatorium">
<text>Piedmont Sanatorium was a rest home for tubercular African Americans in Burkeville, Virginia from 1917 to 1965. It was the first facility of its kind ever to be established in the United States. The Sanatorium later became the site of Piedmont Geriatric Hospital.

==Influence of Tuberculosis==
Tuberculosis was the leading cause of death in the early twentieth century, accounting for one out of every 10 deaths. Those infected with the disease were isolated from society in sanatoriums. These self-contained communities became known as &quot;waiting rooms for death.&quot;

Piedmont Sanatorium was established circa 1917 in Burkeville, Virginia as a rest home for blacks suffering from tuberculosis. Concerns about the health of whites were what led to its construction.

==Segregation==
In the 1910s, as increasing urbanization began bringing whites and blacks into closer contact, Virginia health officials started compiling evidence of the &quot;Negro Health Problem&quot; - high disease, death, and maternal and infant mortality rates among blacks. Hard physical labor along with poor diet and sanitation contributed to the problem. Disease flourished in the crowded black neighborhoods, where garbage piled up, sewage went untreated, and running water was often nonexistent.

Fearing that black child-care nurses, cooks, and laundresses might spread tuberculosis to white neighborhoods, the government began looking for ways to stamp out TB and other contagious diseases. At the time, the only treatment facilities for blacks were the Central State Hospital for Mental Diseases and the State Penitentiary.

The Negro Organization Society, a grassroots advocacy association in Virginia, initiated discussions with the State Board of Health, and particularly Agnes Randolph. Agnes Dillon Randolph, a lifelong political activist and charter member of the Virginia State Association of Nurses, became concerned about the situation. To strengthen her political influence, Randolph rose to the position of Executive Secretary of the Virginia Anti-Tuberculosis Association. She lobbied the General Assembly to establish a sanatorium for Negro tuberculosis patients - the first ever in the United States. Although some legislators were reluctant to try such an unprecedented idea, in 1916, the legislature granted her request.

The all-white Blue Ridge Sanatorium was established in 1920. The City of Charlottesville, Virginia actively sought to locate Blue Ridge within their community. Charlottesville paid $15,000 of the $32,000 required for the procurement of the property and funded Blue Ridge&#x27;s water supply. Piedmont, in contrast, had to hire contractors to dig its well.

Blue Ridge patients enjoyed access to University of Virginia medical staff located in the same city. Piedmont patients, on the other hand, had to travel more than 50 miles to St. Phillips Hospital in Richmond, Virginia in the event of a non-tubercular medical emergency.

==Building Site==
Finding an acceptable site was difficult. The Board of Health placed ads across the state for a site where a &quot;colored sanatorium&quot; could be built. The first location considered was in Ivor, Virginia. Local whites fiercely protested the facility, as recorded in the Aug. 24, 1916 State Board of Health minutes:

While the negotiations [for the purchase of the property] were in progress, and before any papers were passed, a large number of protests began to come into the health department from citizens of Ivor, objecting seriously to the location of such an institution at that point. The Commissioner went down to Ivor and attempted to allay the feeling, without result. A number of the citizens had employed an attorney and a delegation bringing a large petition entered emphatic protest before the committee.

The Piedmont Sanatorium committee then visited a site in Lynchburg, Virginia but received an even harsher response. According to The Tuberculosis Experience of African-Americans in Virginia, &quot;any idea of such purchase was immediately abandoned.&quot;

In 1917, the committee hired a real estate agent named Mr. Barnes to negotiate the purchase of a site in Burkeville, Virginia. This time, the committee asked a group of citizens from Burkeville to sign a statement which said that the sanatorium could be built there. Nonetheless, opposition emerged for a third time. An attorney named Mr. H.H. Watson wrote a letter to the committee on behalf of a group of citizens who opposed locating the sanatorium in Burkeville. Impatient with the delays, this time the State Board of Health ignored the opposition and began construction of Piedmont Sanatorium on a parcel in Burkeville.

The Negro Organization Society continued to be heavily involved with the issue, from raising public awareness to donating funds to improve the facility. Bonds were issued &quot;to erect and to equip one Building to be used for the patients and to include rooms for visiting Doctors who shall from time to time be invited for study to the Sanatorium.&quot;

==Daily life==
According to Gertz, &quot;everything at Piedmont was hierarchically organized and routine&quot;. Patients were awakened every morning at 7:15 a.m. for breakfast. They then rested until lunch, had quiet time from 1:45 until 4:00 p.m., ate supper at 6:00 p.m., and went to bed at 9:30 p.m. Some patients who were advanced in their treatment exercised at certain times of the day. An occupational therapist led the patients in handicraft activities. Some patients were taught skills that they could use upon returning to productive society.

Patients were required to attend weekly lectures on tuberculosis. They were taught the proper way to dispose of sputum and other aspects of dealing with the illness. Piedmont staff hoped that they would go back to their home communities and teach other blacks about tuberculosis.

==Piedmont Sanatorium School of Tuberculosis Nursing==
Piedmont Sanatorium School of Tuberculosis Nursing, a two-year nursing school for black women, was founded shortly after the Sanatorium opened. It allowed the black women to become certified specifically in tuberculosis nursing; a third year of training at St. Phillips Hospital in Richmond was required in order to become a Registered Nurse. The school became the subject of controversy due to the hospital staffing shortages of World War II. In 1943, Virginia Governor Colgate W. Darden Jr. proposed having an all-black staff at Piedmont in order to free white personnel to work in white hospitals. The proposal failed, partly because of concerns that the quality of care at Piedmont would suffer.

==Closing==
In 1965, in a visible sign that racial segregation was beginning to crumble, Piedmont Sanatorium closed and black patients were admitted to the previously all-white Blue Ridge Sanatorium. By 1967, the Burkeville facility had been converted into Piedmont Geriatric Hospital.

==References==
==External links==
*Dr. Julian B. Woodson Home Page
*The Blue Ridge Sanatorium Against the Cityscape of Charlottesville, Monica Shenouda.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7191536" start="0" end="19" title="Piedmont Sanatorium" label="Piedmont Sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="51" end="67" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374144" start="72" end="82" title="Burkeville, Virginia" label="Burkeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="84" end="92" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="180" end="193" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191509" start="235" end="262" title="Piedmont Geriatric Hospital" label="Piedmont Geriatric Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="295" end="307" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="476" end="486" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374144" start="626" end="636" title="Burkeville, Virginia" label="Burkeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="638" end="646" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="818" end="830" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381037" start="1005" end="1013" title="Maternal Mortality Ratio" label="maternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="1018" end="1034" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="1218" end="1224" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="1357" end="1369" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1618" end="1644" title="Negro Organization Society" label="Negro Organization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q113541143" start="2341" end="2362" title="Blue Ridge Sanatorium" label="Blue Ridge Sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="2400" end="2425" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="2722" end="2744" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2859" end="2880" title="St. Phillips Hospital" label="St. Phillips Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="2884" end="2902" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378367" start="3167" end="3181" title="Ivor, Virginia" label="Ivor, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844012" start="3855" end="3874" title="Lynchburg, Virginia" label="Lynchburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374144" start="4160" end="4180" title="Burkeville, Virginia" label="Burkeville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80973" start="5205" end="5214" title="breakfast" label="breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12896105" start="5239" end="5244" title="lunch" label="lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q568285" start="5292" end="5298" title="supper" label="supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q631193" start="5435" end="5457" title="occupational therapist" label="occupational therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="5478" end="5488" title="handicraft" label="handicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q259346" start="5705" end="5711" title="sputum" label="sputum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13608061" start="6254" end="6270" title="Registered Nurse" label="Registered Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6359" end="6371" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q880393" start="6400" end="6421" title="Colgate W. Darden Jr." label="Colgate W. Darden Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="6674" end="6692" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q113541143" start="6807" end="6828" title="Blue Ridge Sanatorium" label="Blue Ridge Sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191509" start="6887" end="6914" title="Piedmont Geriatric Hospital" label="Piedmont Geriatric Hospital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262094" wikidata="Q1999898" url="?curid=1262094" title="Trikiti">
<text>The trikiti (standard Basque, pronounced ) trikitixa (dialectal Basque, pronounced ), or eskusoinu txiki (&quot;little hand-sound&quot;, pronounced )) is a two-row Basque diatonic button accordion with right-hand rows keyed a fifth apart and twelve unisonoric bass buttons. The onomatopoeia &quot;trikitixa&quot;, apparently stemming from the sound emitted by the tambourine, originally referred to a traditional Basque ensemble, made up of the instrument which now bears the name as well as alboka, txistu and other instruments.

Probably introduced by Italian immigrants coming from the Alps, the trikitixa&#x27;s first written evidence is attested late in the 19th century, exactly in 1889, when diatonic accordion was used for music in a popular pilgrimage festivity of Urkiola (Biscay). In 1890, a trikiti appears in a picture taken in Altsasu (Navarre), a railway junction. Therefore, some point to the instrument&#x27;s import to the Basque Country from Italy through the port of Bilbao, while other sources suggest that this kind of diatonic accordion was brought in by Italian railway workers from the Alps. The diatonic button accordion itself was devised in Vienna in 1829, expanding thereafter all over Europe.

The pair of diatonic button accordion along with tambourine gradually grew in popularity and was adopted to perform in local and popular festivities, where the young danced to its tunes (&quot;fandangos, arin-arin&quot; etc.), despite the Catholic Church&#x27;s resistance, who dubbed it &quot;hell&#x27;s bellows&quot; on the grounds that its dance-inciting and lively music would lead Basque youths into temptation.

That playing pattern remained unchanged up to the 1980s, when Kepa Junkera and Joseba Tapia started to develop unprecedented ways of playing trikiti. While both authors came in for much criticism for their novelties and experimenting, they caught on and both styles, traditional and modern trikiti, have found their way and consolidated their separate paths. Both performers remain nowadays key figures of trikiti accordion. There have been influences of Tejano artists like Flaco Jiménez and other international players. Other renowned players include Alaitz Telletxea, Iñaki Malbadi, Maixa Lizarribar, Xabi Solano, Xabi Aburruzaga, Iker Goenaga and the Catalan Carles Belda.

Currently traditional style ensembles consist of a pair playing trikiti (diatonic button accordion), tambourine and voice. Players typically use a highly ornamented and swift style, along with staccato triplets.

== See also ==
* Bandoneon
* Accordion

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1999898" start="4" end="11" title="Trikiti" label="trikiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719300" start="13" end="28" title="standard Basque" label="standard Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999898" start="43" end="52" title="Trikiti" label="trikitixa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218937" start="54" end="70" title="Basque dialects" label="dialectal Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999898" start="89" end="104" title="Trikiti" label="eskusoinu txiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328599" start="164" end="170" title="Basque music" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q379269" start="171" end="196" title="diatonic button accordion" label="diatonic button accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372854" start="226" end="231" title="perfect fifth" label="fifth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="249" end="259" title="unisonoric" label="unisonoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="278" end="290" title="onomatopoeia" label="onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="364" end="374" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q313053" start="492" end="498" title="alboka" label="alboka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6321200" start="500" end="506" title="txistu" label="txistu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="589" end="593" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471738" start="774" end="781" title="Sanctuary of Urkiola" label="Urkiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q93366" start="783" end="789" title="Biscay" label="Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635681" start="841" end="848" title="Altsasu" label="Altsasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="941" end="955" title="Basque Country (historical territory)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="961" end="966" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="987" end="993" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q379269" start="1121" end="1146" title="diatonic button accordion" label="diatonic button accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q379269" start="1236" end="1261" title="diatonic button accordion" label="diatonic button accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="1273" end="1283" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208103" start="1530" end="1537" title="bellows" label="bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q966088" start="1705" end="1717" title="Kepa Junkera" label="Kepa Junkera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1722" end="1734" title="Joseba Tapia" label="Joseba Tapia"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="2098" end="2104" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316590" start="2118" end="2131" title="Flaco Jiménez" label="Flaco Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2196" end="2212" title="Alaitz Telletxea" label="Alaitz Telletxea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2214" end="2227" title="Iñaki Malbadi" label="Iñaki Malbadi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2229" end="2245" title="Maixa Lizarribar" label="Maixa Lizarribar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2247" end="2258" title="Xabi Solano" label="Xabi Solano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121604" start="2260" end="2275" title="Xabi Aburruzaga" label="Xabi Aburruzaga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2277" end="2289" title="Iker Goenaga" label="Iker Goenaga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2306" end="2318" title="Carles Belda" label="Carles Belda"/>
<link wikidata="Q379269" start="2394" end="2419" title="diatonic button accordion" label="diatonic button accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="2422" end="2432" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="2514" end="2522" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q215032" start="2551" end="2560" title="Bandoneon" label="Bandoneon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="2563" end="2572" title="Accordion" label="Accordion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262096" wikidata="Q866709" url="?curid=1262096" title="New People's Army">
<text>The New People&#x27;s Army (; abbreviated NPA or BHB) is the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). It acts as the CPP&#x27;s principal organization, aiming to consolidate political power from what it sees as the present &quot;bourgeois reactionary puppet government&quot; and to aid in the &quot;people&#x27;s democratic revolution&quot;. Founded on March 29, 1969, by the collaboration of Jose Maria Sison and former members of the Hukbalahap led by Bernabe Buscayno, the NPA has since waged a guerrilla war based on the Maoist strategy of protracted people&#x27;s war. The NPA is one of the key figures in the ongoing communist rebellion in the Philippines, the longest ongoing conflict in the country.

The NPA operates and is based primarily in the Philippine countryside, where the CPP alleges it has established itself in 73 out of the country&#x27;s 81 provinces, across over 110 guerrilla fronts. In guerrilla zones where the NPA has entrenched itself, the CPP–NPA has established a People&#x27;s Democratic Government (&quot;Gobyernong Bayan&quot;), which operates independently of the Philippine government. Within these zones, income taxes which would nominally go to the government treasury instead go to the NPA, which they use to fund community services.

The NPA, as represented by the National Democratic Front of the Philippines, is a party to ongoing peace talks between the People&#x27;s Democratic Government and the Government of the Republic of the Philippines. Peace negotiations have reached an impasse, with the Rodrigo Duterte administration unilaterally announcing the termination of peace talks in 2019. Negotiations between the GRP and the NDFP stalled on signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on Socio-Economic Reforms (CASER), and the issue of localized peace talks between individual units of the NPA.

The Office of the President of the Philippines designated the NPA as a terrorist group, along with the CPP. The United States and the European Union have designated the CPP–NPA as &quot;foreign terrorist organizations&quot; in 2002 and 2005, respectively. Japan&#x27;s Public Security Intelligence Agency designated the NPA as a .

== History ==
=== Establishment ===
The New People&#x27;s Army was established on March 29, 1969, following the split of the old Communist Party (Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930) into Lava and Guerrero factions. The 1960s saw a resurgence in radical ideology, following the establishment of Kabataang Makabayan and the emerging popularity of Mao Zedong Thought as an advancement of ideological Marxism-Leninism. In 1966, Jose Maria Sison, under the nom de guerre &quot;Amado Guerrero&quot;, wrote &quot;Rectify Errors and Rebuild the Party!&quot;, a treatise which criticized the old Lavaite leadership and emphasized the need to follow Mao Zedong Thought to foster re-establishment. The conflict continued until December 26, 1968, when the Communist Party of the Philippines was formally re-established along Maoist lines, and the entire issue was termed the First Great Rectification Movement.

After re-establishing the CPP, Guerrero set about to establishing the People&#x27;s Army. KM cadres in Tarlac had contacted Guerrero and linked him with Bernabe Buscayno, a former member of the older Hukbong Mapagpalaya ng Bayan. Relations were established and the New People&#x27;s Army was formally founded on March 29, in continuity with the previous Hukbalahap. At the time the NPA only had 60 armed fighters.

=== Initial activities ===
The NPA was immediately tasked with the role of implementing the CPP&#x27;s program for a People&#x27;s Democratic Revolution. In the &quot;Declaration of the New People&#x27;s Army&quot;, Amado Guerrero outlined the following as its main tasks:
# The New People&#x27;s Army Must Engage in Party Rebuilding
# The New People&#x27;s Army Must Carry Out Agrarian Revolution, Build Rural Bases, and Advance the Armed Struggle
# The New People&#x27;s Army Must Build the National United Front

The NPA quickly spread alongside organizational work of the CPP. By 1972, it had established 735 barrio organizing committees and 60 barrio organizing committees, governing an estimated 400,000 people all over the country. The CPP used the NPA to establish barrio organizing and revolutionary committees, which served as instruments in administering the people&#x27;s revolutionary government. Barrio organizing committees were established to lower land rent, eliminate usury, and ensure the &quot;annihilation of enemy troops and the elimination of landlord despots, enemy spies, and such bad elements as cattle rustlers, extortionists, robbers, murderers, arsonists, and the like.&quot; Once established, barrio revolutionary committees replaced the BOC to formally establish the area as a stronghold of the revolutionary government. The NPA at the time had 72 squads of 800 regulars armed with weapons.

=== Rapid expansion during the Martial Law era ===
Over the next decade, the NPA expanded in response to Ferdinand Marcos and the declaration of martial law in the Philippines. The CPP and the NPA were successfully able to establish themselves in the countryside, reaching a mass base of over one million people, with 1,000 fighters armed with high-powered rifles by 1977 By 1981, the NPA began engaging in tactical offensives involving company-sized units emerged, particularly in the Southern Mindanao region. By 1983, the NPA fielded 5,000 high-powered rifles. By 1988, it had 10,000 high-powered rifles, with 7,000 inferior firearms. It operated in 60 guerrilla fronts across 63 provinces of the Philippines.

=== Changes in tactics and &quot;Kampanyang Ahos&quot; ===
The momentum gained in the 1980s was also given to multiple setbacks. Changes in strategy and internal conflicts within the CPP resulted in ideological, political, and organizational losses for the CPP–NPA–NDF. The CPP devised a plan called a &quot;strategic counteroffensive&quot; (SCO) with the aim of &quot;leaping over&quot; to a higher stage of armed revolution and quickly win the revolution. The SCO program led to &quot;regularization&quot; of units, urban partisan actions, peasant uprisings, and an insurrectionist concept of &quot;seizing opportunities&quot;.

From 1981, the NPA enjoyed strategic gains in Mindanao and was able to consolidate its forces there. However, the Mindanao Commission adopted a strategy of designating areas as Red (where military struggle was applicable) or White (where political struggle and insurrection was applicable) along with the SCO program.

Problems in discipline also emerged during this time, as well as deterioration of the NPA&#x27;s ability to conduct mass work. These ideological and organizational shortcomings, coupled with the Corazon Aquino administration&#x27;s counter-insurgency program, &quot;Oplan Lambat Bitag&quot;, managed to severely harm the NPA and the CPP as a whole.

In 1989, the NPA assassinated U.S. Army Colonel James &quot;Nick&quot; Rowe, founder of the U.S. Army Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) course. Colonel Rowe was part of a military assistance program to the Philippine Army. The NPA asserts that this made him a legitimate military target.

=== Second Great Rectification Movement ===

By 1991, the CPP central committee had assessed the mistakes of the previous decade and carried out the Second Great Rectification Movement from 1992 until declaring a success in 1998. The Second Great Rectification Movement, however, saw splits in the CPP ranks, with rejectionists such as Filemon Lagman, Romulo Kintanar, Etta Rosales, and others leaving the CPP and forming their own groups based on ideological differences. The Alex Boncayao Brigade, notorious for its partisan activities, left the CPP with Lagman and formed the Revolutionary Proletarian Army.

In 1998, the GRP and NDFP signed the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law (CAHRIHL), which establishes rules of engagement for both parties in accordance to international rules of war. The NPA, as a signatory to CAHIRHL, is bound to international agreements stated in the Geneva Convention and thus follows rules set for prisoners of war, command-detonated explosives, and similar rules of engagement.

Since then, rejectionists have been met with reprisals. Lagman was ambushed in the University of the Philippines in 2001 by armed gunmen and slain. The NPA has admitted to killing Kintanar in 2003. Other rejectionists, like Rosales and Walden Bello continue as members of the social-democratic Akbayan party. Ricardo Reyes is active in local politics, having last attempted to secure the mayoralty of Pasig in 2010.

=== Post-Rectification===
The CPP declared the Second Great Rectification Movement as having been &quot;conclusively won&quot; in 1998. Since then, it has re-affirmed that the CPP is in absolute command of the NPA, outlining that its most pressing task is to &quot;defeat and destroy the US-created and US-supported reactionary Armed Forces of the Philippines.

Since then, it has continued to wage a protracted people&#x27;s war through the use of guerrilla tactics, while steadily expanding. In 2002, President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo requested for the United States Department of State to declare the CPP-NPA as a foreign terrorist group, which was granted on August 2. This was in line with her counter-insurgency program, &quot;Oplan Bantay Laya&quot;, which aimed to end the conflict between the AFP and the NPA. In 2005, the European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy included the NPA as a terrorist group. Despite these efforts, the NPA has declared &quot;Oplan Bantay Laya I&quot; a &quot;failure&quot;, citing that it did not lose a single guerrilla front despite the AFP&#x27;s efforts of concentrating its forces in 300 to 600 barrios at any given time.

In 2005, the NPA reported that its strength had surpassed its previous peak in 2005. Arroyo, at this time, had replaced OBL1 with &quot;Oplan Bantay Laya 2&quot;, which aimed at &quot;ending the revolutionary movement by 2010&quot;. OBL2, along with what the CPP identified as &quot;conservatism&quot; in the ranks, led to a decline in NPA strength until 2009.

During the administration of Benigno Aquino III, OBL2 was replaced by &quot;Oplan Bayanihan&quot;, which had a more &quot;people-centered&quot; approach compared to OBL&#x27;s military-heavy tactics. NPA membership, at this time, steadily rose. By 2017, NPA strength had surpassed the previous 2005 peak by 3%.

As of 2018, its strength is tallied at greater than the 5,600 rifles recorded in the CPP&#x27;s 1985 plenum. The Central Committee has stated in its 2017 Congress that it has a five-year plan with aims to &quot;carry forward the antifascist, antifeudal and anti-imperialist movement and overthrow the tyrannical US-Duterte regime, and bring the protracted people&#x27;s war to the advanced phase of the strategic defensive, in order to reach the threshold of the strategic stalemate&quot;. The five-year plan:
# Aims to develop 7 to 10 advanced regions in terms of strength, spread, and advancement of guerrilla warfare, with approximately 20,000 Red fighters spread across the country.
# Calls for the development of sub-regions, with one or two undersized companies and 9 to 15 horizontal platoons, interlocked across three to five company-sized guerrilla fronts.
# Aims for every region and sub-region should have one company-sized unit for every nine platoon-sized units, with recruitment campaigns utilized to achieve this goal.

The CPP five-year plan emphasizes the need to combat conservatism in the NPA ranks, the importance of mass-work in building and strengthening Party groups, and the intensification of guerrilla warfare against enemy targets.

The NPA has a long record of attacking mining corporations and logging companies which they accuse of harming the forests of the Philippines. In 2011 in revenge for the murder of anti-mining activist Rabenio Sungit, the NPA attacked three mines in Mindanao, causing 190 million dollars in damages. Some corporations willing to pay NPA taxes for local social programs are allowed to continue operating within NPA territory, those who do not are often attacked by the NPA who burn their equipment.

=== Ceasefires ===
* In November 27, 1986, the Philippine government and rebels signed a 60-day ceasefire. This deal was rescinded in January 1987 following the events of the Mendiola massacre, where police fired on protesters and killed 13 farmers, injuring 30 more.
* The peace talks between the two sides were intermittent and inconclusive since 1986, bogging down in 2012 when the government refused to free political prisoners. They resumed in August 2016, when Duterte released 19 rebel leaders from jail. However, President Duterte scrapped talks in February 2017, when rebels ambushed an army convoy, breaking a unilateral ceasefire that had held for five months. Both sides returned to the negotiating table on April 1, 2017.
* In April 2017, peace talks between the National Democratic Front and the Philippine government brokered by Norway took place in the Netherlands, hoping to reach a political settlement in twelve months to end the conflict. This was the second time the two sides agreed on a bilateral truce since November 1986.
* As of 2019, the Duterte administration unilaterally declared the end of peace talks between the GRP and the NDFP, focusing instead on their counter-insurgency program &quot;Oplan Kapanatagan&quot; and what it terms as a &quot;whole-of-nation&quot; approach.

== Ideology and policies ==
The NPA, being the primary organization of the CPP, follows a theoretical ideology of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism. It regards the Philippines as a semi-colonial, semi-feudal state where political and economic power is concentrated on a local class of landlords and comprador bourgeoisie, aided by foreign imperialists, chief of which is United States imperialism. The CPP regards a two-stage revolution of People&#x27;s Democratic Revolution followed by socialist reconstruction as the path to achieve socialism and wrest control away from the bourgeois.

The NPA regards itself as waging a revolution ultimately stemming from the &quot;unfinished&quot; revolution of the Katipunan, calling itself a revolution of the &quot;new type&quot;; whereas the Katipunan waged a &quot;bourgeois democratic revolution of the old type, the NPA is waging a &quot;proletarian socialist revolution&quot; in the same vein as the October Revolution in Russia.

The CPP-NPA regards three things as central to waging revolution: armed struggle, agrarian revolution, and the building of mass-bases in the countryside. The NPA, aside from being a military force, also puts emphasis in carrying out land reform and organizational work to ensure that villages become bases of the people&#x27;s democratic government.

=== Ideologies regarding armed struggle ===
The CPP regards armed struggle as a necessary component of revolution coinciding with the Party&#x27;s organizational work. The NPA, as the central agent of armed struggle, serves to achieve its central task of &quot;destroying and dismantling the rule of the enemy and taking their political power&quot;. In waging armed revolution, the NPA follows the strategic line of protracted people&#x27;s war by &quot;encircling the cities from the countryside until conditions are ripe for seizing the cities through a strategic offensive&quot;.

The NPA identifies three stages in waging armed struggle: strategic defensive, strategic stalemate, and strategic offensive. It regards itself as yet unable to conduct symmetric warfare in the urban centers and thus regards the people&#x27;s war as being in a stage of strategic defensive moving to a stage of strategic stalemate. During the stage of strategic defensive, the NPA &quot;maintains the initiative in tactical offensives against the strategic military advantage of the enemy&quot;, making use of guerrilla tactics to attack targets and defend guerrilla zones, while armed partisans perform special roles in the cities. The second stage is strategic stalemate, where fighting force is more or less equal, while the last stage is that of strategic offensive, where the NPA has developed its strength capable of assaulting military camps and cities.

=== Promotion of LGBT rights ===
The NPA has explicitly allowed the recruitment of sexual and gender minorities. Many queer Filipinos join the NPA due to the lack of LGBT rights in the Philippines, and they believe that queer liberation can be achieved through a communist revolution. To the NPA, one&#x27;s ability and willingness to serve the cause takes precedence over one&#x27;s sexual orientation and gender identity; the CPP had recognized &quot;the right to form samesex relationships and changing one&#x27;s gender&quot; since 1992. Kaira Zoe Alburo writes that gay NPA recruits challenge the concept of a hegemonic, &quot;heterosexualized&quot; masculinity in the army in that by enlisting, they create a &quot;new man&quot; who exists outside of the heterosexual ideal of a &quot;real man patterned on being strong, aggressive, and skilled in the art of war&quot;.

Same-gender marriage is permitted by the NPA. In 1998, the CPP released the document &quot;On Proletarian Relationship of the Sexes, which&quot; outlined how romantic relationships and marriages should work under the army. The document also covered same-gender relationships, and with its implementation, the queer rights of sexual and gender minorities in the army became more recognized. In 2005, the NPA conducted the first recorded gay marriage in the history of the Philippines. 

The former Filipino president Duterte mocked the NPA&#x27;s acceptance of LGBT members, erroneously claiming that &#x27;40 percent&#x27; of NPA members are gay. Duterte also claimed that NPA guerrillas once attempted to sexually seduce his son. NPA co-founder Jose Maria Sison confirmed that the NPA openly accepted LGBT people and called Duterte&#x27;s claims &quot;unbelievable&quot;.

== International relations ==
The Philippine Army had apprehended Eduardo Quitoriano in 1994, who was a NPA liaison officer to the Japanese Red Army and involved in a money laundering case in Switzerland.

It is reported that the NPA had supported the Naxalites (of India) during the Naxalite–Maoist insurgency by providing training and technical support.

The CPP-NPA received large-scale support, in the form of arms, $7 million and logistical support, from the Gaddafi government in Libya according to a US Secretary of State.

== Legal status ==
=== Under the Anti-Subversion Act of 1957 ===
At the time of its inception, Government of the Philippines automatically outlawed the NPA (along with the CPP) through the Anti-Subversion Act of 1957 which had branded the Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930 (PKP) and the Hukbalahap as an &quot;organized conspiracy&quot;. As splinter groups which had roots to the PKP, the ban extended to the CPP-NPA. 

=== Repeal of the Anti-Subversion Act of 1957 ===
The Anti-Subversion Act of 1957 was repealed by President Fidel Ramos in October 1992, decriminalizing membership in the NPA and CPP.

=== Tagging as &quot;Terrorist Organization&quot; during the Duterte administration ===
In December 2017, President Rodrigo Duterte declared the NPA along with the CPP as terrorist organizations. In agreement were the European Union, New Zealand and the United States.

The Anti-Terror Council of the Philippines designated CPP-NPA as a terrorist organization in the Philippines on December 9, 2020.

The Manila Regional Trial Court has junked a proscription case by the Department of Justice seeking to designate the CPP-NPA as a terrorist organization on September 22, 2022. The court concluded that the constitution and program of the CPP-NPA, including its justification for armed struggle, fall under &quot;rebellion&quot; and do not constitute the legal definition of &quot;terrorism&quot;.

== See also ==
* Communist rebellion in the Philippines
* Moro National Liberation Front
* Jose Maria Sison

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;Armed Conflict Report 2002, Philippines-CPP/NPA&quot; (; PDF).
* &quot;U.S. Department of State – Philippine Communist Party Designated Foreign Terrorist Group&quot;.
* &quot;New People&#x27;s Army&quot; (archived from the original on February 25, 2008). Extract of article about NPA&#x27;s tactics and strategy, May 2006 (full article needs subscription).
* &quot;Amnesty International Report 2003 – The Philippines&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q866709" start="4" end="26" title="New People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="New People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="30" end="41" title="abbreviation" label="abbreviated"/>
<link wikidata="Q866709" start="42" end="45" title="New People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="NPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q866709" start="49" end="52" title="New People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="BHB"/>
<link wikidata="Q636521" start="79" end="113" title="Communist Party of the Philippines" label="Communist Party of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819059" start="318" end="342" title="People&amp;#x27;s democracy (Marxism–Leninism)" label="people&amp;#x27;s democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q736833" start="412" end="428" title="Jose Maria Sison" label="Jose Maria Sison"/>
<link wikidata="Q371789" start="455" end="465" title="Hukbalahap" label="Hukbalahap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464828" start="473" end="489" title="Bernabe Buscayno" label="Bernabe Buscayno"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="517" end="530" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="544" end="550" title="Maoism" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289477" start="563" end="591" title="people&amp;#x27;s war" label="protracted people&amp;#x27;s war"/>
<link wikidata="Q27791637" start="642" end="680" title="communist rebellion in the Philippines" label="communist rebellion in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716052" start="694" end="710" title="list of conflicts by duration" label="ongoing conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707111" start="1323" end="1367" title="National Democratic Front of the Philippines" label="National Democratic Front of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q457786" start="1559" end="1574" title="Rodrigo Duterte" label="Rodrigo Duterte"/>
<link wikidata="Q43079415" start="1862" end="1904" title="Office of the President of the Philippines" label="Office of the President of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1970" end="1983" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1992" end="2006" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346667" start="2127" end="2162" title="Public Security Intelligence Agency" label="Public Security Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712402" start="2336" end="2371" title="Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930" label="Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q25562290" start="2378" end="2382" title="Jesus Lava" label="Lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q47004842" start="2485" end="2504" title="Kabataang Makabayan" label="Kabataang Makabayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="2536" end="2554" title="Maoism" label="Mao Zedong Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="2588" end="2604" title="Marxism-Leninism" label="Marxism-Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723346" start="2643" end="2656" title="nom de guerre" label="nom de guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47010195" start="3054" end="3088" title="First Great Rectification Movement" label="First Great Rectification Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q371789" start="3291" end="3319" title="HUKBALAHAP" label="Hukbong Mapagpalaya ng Bayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="5034" end="5050" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774719" start="5074" end="5104" title="martial law in the Philippines" label="martial law in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="6788" end="6802" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="6973" end="6982" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="6983" end="6990" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15504738" start="6991" end="7018" title="James N. Rowe" label="James &amp;quot;Nick&amp;quot; Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507188" start="7045" end="7085" title="Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape" label="Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q47010202" start="7395" end="7430" title="Second Great Rectification Movement" label="Second Great Rectification Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448378" start="7582" end="7596" title="Filemon Lagman" label="Filemon Lagman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404971" start="7615" end="7627" title="Etta Rosales" label="Etta Rosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641247" start="7723" end="7744" title="Alex Boncayao Brigade" label="Alex Boncayao Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q42728858" start="7825" end="7855" title="Revolutionary Proletarian Army" label="Revolutionary Proletarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="8168" end="8185" title="Geneva Convention" label="Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q746592" start="8382" end="8411" title="University of the Philippines" label="University of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285526" start="8535" end="8547" title="Walden Bello" label="Walden Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="8575" end="8592" title="social democracy" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828960" start="8593" end="8600" title="Akbayan" label="Akbayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624" start="8700" end="8705" title="Pasig" label="Pasig"/>
<link wikidata="Q438061" start="9044" end="9075" title="Armed Forces of the Philippines" label="Armed Forces of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="9165" end="9182" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="9229" end="9252" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="9548" end="9562" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q672788" start="9563" end="9597" title="Common Foreign and Security Policy" label="Common Foreign and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464" start="10281" end="10299" title="Benigno Aquino III" label="Benigno Aquino III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12024" end="12038" title="Rabenio Sungit" label="Rabenio Sungit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816645" start="12496" end="12513" title="Mendiola massacre" label="Mendiola massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="13165" end="13171" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="13190" end="13201" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127879" start="13743" end="13766" title="Marxism-Leninism-Maoism" label="Marxism-Leninism-Maoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q618532" start="13904" end="13912" title="landlord" label="landlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427496" start="13918" end="13927" title="comprador" label="comprador"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="13928" end="13939" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="13958" end="13970" title="imperialism" label="imperialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858755" start="14035" end="14055" title="two-stage theory" label="two-stage revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="14155" end="14164" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="14325" end="14334" title="Katipunan" label="Katipunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="14567" end="14585" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="15052" end="15062" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q584367" start="16560" end="16590" title="LGBT rights in the Philippines" label="LGBT rights in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17362" end="17402" title="On Proletarian Relationship of the Sexes" label="On Proletarian Relationship of the Sexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q333954" start="18276" end="18293" title="Japanese Red Army" label="Japanese Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q979845" start="18429" end="18455" title="Naxalite–Maoist insurgency" label="Naxalite–Maoist insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="18605" end="18636" title="History of Libya under Muammar Gaddafi" label="the Gaddafi government in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925797" start="18771" end="18800" title="Government of the Philippines" label="Government of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712402" start="18915" end="18950" title="Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930" label="Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q371789" start="18965" end="18975" title="Hukbalahap" label="Hukbalahap"/>
<link wikidata="Q27791637" start="20098" end="20136" title="Communist rebellion in the Philippines" label="Communist rebellion in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q59938" start="20139" end="20169" title="Moro National Liberation Front" label="Moro National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q736833" start="20172" end="20188" title="Jose Maria Sison" label="Jose Maria Sison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262099" wikidata="Q412873" url="?curid=1262099" title="Ājīvika">
<text>Ajivika (, IAST: ) is one of the &quot;nāstika&quot; or &quot;heterodox&quot; schools of Indian philosophy. Believed to have been founded in the 5th century BCE by Makkhali Gosāla, it was a &quot;Śramaṇa&quot; movement and a major rival of Vedic religion, early Buddhism, and Jainism. Ājīvikas were organized renunciates who formed discrete communities. The precise identity of the Ājīvikas is not well known, and it is even unclear if they were a divergent sect of the Buddhists or the Jains.

Original scriptures of the Ājīvika school of philosophy may once have existed, but these are currently unavailable and probably lost. Their theories are extracted from mentions of Ājīvikas in the secondary sources of ancient Indian literature. The oldest descriptions of the Ājīvika fatalists and their founder Gosāla can be found both in the Buddhist and Jaina scriptures of ancient India. Scholars question whether Ājīvika philosophy has been fairly and completely summarized in these secondary sources, as they were written by groups (such as the Buddhists and Jains) competing with and adversarial to the philosophy and religious practices of the Ājīvikas. It is likely that much of the information available about the Ājīvikas is inaccurate to some degree, and characterizations of them should be regarded carefully and critically.

The Ājīvika school is known for its &quot;Niyati&quot; (&quot;Fate&quot;) doctrine of absolute fatalism or determinism, the premise that there is no free will, that everything that has happened, is happening and will happen is entirely preordained and a function of cosmic principles. The predetermined fate of living beings was the major distinctive doctrine of their school, along with withholding judgement on how to achieve liberation (&quot;moksha&quot;) from the eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth, instead believing that fate would lead us there. Ājīvikas further considered the &quot;karma&quot; doctrine as a fallacy. Ājīvika metaphysics included a theory of atoms, which was later adapted in the Vaiśeṣika school, where everything was composed of atoms, qualities emerged from aggregates of atoms, but the aggregation and nature of these atoms were predetermined by cosmic laws and forces. Ājīvikas were mostly considered as atheists. They believed that in every living being there is an &quot;ātman&quot;—a central premise of Vedic religion and Jainism.

Ājīvika philosophy, otherwise referred to as Ājīvikism in Western scholarship, reached the height of its popularity during the rule of the Mauryan emperor Bindusara, around the 4th century BCE. This school of thought declined but survived for nearly 2,000 years through the 13th and 14th centuries CE in the Southern Indian states of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The Ājīvika philosophy, along with the Cārvāka philosophy, appealed most to the warrior, industrial, and mercantile classes of ancient Indian society.

==Etymology and meaning==
 means &quot;Follower of the Way of Life&quot;. Ajivika (Prakrit: , ; , IAST: ) or adivika (Prakrit: , ) are both derived from Sanskrit () which literally means &quot;livelihood, lifelong, mode of life&quot;. The term &quot;Ajivika&quot; means &quot;those following special rules with regard to Iivelihood&quot;, sometimes connoting &quot;religious mendicants&quot; in ancient Sanskrit and Pali texts.

The name &quot;Ajivika&quot; for an entire philosophy resonates with its core belief in &quot;no free will&quot; and complete &quot;niyati&quot;, literally &quot;inner order of things, self-command, predeterminism&quot;, leading to the premise that good simple living is not a means to salvation or moksha, just a means to true livelihood, predetermined profession and way of life. The name came to imply that school of Indian philosophy which lived a good simple mendicant-like livelihood for its own sake and as part of its predeterministic beliefs, rather than for the sake of after-life or motivated by any soteriological reasons.

Some scholars spell Ajivika as Ajivaka.

==History==

===Origins===
Ājīvika philosophy is cited in ancient texts of Buddhism and Jainism to Makkhali Gosala, a contemporary of the Buddha and Mahavira. In &quot;Sandaka Sutta&quot; the Ājīvikas are said to recognize three emancipators: Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Saṅkicca, and Makkhali Gosāla. Exact origins of Ājīvika is unknown, but generally accepted to be the 5th century BCE.

Primary sources and literature of the Ājīvikas are lost, or yet to be found. Everything that is known about Ājīvika history and its philosophy is from secondary sources, such as the ancient and medieval texts of India. Inconsistent fragments of Ājīvika history are found mostly in Jain texts such as the &quot;Bhagvati Sutra&quot; and Buddhist texts such as the &quot;Samaññaphala Sutta&quot; and &quot;Sandaka Sutta&quot;, and Buddhaghosa&#x27;s commentary on Sammannaphala Sutta, with a few mentions in Hindu texts such as Vayu Purana.

The Ājīvikas reached the height of their prominence in the late 1st millennium BCE, then declined, yet continued to exist in south India until the 14th century CE, as evidenced by inscriptions found in southern India. Ancient texts of Buddhism and Jainism mention a city in the 1st millennium BCE named Savatthi (Sanskrit &quot;Śravasti&quot;) as the hub of the Ājīvikas; it was located near Ayodhya in what is now the North Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. In later part of the common era, inscriptions suggests that the Ājīvikas had a significant presence in the South Indian state of Karnataka, prominently in Kolar district and some places of Tamil Nadu.

The Ājīvika philosophy spread rapidly in ancient South Asia, with a &quot;Sangha Geham&quot; (community center) for Ājīvikas on the island now known as Sri Lanka and also extending into the western state of Gujarat by the 4th century BCE, the era of the Maurya Empire.

====Classification in Hindu philosophy====
Riepe refers to Ājīvikas as a distinct heterodox school of Indian tradition. Raju states that &quot;Ājīvikas and Cārvākas can be called Hindus&quot; and adds that &quot;the word Hinduism has no definite meaning&quot;. Epigraphical evidence suggests that emperor Ashoka, in the 3rd century BCE, considered Ājīvikas to be more closely related to the schools of Vedic&#x27;s than to Buddhists, Jainas or other Indian schools of thought.

===Biography of Makkhali Gosala===

Makkhali Gosala (Pali; Sanskrit &quot;Gośala Maskariputra&quot;, c. 484 BCE) is generally considered as the founder of the Ājīvika movement. Some sources state that Gosala was only a leader of a large Ājīvika congregation of ascetics, but not the founder of the movement himself. The Swedish Indologist Jarl Charpentier and others suggest the Ājīvika tradition existed in India well before the birth of Makkhali Gosala, citing a variety of ancient Indian texts.

Gosala was believed to be born in Tiruppatur of Tiruchirappalli district in Tamil Nadu and was the son of Mankha, a professional mendicant. His mother was Bhaddā. His name Gosala &quot;cowshed&quot; refers to his humble birthplace.

Gosala is described in ancient texts as a contemporary of Mahavira, the 24th Tirthankara of Jainism, and of Gautama Buddha. The Jain &quot;Bhagavati Sutra&quot; refers to him as Gosala Mankhaliputta (&quot;son of Mankhali&quot;). The text depicts Gosala as having been a disciple of Mahavira&#x27;s for a period of six years, after which the two had a falling out and parted ways. According to the &quot;Bhagvati Sutra&quot;, Makkhali Gosala met with Mahāvīra again later in life, but Gosala asserted to Mahavira that he was not the same person. Makkhali Gosala referred to the example of a sesame plant which &quot;had been pulled up, and had temporarily died, but it had been replanted and thus reanimated, becoming once more living, while the seven pods had developed&quot;. Gosāla declared that the original Gosāla, who was Mahavira&#x27;s companion, was once dead and that the soul now inhabiting the apparent Gosāla in front of him was a reanimated, different Gosala. This argument was declared a form of sophistry by Mahavira, and this led to a significant break in the relations between the two.

===Inscriptions and caves===
Several rock-cut caves belonging to Ājīvikas are dated to the times of the Mauryan emperor Ashoka (r. 273 BCE to 232 BCE). These are the oldest surviving cave temples of ancient India, and are called the Barabar Caves in Jehanabad district of Bihar. The Barabar caves were carved out of granite, has a highly polished internal cave surfaces, and each consists of two chambers, the first is a large rectangular hall, the second is a small, circular, domed chamber. These were probably used for meditation.

The Ashokan dedications of several Barabar Caves to the Ajivikas were engraved during the 12th year and the 19th year of his reign (about 258 BCE and 251 BCE respectively, based on a coronation date of 269 BCE). In several instances, the word &quot;Ājīvikas&quot; (𑀆𑀤𑀻𑀯𑀺𑀓𑁂𑀳𑀺, &quot;Ādīvikehi&quot;) was later attacked by the chisel, probably by religious rivals, at a time when the Brahmi script was still understood (probably before the 5th century CE). However, the original inscriptions being deep, they remain easily decipherable.

=== Decline ===

After the decline of the Maurya Empire in the 2nd century BCE, the Ajivikas find only occasional mentions in the Sanskrit literature and do not appear to have been serious rivals to other sects. The final version of the Buddhist and Jain scriptures were compiled at a later period, but the description of Ajivikas in these texts likely represents the conditions of the Maurya and pre-Maurya times.

In northern India, Ajivikas may have become insignificant by the Shunga period (1st century BCE), although they may have survived until the 15th century, as suggested by stray references to them in various texts. References in the &quot;Vayu Purana&quot; suggest that during the Gupta period (fourth-6th century CE) the Ajivika practices had changed substantially, and their sect was declining rapidly.

In some of the Barabar Caves inscriptions, the words referring to the Ajivikas appear to have been defaced, although the rest of the text appears intact. The selective nature of these defacements suggests that they were carried out by the religious rivals of the Ajivikas. This defacement must have taken place when the Brahmi script had still not been forgotten, likely some time before the 5th century CE. The Caves were subsequently occupied by Buddhists, Hindus and Muslims. It is unlikely that the Muslims defaced the inscriptions, as the Brahmi script was illegible to them. E. Hultzsch theorized that the defacement took place when the Maukhari (c. 6th century) ruler Ananta-varman installed Hindu images at the Caves. However, Basham dismisses this theory, noting that there is little evidence to support this view and the only cave in which the word &quot;Ajivikehi&quot; remains intact is among the three caves where Ananta-varman installed a Hindu image. Based on similarities of carvings at the Barabar and the Udaygiri Caves, scholar A. Banerji Sastri theorized that the Kalinga monarch Kharavela (1st-2nd century BCE) evicted the Ajivikas to favour Jains, but Basham finds this evidence inconclusive. According to Basham, any ruler of Magadha between the Maurya and the Gupta periods may have been responsible for the persecution of the Ajivikas.

The &quot;Brhaj-jataka&quot; of Varahamihira (6th century) mentions the Ajivikas (among other major ascetic groups) in an astrological context, stating that a person born under a certain planetary influence becomes an Ajivika ascetic. According to the 9th-10th century commentator Utpala, &quot;Ajivika&quot; in this context refers to the Vaishnavite Ekadandin ascetics. However, according to historian Ajay Mitra Shastri, Varahamihira indeed refers to the Ajivikas, who may have existed as an influential sect in the 6th century. A.L. Basham notes that there are several such instances of Ajivikas being confused with other major sects: for example, the commentator of &quot;Achara-sara&quot; believes them to be Buddhist, and in &quot;Neelakesi&quot;, the Ajivika leader clarifies that his followers should not be mistaken for Digambaras. According to Basham, this suggests that the surviving Ajivikas adopted some of the beliefs and customs of the more popular faiths and possibly merged with them.

The Jain commentator Mallisena, who wrote &quot;Syadvada-manjari&quot; (1292 CE), suggests that the Ajivikas existed during his time; he may have been aware of the Ajivikas of southern India. At least 17 inscriptions from southern India suggest that a tax was imposed on Ajivikas or Acuvas (believed to be a Tamil form of Ajivikas) there. These inscriptions range from the time of the Pallava king Simhavarman II (c. 446 CE) to the 14th century. The last of these inscriptions are dated to 1346 CE (Shaka 1268), found at three different places around Kolar. E. Hultzsch and Rudolf Hoernlé theorized that the term Ajivika (&quot;Acuva&quot;) refers to Jains in this context, and some others—such as A. Chakravarti—doubt the equivalence of the terms &quot;Ajivika&quot; and &quot;Acuva&quot;. However, Basham believes that these inscriptions indeed refer to the Ajivikas and that they may have survived there until the 15th century, as suggested by the writings of Vaidyanatha Dikshita. The Ajivikas may have completely declined because of the growing Hindu, Buddhist and Jain influence.

The 14th century &quot;Sarva-Darshana-Sangraha&quot;, a compendium of the Indian philosophical systems, makes no mention of Ajivikas, which indicates the decline of their sect.

==Reliability of sources==
Ājīvikas competed with and debated the scholars of Buddhism, Jainism, and Vedic&#x27;s. The Ājīvika movement is primarily known from historical references left behind in Jain and Buddhist sources, that may therefore be hostile to it. It is unknown to what degree the available non-Ājīvika sources reflect the actual beliefs and practices of the Ājīvikas. Most of what is known about them was recorded in the literature of rival groups, modern scholars question the reliability of the secondary sources, and whether intentional distortions for dehumanization and criticism were introduced into the records.

More recent work by scholars suggests that the Ājīvika were perhaps misrepresented by Jain and Buddhist sources.
Paul Dundas states that the Jain and Buddhist texts cannot be considered reliable source of Ājīvika history and philosophy, because &quot;it seems doubtful whether a doctrine [of Ajivikas] which genuinely advocated the lack of efficacy of individual effort could have formed the basis of a renunciatory path to spiritual liberation&quot;, and that &quot;the suspicion must be that the Jains and Buddhists deliberately distorted Ajivika doctrine for their own polemical purposes&quot;. In contrast, other scholars suggest that at least the common elements found about Ājīvikas in Jain and Buddhist literature may be considered, because Jainism and Buddhism were two different, competing and conflicting philosophies in ancient India.

==Philosophy==
===Absolute determinism and no free will===
The problems of time and change was one of the main interests of the Ajivikas. Their views on this subject may have been influenced by Vedic sources, such as the hymn to &quot;Kala&quot; (Time) in Atharvaveda. Both Jaina and Buddhist texts state that Ājīvikas believed in absolute determinism, absence of free will, and called this &quot;niyati&quot;. Everything in human life and the universe, according to Ajivikas, was pre-determined, operating out of cosmic principles, and true choice did not exist. The Buddhist and Jaina sources describe them as strict fatalists, who did not believe in karma. The Ajivikas philosophy held that all things are preordained, and therefore religious or ethical practice has no effect on one&#x27;s future, and people do things because cosmic principles make them do so, and all that will happen or will exist in future is already predetermined to be that way. No human effort could change this &quot;niyati&quot; and the karma ethical theory was a fallacy. James Lochtefeld summarizes this aspect of Ajivika belief as, &quot;life and the universe is like a ball of pre-wrapped up string, which unrolls until it was done and then goes no further&quot;.

Riepe states that the Ajivika belief in predeterminism does not mean that they were pessimistic. Rather, just like Calvinists belief in predeterminism in Europe, the Ajivikas were optimists. The Ajivikas simply did not believe in the moral force of action, or in merits or demerits, or in after-life to be affected because of what one does or does not do. Actions had immediate effects in one&#x27;s current life but without any moral traces, and both the action and the effect was predetermined, according to the Ajivikas.

Makkhali Gosala seems to have combined the ideas of older schools of thought into an eclectic doctrine. He appears to have believed in &quot;niyati&quot; (destiny), &quot;svabhava&quot; (nature), &quot;sangati&quot; (change), and possibly &quot;parinama&quot;, which may have prompted other philosophical schools to label him variously as &quot;ahetuvadin&quot;, &quot;vainayikavadin&quot;, &quot;ajnanavadin&quot;, and &quot;issarakaranavadin&quot;. According to him, all beings undergo development (&quot;parinama&quot;). This culminates in the course of time (&quot;samsarasuddhi&quot;) in final salvation to which all beings are destined under the impact of the factors of &quot;niyati&quot; (destiny), &quot;bhava&quot; (nature), and &quot;sangati&quot; (change). As such, destiny does not appear as the only player, but rather chance or indeterminism plays an equal part in his doctrine. He thus subscribed to &quot;niyativada&quot; (fatalism) only in the sense that he thought that &quot;some&quot; future events like salvation for all were strictly determined.

===Ajivikas and theism===
Ajivika was an atheistic philosophy. Its adherents did not presume any deity as the creator of the universe, or as prime mover, or that some unseen mystical end was the final resting place of the cosmos.

In later texts, the Tamil &quot;Nīlakēci&quot;, a story of two divinities, Okkali and Ōkali, relates the Ājīvikas instructed men in the scriptures.

Ajivikas believed that in every being, there is a soul (Atman). However, unlike Jains and various orthodox schools of Hinduism that held that the soul is formless, Ajivikas asserted the soul has a material form, one that helps meditation. They also believed the soul passes through many births and ultimately progresses unto its pre-destined &quot;nirvana&quot; (salvation). Basham states, that some texts suggest evidence of Vaishnavism-type devotional practices among some Ajivikas.

===Atomism===
Ajivikas developed a theory of elements and atoms similar to the Vaisheshika school of Vedic&#x27;s. Everything was composed of minuscule atoms, according to Ajivikas, and qualities of things are derived from aggregates of atoms, but the aggregation and nature of these atoms were predetermined by cosmic forces.

The description of Ajivikas&#x27; atomism is inconsistent with those described in Buddhist and Vedic texts. According to three Tamil texts, the Ajivikas held there exists seven &quot;kayas&quot; (Sanskrit: काय, assemblage, collection, elemental categories): &quot;pruthvi-kaya&quot; (earth), &quot;apo-kaya&quot; (water), &quot;tejo-kaya&quot; (fire), &quot;vayo-kaya&quot; (air), &quot;sukha&quot; (joy), &quot;dukkha&quot; (sorrow), and &quot;jiva&quot; (life). The first four relate to matter, the last three non-matter. These elements are &quot;akata&quot; (that which is neither created nor destroyed), &quot;vanjha&quot; (barren, that which never multiplies or reproduces) and have an existence independent of the other. The elements, asserts Ajivika theory in the Tamil text Manimekalai, are made of &quot;paramanu&quot; (atoms), where atoms were defined as that which cannot be further subdivided, that which cannot penetrate another atom, that which is neither created nor destroyed, that which retains its identity by never growing nor expanding nor splitting nor changing, yet that which moves, assembles and combines to form the perceived.

The Tamil text of Ajivikas asserts this &quot;coming together of atoms can take diversity of forms, such as the dense form of a diamond, or a loose form of a hollow bamboo&quot;. Everything one perceives, states the atomism theory of Ajivikas, was mere juxtapositions of atoms of various types, and the combinations occur always in fixed ratios governed by certain cosmic rules, forming &quot;skandha&quot; (molecules, building blocks). Atoms, asserted the Ajivikas, cannot be seen by themselves in their pure state, but only when they aggregate and form &quot;bhutas&quot; (objects). They further argued that properties and tendencies are characteristics of the objects. The Ajivikas then proceeded to justify their belief in determinism and &quot;no free will&quot; by stating that everything experienced—&quot;sukha&quot; (joy), &quot;dukkha&quot; (sorrow), and &quot;jiva&quot; (life)—is a mere function of atoms operating under cosmic rules.

Riepe states that the details of the Ajivikas theory of atomism provided the foundations of later modified atomism theories found in Jain, Buddhist, and Vedic traditions.

===Antinomian ethics===
Another doctrine of Ajivikas philosophy, according to Buddhist texts, was their antinomian ethics, that is there exist &quot;no objective moral laws&quot;. Buddhaghosa summarizes this view as, &quot;There is neither cause nor basis for the sins of living beings and they become sinful without cause or basis. There is neither cause nor basis for the purity of living beings and they become pure without cause or basis. All beings, all that have breath, all that are born, all that have life, are without power, or strength, or virtue, but are the result of destiny, chance and nature, and they experience joy and sorrow in six classes&quot;.

Despite this ascribed premise of antinomian ethics, both Jain and Buddhist records note that Ājīvikas lived a simple ascetic life, without clothes and material possessions.

Tamil literature on Ajivikas suggests they practiced Ahimsa (non-violence) and a vegetarian lifestyle. Arthur Basham notes that Buddhist and Jaina texts variously accuse Ajivikas of immorality, unchastity, and worldliness, but they also acknowledge the confusion among Buddhists and Jainas when they observed the simple, ascetic lifestyle of Ajivikas.

==Scriptures==
The Ajivikas had a fully elaborate philosophy, produced by its scholars and logicians, but those texts are lost. Their literature evolved over the centuries, like other traditions of Indian philosophy, through the medieval era. The Pali and Prakrit texts of Buddhism and Jainism suggest that Ajivika theories were codified, some of which were quoted in commentaries produced by Buddhist and Jaina scholars.

The main texts of the Ajivikas included the ten &quot;Purvas&quot; (eight &quot;Mahanimittas&quot;, two &quot;Maggas&quot;) and the &quot;Onpatu Katir&quot;. The &quot;Mahanimittas&quot; of Ajivikas claims Bhagavati Sutra was extracted from the teachings Gosala received from Mahavira when he was a disciple.

The belief of Ajivikas in absolute determinism and influence of cosmic forces led them to develop extensive sections in their Mahanimittas texts on mapping the sun, moon, planets, and stars and their role in astrology and fortune telling.

==Influence==
Isaeva suggests that the ideas of Ajivika influenced Buddhism and various schools of Vedic thought. Riepe provides an example of an influential Ajivika theory, namely, its theory on atomism. Basham proposes that Ajivikas may have possibly influenced the doctrines of the Dvaita Vedanta sub-school of medieval Vedic philosophy.

==Conflict between Ajivikas, Buddhists and Jains==
According to the 4th century Buddhist legend &quot;Ashokavadana&quot;, the Mauryan emperor Bindusara and his chief queen Shubhadrangi were believers of this philosophy, which reached its peak of popularity during this time. &quot;Ashokavadana&quot; also mentions that, after his conversion to Buddhism, Bindusara&#x27;s son Ashoka issued an order to kill all the Ajivikas in Pundravardhana, enraged at a picture that depicted Gautama Buddha in a negative light. Around 18,000 followers of the Ajivika sect were supposedly executed as a result of this order. The entire story may be apocryphal and fictitious as Ashoka himself contributed for the growth of Ajivikas sect by constructing four caves for Ajivakas at Barabar.

An earlier Jaina text, the &quot;Bhagavati Sutra&quot;, similarly mentions a debate, disagreement, and then &quot;coming to blows&quot; between factions led by Mahavira and by Gosala.

==See also==
==Notes==
==References==
* Reprinted by Moltilal Banarsidass in 1981 ().
*

== External links ==
* Doctrines and History of the Ajivikas, University of Cumbria, UK
* The Ajivikas B.M. Barua (1920), University of Calcutta, West Bengal
* A New Account of the Relations between Mahavira and Gosala, Helen M. Johnson, The American Journal of Philology, Vol. 47, No. 1 (1926), pages 74–82
* Rock-cut cave halls of Ajivikas Government of Bihar, India
* Ajivikas in Malhar, South Kosala, Inscriptions and artwork related to Ajivikas in Chhattisgarh, India, by Ed Murphy (Harvard Law School)
* Ajivakas in Manimekhalai, Rao Bahadur Aiyangar (Translated from Tamil), Madras University, pages 54–57</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194486" start="11" end="15" title="IAST" label="IAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q412873" start="17" end="17" title="Ājīvika" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q618680" start="33" end="52" title="Āstika and nāstika" label="&amp;quot;nāstika&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="89" end="106" title="Indian philosophy" label="Indian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701335" start="164" end="179" title="Makkhali Gosala" label="Makkhali Gosāla"/>
<link wikidata="Q211390" start="196" end="203" title="Śramaṇa" label="Śramaṇa"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="240" end="254" title="Historical Vedic religion" label="Vedic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q853482" start="256" end="270" title="Pre-sectarian Buddhism" label="early Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="276" end="283" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="712" end="737" title="Indian literature#In archaic Indian languages" label="ancient Indian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="838" end="846" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006151" start="851" end="856" title="Jain literature" label="Jaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="1395" end="1399" title="Fate" label="Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29253" start="1428" end="1436" title="fatalism" label="fatalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="1440" end="1451" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="1482" end="1491" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="1779" end="1785" title="moksha" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q173324" start="1802" end="1844" title="Saṃsāra" label="eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="1933" end="1938" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="1976" end="1987" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1999" end="2014" title="Atomism#Ancient_Indian_atomism" label="theory of atoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q651387" start="2047" end="2056" title="Vaisheshika" label="Vaiśeṣika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813321" start="2276" end="2284" title="Hindu atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="2345" end="2350" title="Ātman (Hinduism)" label="ātman"/>
<link wikidata="Q625510" start="2465" end="2484" title="Indology" label="Western scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="2546" end="2561" title="Maurya Empire" label="Mauryan emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q315526" start="2562" end="2571" title="Bindusara" label="Bindusara"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="2715" end="2730" title="South India" label="Southern Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="2741" end="2750" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="2755" end="2765" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q477243" start="2806" end="2813" title="Cārvāka" label="Cārvāka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2894" end="2916" title="History of India#Second urbanisation (c. 600 – 200 BCE)" label="ancient Indian society"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="3002" end="3009" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="3037" end="3044" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408861" start="3547" end="3561" title="predeterminism" label="predeterminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="3647" end="3653" title="moksha" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q326255" start="3959" end="3973" title="soteriology" label="soteriological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701335" start="4124" end="4139" title="Makkhali Gosala" label="Makkhali Gosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="4159" end="4169" title="Gautama Buddha" label="the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="4174" end="4182" title="Mahavira" label="Mahavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483786" start="4774" end="4792" title="Samaññaphala Sutta" label="Samaññaphala Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q335247" start="4834" end="4845" title="Buddhaghosa" label="Buddhaghosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594448" start="5248" end="5256" title="Savatthi" label="Savatthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186040" start="5337" end="5344" title="Ayodhya" label="Ayodhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="5364" end="5375" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="5386" end="5399" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="5508" end="5519" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="5530" end="5539" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="5590" end="5600" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="5755" end="5764" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="5810" end="5817" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="5857" end="5870" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q477243" start="6029" end="6036" title="Cārvāka" label="Cārvāka"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="6052" end="6057" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="6134" end="6146" title="Epigraphy" label="Epigraphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="6178" end="6184" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="6404" end="6408" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607040" start="6690" end="6706" title="Jarl Charpentier" label="Jarl Charpentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="7141" end="7149" title="Mahavira" label="Mahavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077817" start="7160" end="7171" title="Tirthankara" label="Tirthankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="7175" end="7182" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="7191" end="7205" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="8308" end="8314" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311736" start="8421" end="8434" title="Barabar Caves" label="Barabar Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="8460" end="8465" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="9301" end="9314" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="9740" end="9753" title="Shunga Empire" label="Shunga period"/>
<link wikidata="Q151611" start="9912" end="9923" title="Vayu Purana" label="Vayu Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="9954" end="9966" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311736" start="10094" end="10107" title="Barabar Caves" label="Barabar Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q101954" start="10660" end="10671" title="E. Hultzsch" label="E. Hultzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12448145" start="10722" end="10730" title="Maukhari dynasty" label="Maukhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536413" start="11102" end="11116" title="Udayagiri and Khandagiri caves" label="Udaygiri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391280" start="11179" end="11188" title="Kharavela" label="Kharavela"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967951" start="11451" end="11463" title="Brihat Jataka" label="Brhaj-jataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q858348" start="11473" end="11485" title="Varahamihira" label="Varahamihira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902978" start="11722" end="11728" title="Utpala (astronomer)" label="Utpala"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="11780" end="11791" title="Vaishnavite" label="Vaishnavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q54895014" start="11844" end="11862" title="Ajay Mitra Shastri" label="Ajay Mitra Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595852" start="11972" end="11983" title="A.L. Basham" label="A.L. Basham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986755" start="12178" end="12187" title="Neelakesi" label="Neelakesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9436" start="12270" end="12279" title="Digambara" label="Digambara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12465" end="12474" title="Mallisena" label="Mallisena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517702" start="12842" end="12856" title="Simhavarman II" label="Simhavarman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358959" start="12943" end="12948" title="Shaka era" label="Shaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q727181" start="12995" end="13000" title="Kolar, Karnataka" label="Kolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q101954" start="13002" end="13013" title="E. Hultzsch" label="E. Hultzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375111" start="13018" end="13032" title="Rudolf Hoernlé" label="Rudolf Hoernlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164484" start="13407" end="13427" title="Vaidyanatha Dikshita" label="Vaidyanatha Dikshita"/>
<link wikidata="Q111165738" start="13554" end="13577" title="Sarva-Darsana-Sangraha" label="Sarva-Darshana-Sangraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059352" start="14456" end="14467" title="Paul Dundas" label="Paul Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q236092" start="15446" end="15457" title="Atharvaveda" label="Atharvaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="15843" end="15848" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="16207" end="16212" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="16554" end="16563" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986755" start="18297" end="18305" title="Neelakesi" label="Nīlakēci"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="18840" end="18851" title="Vaishnavism" label="Vaishnavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q651387" start="18979" end="18990" title="Vaisheshika" label="Vaisheshika"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="22395" end="22401" title="Ahimsa" label="Ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q682212" start="24112" end="24124" title="Ashokavadana" label="Ashokavadana"/>
<link wikidata="Q315526" start="24152" end="24161" title="Bindusara" label="Bindusara"/>
<link wikidata="Q24929787" start="24182" end="24194" title="Shubhadrangi" label="Shubhadrangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q682212" start="24291" end="24303" title="Ashokavadana" label="Ashokavadana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="24385" end="24391" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350794" start="24436" end="24450" title="Pundravardhana" label="Pundravardhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311736" start="24774" end="24781" title="Barabar Caves" label="Barabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="25204" end="25215" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q78901766" start="25278" end="25294" title="Helen Moore Johnson" label="Helen M. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="25414" end="25419" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="25511" end="25523" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262101" wikidata="Q5070422" url="?curid=1262101" title="Ir Amim">
<text>Ir Amim (; &quot;City of Peoples&quot; or &quot;City of Nations&quot;) is an Israeli activist non-profit founded in 2004 that focuses on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in Jerusalem. It seeks to ensure the &quot;dignity and welfare of all its residents and that safeguards their holy places, as well as their historical and cultural heritages.&quot;

==Organizational activities==
Ir Amim works from several angles to further its goals:

===Legal and governmental policy===
Ir Amim regularly provides information to Knesset members and members of the Jerusalem Municipal Government about actions in East Jerusalem that they believe to undermine Jerusalem&#x27;s stability, impede parity amongst residents, or threaten the possibility for future final-status negotiations in Jerusalem (such as settlement building in Palestinian neighborhoods). The organization also brings cases to the Supreme and Municipal courts on topics such as building permits and social services in East Jerusalem. An example of this is in May 2016, when Ir Amim filed a petition asking the High Court of Justice to prohibit the Jerusalem Day flag parade from entering the Muslim Quarter, arguing that previous parades have resulted in violence to residents, vandalism, and racist provocations and that in 2016 the parade would coincide with the holy days of Ramadan. The High Court rejected the petition.

===Monitoring and reporting===
Ir Amim daily monitors the situation in East Jerusalem, and exposes key developments and in-depth analysis in its reports almost monthly. This type of monitoring and reporting is the basis for the legal and policy activity of Ir Amim, as well as the media work.

===Jerusalem Policy Forum===
The Jerusalem Policy Forum is a joint project of Ir Amim and the Palestinian NGO, the Peace and Democracy Forum.

===Public outreach===
Ir Amim&#x27;s public outreach is primarily aimed at the Israeli public, with the goal of re-orienting the public discourse on the issue of Jerusalem. The organization encourages the public to evaluate both the current realities and the ongoing developments in Jerusalem with regard to the possible long-term ramifications for Israel. Ir Amim&#x27;s public outreach centers around study tours, media work, briefings, house meetings, and educational programs. Ir Amim also maintains a blog on the Huffington Post.

====Study tours====
Ir Amim offers study tours of East Jerusalem to both individuals and organizations. The tours focus on the historical background as well as the Ir Amin view of current political and socio-economic developments in East Jerusalem. The tours travel along the Separation Barrier and through Jerusalem neighborhoods, discussing Israeli policies and their impact on Israelis and Palestinians and on a possible political resolution in Jerusalem.

===Jerusalem Moments===
Jerusalem Moments is a film project sponsored by Ir Amim. It is a collection of short documentaries directed by young filmmakers, both Israelis and Palestinians, which reflect the complexity of daily life in Jerusalem, in the context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The films in the 2008 collection are:
*Bus Station, by Lily Sheffy
*You Don&#x27;t Live Here Anymore, by Nizar Abu Zayyad
*The Third House, by Yoram Ron
*The Largest Mammals in Jerusalem, by Nitsan Shorf Domidiano
*Archaeology of Ownership, by Noga Almi Hantke
*Children&#x27;s Story, by Daniel Gal
*Boulders, by Eran Sahar
*Two Houses and a Longing, by Dorit Naaman
*Noor and Nar, by Saeed Khairaldeen
*Home, by Marwah Jabara Tibi

The films in the 2009 collection are:
*The Little Western Wall, by Liviu Babich
*In Israel&#x27;s Custody, by Radwan Duha
*Prince of Jerusalem, by Shabaneh Momen
*Hamamm al-Ayn and Me, by Nihad Sabri Markesto
*Bus, by Yasmine Novak
*Nine to Five, by Daniel Gal
*Ghetto Town, by Amber Fares and Avi Goldstein

===Supporting grassroots civil society===
Ir Amim has worked with several Palestinian non-profit organizations to help to strengthen civil society in East Jerusalem. Emphasis is placed on organizations that work to improve infrastructure (sanitation, water, roads, sidewalks), street utilities (streetlamps, bus stops) or neighborhood services (clinics, emergency services, mail delivery, waste collection). An example of one such organization is Nuran, which provides emergency ambulance service in East Jerusalem.

==Issues==
Some of the issues that Ir Amim engages with include:
*Jewish construction in East Jerusalem
*Home demolitions and evictions in East Jerusalem
*The Separation Barrier in Jerusalem
*Excavations in the Old City and Historic Basin (including Silwan)
*E-1
*Freedom of Movement in Jerusalem
*Planning and Construction in East Jerusalem
*Education in East Jerusalem
*Municipal Services in East Jerusalem, such as sewage, electricity, and trash collection

==References==
==External links==
* Official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5070422" start="0" end="7" title="Ir Amim" label="Ir Amim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070422" start="8" end="9" title="Ir Amim" label="("/>
<link wikidata="Q5070422" start="17" end="32" title="Ir Amim" label="City of Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070422" start="48" end="63" title="Ir Amim" label="City of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="2588" end="2602" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q524253" start="2631" end="2649" title="Israeli West Bank Barrier" label="Separation Barrier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262102" wikidata="Q65937" url="?curid=1262102" title="Regina Halmich">
<text>Regina Halmich (born 22 November 1976) is a German former professional boxer. She is among the most successful female boxers of all time and helped popularise female boxing in Europe.

==Amateur career==
Halmich was German champion in kickboxing as an amateur in 1992, 1993 and 1994, a year in which she also earned the European title.

==Professional career==
As a professional, she has boxed in the Jr. Flyweight, Flyweight, Jr. Bantamweight, Bantamweight and Featherweight divisions. Halmich was the WIBF&#x27;s world champion in the Jr. Flyweight, Flyweight and Super Flyweight divisions. Halmich made her professional debut on 4 March 1994, in her hometown of Karlsruhe, defeating Fienie Klee of the Netherlands.

Regina Halmich has defeated several quality boxers during her career. She defended her Flyweight title with success against Delia Gonzalez, Yvonne Caples, Johanna Peña-Álvarez and numerous others, once only with a draw against Elena Reid. She also faced Daisy Lang, against whom she won in a fight for the vacant IWBF world Super Flyweight title.

On 15 January 2005, she defeated Marylin Hernandez by a ten-round unanimous decision defending the world Flyweight title. On 16 April 2005 she also defeated Hollie Dunaway in ten rounds defending her title. In her 50th professional fight, she defended the title against María Jesús Rosa Reina from Spain. She held the title for more than ten years. In December 2005 she won the rematch against Elena Reid.

On 9 September 2006, Halmich won her 53rd pro fight, defeating Ria Ramnarine of Trinidad and Tobago by TKO in the sixth round. Her pro boxing record now stands at 52 wins, 1 loss and 1 draw.

Halmich faced Reka Krempf of Hungary on 13 January 2007 at the Brandberg Arena in Halle (Saale), defeating her by a unanimous decision for the 44th successful title defense.

===Retirement===
Halmich announced her retirement after her farewell fight on 30 November 2007, in which she beat Hagar Finer of Israel by majority decision (96–94, 97–94, 95–95).

==Outside the ring==

In addition to her boxing career, Halmich has branched out into the world of business, as she became one of the first women boxers to have her own line of cosmetics. She has posed as a model for some German magazines and websites. 
Halmich became famous on German television with a promotional fight against German TV host Stefan Raab, in his show &quot;TV total&quot; in March 2001. The fight was rather chaotic, the referee intended to end it more than once because he felt that Stefan Raab&#x27;s health was in danger, but show host Raab kept convincing him to continue the fight. Although Halmich broke Stefan Raab&#x27;s nose during the fight, he at least managed to go the distance with her. A second fight between these two took place in 2007, and Halmich won again.

The EP &quot;All We Are – The Fight&quot; by metal band Warlock is subtitled &quot;A Tribute to Regina Halmich&quot;, because this version of the title track &quot;All We Are&quot; was originally performed on 30 March 2006 on German TV as the entrance song for Regina Halmich, who was also Doro Pesch&#x27;s best friend.

==International recognition==
She is not a stranger to American boxing fans, and, in 1996, American boxing publication &quot;Ring Magazine&quot; published the first of a number of articles about her in that magazine. In January 2016 the Ring magazine considered her the 2nd best female boxer of all time.

==Professional boxing record==

==References==
==External links==

* Official website 
* News and Pictures of Regina Halmich</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65937" start="0" end="14" title="Regina Halmich" label="Regina Halmich"/>
<link wikidata="Q961015" start="71" end="76" title="women&amp;#x27;s boxing" label="boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367360" start="503" end="507" title="Women&amp;#x27;s International Boxing Federation" label="WIBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="665" end="674" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253869" start="843" end="857" title="Delia Gonzalez" label="Delia Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562631" start="859" end="872" title="Yvonne Caples" label="Yvonne Caples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216410" start="874" end="894" title="Johanna Peña-Álvarez" label="Johanna Peña-Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327917" start="946" end="956" title="Elena Reid" label="Elena Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157692" start="973" end="983" title="Daisy Lang" label="Daisy Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881379" start="1224" end="1238" title="Hollie Dunaway" label="Hollie Dunaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q786175" start="1337" end="1359" title="María Jesús Rosa Reina" label="María Jesús Rosa Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322074" start="1537" end="1550" title="Ria Ramnarine" label="Ria Ramnarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="1554" end="1573" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="1748" end="1761" title="Halle (Saale)" label="Halle (Saale)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902175" start="1955" end="1966" title="Hagar Finer" label="Hagar Finer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610556" start="2229" end="2234" title="Fashion model" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969" start="2367" end="2378" title="Stefan Raab" label="Stefan Raab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978" start="2398" end="2406" title="TV total" label="TV total"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859667" start="2462" end="2469" title="referee (boxing)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729858" start="2832" end="2854" title="All We Are – The Fight" label="All We Are – The Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q696050" start="2875" end="2882" title="Warlock (band)" label="Warlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q77268" start="3109" end="3119" title="Doro Pesch" label="Doro Pesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="3266" end="3279" title="Ring Magazine" label="Ring Magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262106" wikidata="Q733838" url="?curid=1262106" title="Cotroceni Palace">
<text>Cotroceni Palace (Romanian: &quot;Palatul Cotroceni&quot;) is the official residence of the President of Romania. It is located at &quot;Bulevardul Geniului, nr. 1&quot;, in Bucharest, Romania. The palace also houses the National Cotroceni Museum.

==History==

=== The Cotroceni Monastery (1679–1682) ===

In 1679, a monastery was built by Șerban Cantacuzino on Cotroceni Hill in the first year of his rule on the place of an old wooden hermitage. The plans of this new monastery kept many of the traditional architectural elements found in the principalities of Romania at the time. The Cotroceni monastery was completed in 1682, and has since been visited frequently by many pilgrims and documented in various Chronicles.

=== The royal palace (1883–1895) ===

Cotroceni Hill was also the place of residence of many of Romania&#x27;s rulers for a time until 1883, when King Carol I of Romania received the residences and ordered them demolished with plans to build a much larger edifice in their stead which would serve to house the future heirs to his throne.

Construction of this new royal palace was commissioned to begin in the year 1893, the project being placed under the direction of French architect Paul Gottereau.

=== The north wing (1915–1926) ===

During the rule of King Ferdinand I and Queen Marie, further improvements were made to the royal palace. At the request of Queen Marie, the north wing of the palace was completed with the space that would be used to house the maids of honor and adjutants in duplex apartments of sorts. A gymnastics hall at the semi-basement was also built, taking up the space where it is assumed that a chapel would have resided on the ground floor. In October 1915, the space was refitted to accommodate central heating.

In 1925, architect Grigore Cerchez began his work on the Cotroceni Palace by adding a living room with a gazebo on the first floor. On the second floor, he added a small terrace on the northern face along with an additional gazebo. Cerchez continued to work on the two adjacent salons on the first floor of the north wing, as well as the Grand Reception Hall that distinguished this part of the building, until 1926.

In 1929, Cerchez achieved the functional completion of the north-eastern corner of the palace, having created a loggia at the library&#x27;s level. Above the library, a large storage area was built as an annex to the royal dormitory.

=== The socialist occupation (1947–1948) ===

On 30 December 1947, King Michael I was forced to abdicate by the communists. At that point, the new government had control of the palace which was then uninhabited by the royal family.

On February 13, 1948, the new government held a meeting in which the destiny of the palace would be decided while an inventory of the royal goods was taking place. There were multiple requests for different functions the palace could serve, from the location of the University of Medicine to the headquarters for the National Union of Romanian Students. On May 26 that year, decree number 38 was issued, in which the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People&#x27;s Republic of Romania decided that &quot;all goods and estates that were found from the date of March 6, 1945 in the possession of the former king Mihai and other members of the former royal family shall be passed into the possession of the Romanian state.&quot; Finally, on June 18, 1948, the Council of Ministers has decided that the Cotroceni Palace, its &quot;five bodies, 150 rooms, park, the property of the state&quot; would be placed under the administration of the Ministry of Interior. The same decree stipulated that other valuables found within the palace would be redistributed among various ministries, including the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Health.

After the new administrator of the palace has settled in, around 1,000 objects, including paintings, sculptures, icons, furniture, rugs, draperies, dishes, and other decorative items were missing. They were taken by the Ministry of Art and Information at the proposal of a special commission &quot;to take objects of art from the Cotroceni Palace.&quot; The majority of the remaining objects were redistributed to various institutions and organizations, including the press arm of the Ministry of Art and Information, the &quot;Bee&quot; Society (Societatea &quot;Albina&quot;), and the restaurant union &quot;Ambasador&quot;.

=== The &quot;Pioneers&#x27; Palace&quot; (1949) ===

On April 30, 1949, a school children&#x27;s program called the &quot;Pioneers&quot; was about to receive its first group ceremony, which would mark a moment in the Cotroceni Palace&#x27;s history in which it would be re-purposed for the use of these children who were preparing to become &quot;dignified citizens devoted to their homeland and The Romanian Worker&#x27;s Party.&quot; It was around this time when the Cotroceni Palace took on another name – &quot;Palatul Pionierilor&quot;, known in English as The Pioneers&#x27; Palace (also known as young communists).

The retrofit was to take place in four stages, during which the building would allocate rooms for a bigger library and centers or workshops for chess, miniature aircraft, automobiles, radiophony, photography, painting, choreography and dance, history, and ceramics.

In addition to the retrofits, the palace was also to be used as a cinema and auditorium. The Pioneers&#x27; Palace, however, was not inaugurated until June 1, 1950 — approximately one year after it was meant to be inaugurated.

=== Modifications by the socialist regime (1949–1976) ===

After the abdication of King Michael I, the new government made several well-documented changes to the palace:

On the ground floor

* Hanging lamps from the principal entrance were unmounted.
* Plaster ornaments – as well as the anthropomorphic gable over the stairs of honor – were either detached, forced down, or broken.
* Stucco marble pilasters and boards were covered with clay and paint. They were also perforated for the mounting of electrical cords or piping for heat.

On the first floor

* The neo-German-style living room and the Golden Salon were destroyed.
* All of the Ruse stone columns from the White Salon (known also as the Cerchez salon) were painted with dark ash polyvinyl paint.
* All of the space within the new living room (planned by Grigore Cerchez) and kitchen were transformed.

On the second floor

* All of the spaces used by the children of the royal family – as well as the loggia area towards the principal courtyard – were emptied of any finishes.
* The dormitory of Ferdinand I was completely destroyed.
* All of the spaces between the Ferdinand I&#x27;s dormitory and Maria&#x27;s painting salon, save for the cherry wood stairs, were dismantled.

On the third floor

* The spaces on this floor have all been modified radically.

In 1976, during the regime of Nicolae Ceaușescu, the Cotroceni Palace once again changed its purpose after its transfer to the State Protocol (Protocolul de Stat). Its new function would be as a residential building – a guest house.

=== 1977 Vrancea earthquake ===
In 1977, a magnitude 7.5 earthquake struck Vrancea County and damaged several buildings in Bucharest. The Cotroceni Palace was among those buildings, and suffered such extensive damage that a project had to be commissioned for restoration and consolidation.

==National Cotroceni Museum==

The Cotroceni National Museum is the old Royal Palace, built in 1895. 
In 1991 the palace became the headquarters of the Romanian Presidency and the old wing of the ensemble was opened to the public as Cotroceni National Museum, envisioned as an insight into past ages.

Many of the palace&#x27;s function rooms were decorated to the taste of Marie, the English wife of Carol&#x27;s heir, his nephew Crown Prince Ferdinand. Her extensive art collection is also on display.

===The Hall of Honour===

Largely kept intact since the 1890s, the Hall of Honour, built in the French style of Napoleon III, boasts an original Italian marble staircase. The decorations are inspired by the French Opera Garnier.

===The German Living Room===

Decorated in the German Neorenaissance style, the German Living room was a place of daily reunion for the royal family. King Carol I was a most enthusiastic advocate of this style and no doubt wished to impose it in the rooms of Cotroceni.

===The Hunting Room===

Built in 1926 under the guidance of the Czech architect Karel Liman, the Hunting Room showcases some of King Ferdinand&#x27;s personal trophies.

===The Flowers&#x27; Room===

The Flowers&#x27; Room was named the Golden Room in the times of Queen Marie. The rich stucco flower decoration was, at the time, gilded.

===The Library===

Also known as King Ferdinand&#x27;s private study room, the library still sports the original elm wood panelling and, even today, houses part of King Ferdinand&#x27;s collection of books.

===The Great Hall of Receptions===

Built by the architect Grigore Cerchez in the Neo-Romanian style, the Great Hall of Receptions today also functions as a place for specific activities hosted by the museum, such as concerts, book launches or art exhibitions.

===The Royal Dining Room===

The Royal Dining Room is situated in a wing also designed by Cerchez in the Neo-Romanian style, and features a Neo-Byzantine round table, an original design by Queen Marie.

===The Apartments===

The second floor houses the private apartments of the members of the royal family, such as King Ferdinand&#x27;s apartment, Queen Marie&#x27;s apartment or the German apartment.

==Collections==

Comprising approximately 20,000 objects, the collection of the Cotroceni National Museum has been continuously enriched through transfers from other institutions and museums (The National Commission for Administrating State Heritage, The Peles National Museum, the National Arts Museum of Romania) and particularly through acquisitions and generous private donations.

The collection of the National Cotroceni Museum is divided into the following domains: plastic arts (Romanian and international paintings, graphic arts, Romanian and foreign sculpture, religious art), decorative arts (ceramics, glass, metal, textile, furniture), numismatics, medals, history, archaeology.

The plastic arts domain is divided into the following collections: religious arts (wood painted icons), which is representative for the late period of Romanian religious arts (18th- 19th century) and Russian workshops.

The Romanian painting collection gathers paintings by famous Romanian painters of the end of the 19th century up to now. The vast majority of these painters were trained in the renowned Arts school of Bucharest and Iasi while others had the privilege of studying abroad in the famous European schools. After returning, some of them became professors, thus contributing to the improvement of plastic arts and educating a new generation of painters.

Lately, one of the priorities in the heritage acquisitions of Cotroceni National Museum have been the works of artists in the Artistic Youth society, whose activity was prominent at the beginning of the 20th century and encouraged by Queen Mary. Among them: Leon Al. Biju (&quot;Balcic Landscape&quot;), Kimon Loghi (&quot;Balcic coffee shop&quot;), Nicolae Grant (&quot;Landscape&quot;).

The graphic arts collection includes numerous drawings, watercolours and engravings from the 19th and 20th century, and Japanese prints. This particular collection was extended through acquisitions and donations of Romanian modern and contemporary graphics.

The decorative art domain is well represented in the permanent exhibitions and includes furniture, ceramics, glass, metal and textiles.
The furniture collection is one good reminder of the variety of European styles and evolving techniques. In terms of interior pieces of furniture one can notice wood tables and chairs (Neoromanian style), specific ensembles (Empire, Napoleon the 3rd, Napoleon 3rd, Louis 15th and 16th and oriental furniture).

The ceramics collection include valuable pieces of renowned workshops in Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands, and Russia. The Sèvres, Meissen, and Kuznetzov porcelain is truly remarkable.

The glass collection includes valuable artistic and historical pieces: the table set of Queen Mary (Neo Byzantine style) and Italian and French workshops.

The textile collection includes carpets of famous workshops of Buchara, Sumak Shirvan.

The collection of the museum also comprises a number of Art Nouveau objects, created by the artistic movement of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century.

==Visiting hours==

Visiting hours are Tuesday to Sunday, from 9:30 AM to 5:30 PM. The church can be visited with no prior reservation, from Wednesday to Saturday, 9:30 AM to 5:30 PM and on Sunday, the Liturgy can be attended. 
Visits are made only within a guided tour. There are two types of tours: the &quot;classic&quot; tour takes 60 minutes and includes the first and second floors, while the &quot;complete&quot; tour, which lasts 100 minutes, also includes the medieval areas of the Palace, the church and the cellars. Museum reservations have to be made 48 hours beforehand.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Brâncovenesc style
*Presidential Palace

== References ==

== External links ==

* Official National Cotroceni Museum website 
* Official National Cotroceni Museum website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q733838" start="0" end="16" title="Cotroceni Palace" label="Cotroceni Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="18" end="26" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="66" end="84" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="92" end="112" title="President of Romania" label="President of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="174" end="183" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="185" end="192" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q733838" start="221" end="246" title="National Cotroceni Museum" label="National Cotroceni Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q127436" start="341" end="359" title="Șerban Cantacuzino" label="Șerban Cantacuzino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554754" start="363" end="372" title="Cotroceni" label="Cotroceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="564" end="571" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="872" end="876" title="King of Romania" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="877" end="895" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="1289" end="1300" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="1311" end="1316" title="Marie of Romania" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q902435" start="1491" end="1505" title="Maid of honor" label="maids of honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="1510" end="1518" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q843596" start="1755" end="1770" title="central heating" label="central heating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1792" end="1807" title="Grigore Cerchez" label="Grigore Cerchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q961082" start="1878" end="1884" title="gazebo" label="gazebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q466544" start="2303" end="2309" title="loggia" label="loggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="2498" end="2507" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="2538" end="2548" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916637" start="2925" end="2947" title="Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy" label="University of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q637821" start="3093" end="3116" title="Great National Assembly (Socialist Republic of Romania)" label="Great National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="3124" end="3157" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771262" start="4571" end="4579" title="Pioneer Organization" label="Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="5856" end="5871" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161370" start="5872" end="5877" title="gable" label="gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="5967" end="5975" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q160173" start="6211" end="6215" title="Ruse, Bulgaria" label="Ruse"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="6924" end="6941" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="7171" end="7180" title="moment magnitude scale" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q182778" start="7203" end="7217" title="Vrancea County" label="Vrancea County"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="7251" end="7260" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="8036" end="8048" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q187840" start="8138" end="8151" title="Palais Garnier" label="Opera Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11304" end="11315" title="Kimon Loghi" label="Kimon Loghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12169" end="12176" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="12178" end="12184" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="12186" end="12191" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="12197" end="12208" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="12214" end="12220" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12517" end="12530" title="Sumak Shirvan" label="Sumak Shirvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="12589" end="12600" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q460596" start="13306" end="13324" title="Brâncovenesc style" label="Brâncovenesc style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114972" start="13326" end="13345" title="Presidential Palace" label="Presidential Palace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262107" wikidata="Q2554754" url="?curid=1262107" title="Cotroceni">
<text>Cotroceni is a neighbourhood in western Bucharest, Romania, located around the Cotroceni hill, in Bucharest&#x27;s Sector 5.

The nearest Metro stations are Eroilor, Academia Militară, and Politehnica.

==History==
The Hill of Cotroceni was once covered by the forest of Vlăsia, which covered most of today&#x27;s Bucharest. Here, in 1679 a monastery was built by Șerban Cantacuzino, later to be transformed into a palace in 1888 by King Carol I. Houses were built in the area near the palace by the royal servants and by high-ranking military personnel. 

Carol I also build a royal train station named near the palace. The train station was relocated by the communist regime and was later used for transporting materials for the construction of Casa Poporului.

==Notable people==
Important Romanian figures who lived in this neighborhood: Ion Barbu, Nicolae Herlea, Ion Minulescu, Marin Preda, and Liviu Rebreanu.

==Landmarks== 
* Cotroceni Palace, the official residence of the President of Romania, is located in this neighbourhood
* Bucharest Botanical Garden 
* Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy
* The Bucharest Opera building
* New St. Eleftherios Church
* Casa Radio

==Gallery==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2554754" start="0" end="9" title="Cotroceni" label="Cotroceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="40" end="49" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q167630" start="115" end="123" title="Sector 5 (Bucharest)" label="Sector 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q622884" start="138" end="143" title="Bucharest Metro" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380294" start="157" end="164" title="Eroilor metro station" label="Eroilor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12719860" start="166" end="183" title="Academia Militară metro station" label="Academia Militară"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224054" start="189" end="200" title="Politehnica metro station" label="Politehnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846743" start="261" end="277" title="forest of Vlasia" label="forest of Vlăsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127436" start="364" end="382" title="Șerban Cantacuzino" label="Șerban Cantacuzino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="433" end="437" title="King of Romania" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="438" end="445" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="660" end="676" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="communist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q164150" start="747" end="761" title="Casa Poporului" label="Casa Poporului"/>
<link wikidata="Q545724" start="842" end="851" title="Ion Barbu" label="Ion Barbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q464758" start="853" end="867" title="Nicolae Herlea" label="Nicolae Herlea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063157" start="869" end="882" title="Ion Minulescu" label="Ion Minulescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360145" start="884" end="895" title="Marin Preda" label="Marin Preda"/>
<link wikidata="Q462220" start="901" end="915" title="Liviu Rebreanu" label="Liviu Rebreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q733838" start="935" end="951" title="Cotroceni Palace" label="Cotroceni Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="983" end="1003" title="President of Romania" label="President of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616933" start="1040" end="1066" title="Bucharest Botanical Garden" label="Bucharest Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916637" start="1070" end="1118" title="Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy" label="Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163508" start="1125" end="1140" title="Bucharest Opera" label="Bucharest Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400403" start="1152" end="1178" title="New St. Eleftherios Church" label="New St. Eleftherios Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320139" start="1181" end="1191" title="Dâmbovița Center" label="Casa Radio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262109" wikidata="Q1423158" url="?curid=1262109" title="Tamburica">
<text>Tamburica ( or ; sometimes written tamburrizza or tamburitza; ) or tamboura (; ) refers to a family of long-necked lutes popular in Southeast Europe and Central Europe, especially Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia (of which it is the national string instrument), Hungary, Serbia (in Vojvodina, Mačva, and Posavo-Tamnava), and Slovenia. It is also known in Burgenland, Austria. All took their name and some characteristics from the Persian tanbur but also resemble the mandolin and guitar in the sense that its strings are plucked and often paired. The frets may be moveable to allow the playing of various modes. The variety of tamburica shapes known today were developed in Serbia and Croatia by a number of indigenous contributors near the end of the 19th century.

==History==

There is little reliable data showing how the tamboura entered Central Europe. It already existed during Byzantine Empire, and the Greeks and Slavs used to call &quot;pandouras&quot; (see pandoura) or &quot;tambouras&quot; the ancestor of modern bouzouki. The instrument was referred to as θαμπούριν, &quot;thambourin&quot; in the Byzantine Empire (confer Digenis Akritas, Escorial version, vv. 826–827, ed. and transl. Elizabeth Jeffrey).

It is said it was probably brought by the Turks to Bosnia, from where the instrument spread further with migrations of Šokci and Bunjevci above the Sava River to all parts of Croatia, Serbia and further, although this theory is not consistent with the generally accepted view that the ancestor of the tamboura is the ancient Greek pandouris.

Until the Great Migration of the Serbs at the end of the 17th century, the type of tambura most frequently used in Croatia and Serbia had a long neck and two or three strings (sometimes doubled). Similar string instruments include the Czech bratsche, Turkish saz and the sargija, çiftelia and bouzouki. The oldest surviving and authenticated tambura known, which is still kept in a museum in Osijek, dates from 1847 and was owned by Pajo Kolarić of Osijek, who was also the founder of the first amateur tamburica orchestra. In honour of 
him, a festival called tamburitzan is held every year in Osijek.

The development process of the modern tamburica was initiated by several Serbian and Croatian citizens over a period of time. The original long neck, pear shaped tamburica was called the &quot;samica&quot; and it came in a small or larger size. The &quot;kontra,&quot; which had 4 strings tuned in an upper A chord was used only as an accompaniment instrument, it originated in Dalmatia. During the autumn of 1875, after a rebellion in Bosnia had broken out, many refugees arrived in Sremski Karlovci. Among these refugees was a man named Marko Capkun who brought two tamburas with him. He called the small one &quot;icitel&quot; and the larger one &quot;sarkija.&quot; These tamburas did not use wire strings but rather gut strings pulled through little holes on the neck and tied behind. A woodworker, Josif, in Sremski Karlovci began to make Marko&#x27;s tamburas, but instead of the traditional pear shape, he made them into the shape of a little guitar. A bird catcher named Joza built a large tambura-much bigger than a guitar in 1877 or 1878. It stretched two thicker and two thinner strings on it and Joza called it the &quot;bas&quot; or &quot;berdon.&quot; They developed an orchestra with a little tambura called the &quot;prima ,&quot; 5 &quot;kontra&quot; and 1 &quot;bas.&quot; 

The modern tamburica, used in Central Europe and the Balkans, was developed in Budapest. At the time the tamburica seemed to disappear, receding further south, as it used to be played throughout the Kingdom of Hungary, as far north as Pozsony. This traditional folk instrument attracted the interest of local skilled instrument makers, who eventually transformed the instrument, originally made with a carving, into the form and tuning we know today. The transformation took place in the 1900s and the first half of the 1910s, and the model created here has been taken up by traditional ensembles in the current regions.
==Types of tamburica==

The number of strings on a tamburica varies and it may have single or double-coursed strings or a mixture of both. Double-coursed strings are tuned in unison. The basic forms of tamburica are (Serbian and Croatian name is given with Hungarian name in the parenthesis, if different):

=== &quot;Samica&quot; ===
The Samica is a solo instrument that is rarely found as a part of the standard tamburica orchestra. The samica is thought to be the ancestor of the modern tamburica and usually consists of two doubled strings. The samica is traditionally played in Slavonia, Baranja and Vojvodina.

=== &quot;Dangubica&quot; ===
A Dangubica, also known as a &quot;Razbibriga&quot;, &quot;Kozarica&quot;, &quot;Tikvara&quot;, &quot;Potpalac&quot; or &quot;Kuterevka&quot; is another solo instrument very similar to the samica in both shape and sound. It is predominantly played in and around the region of Lika. It is typically larger than the samica and tuned to a lower note.
=== &quot;Tambura Trožica&quot; ===
The Tambura Trožica is a lesser known tambura with three strings (hence the name &quot;trožica&quot; lit. &quot;three stringed&quot;). It was played in the Bosanska Krajina and kozara.

=== &quot;Prim&quot; (&quot;Prím&quot;) ===
The prim comes in a lot of shapes. Sometimes it has a different tune, or it has 6 strings instead of five. The standard that most students use has five strings (one double and three single) But sometimes it has six strings (two doubles and 2 singles). It&#x27;s the smallest in the family ( (about 50 cm long), but is very loud. It is mostly used as a lead instrument or harmonizing instrument. The &quot;bisernica&quot; (from Serbian and Croatian &quot;biser&quot; meaning &quot;pearl&quot;) is another name for the &quot;prim&quot;. It&#x27;s also referred to &quot;Tamburica&quot;. The name comes from the Croatian diminutive of the word &quot;Tambura&quot;

=== &quot;Brač&quot; (&quot;basprim, brács, or basszprím)&quot; ===
The Brač has one double string and three single strings. (basprim), a slightly bigger, lower instrument than the bisernica but played in a similar fashion.

=== &quot;Čelović&quot; ===
The &quot;čelović&quot; – originally has one double string and three single strings. It&#x27;s a deeper version of the basprim.

=== &quot;Bugarija (kontra, or brácsó)&quot; ===
The &quot;bugarija&quot; or &quot;kontra&quot; (&quot;brácsó&quot;) – It has four single strings, similar to a guitar, mostly plays chords on the &quot;back beat&quot; for rhythm. A bugarija has four strings, the bottom pair are &quot;D&quot;, the middle string is &quot;A&quot; and the top two are tuned &quot;F#&quot; and &quot;F#&quot;.

=== &quot;Čelo (cselló)&quot; ===
The &quot;čelo&quot; (&quot;cselló&quot;) – It is similar to the bugarija, but it plays in the bass key, there are no chords and the head is similar to the contrabass, but you play it like any other tambura in the family.

=== &quot;Čelo-Berde&quot; ===
The čelo-berde or the standing čelo- it has four strings and it is played vertically, but you sit while you play. It is used for the bass but it is not a very popular instrument in the tambura family.

=== &quot;Bas&quot; ===
The &quot;bas&quot; or &quot;berda&quot; (&quot;tamburabőgő&quot;), also called &quot;begeš&quot; (&quot;bőgős&quot;) – four strings. It is the largest instrument in the tamburica family, and is similar to contrabass. It can only be played standing and is used for playing bass lines. It could also be played sitting down by using a bar stool or a Double Bass Chair, &amp; the advantage is it allows the instrument to sit flat against the stomach.

There is a view that the first tambura orchestra was formed in Hungary in the 19th century. The instruments&#x27; names came from the Hungarian names of the musical instruments of the symphony orchestra (&quot;cselló&quot; meaning cello, &quot;bőgő&quot; meaning contrabass) and from the Hungarian Gipsy bands (&quot;bőgős&quot;, &quot;prím&quot;, &quot;kontra&quot;). These orchestras soon spread to what is now Bosnia, Austria, Slovenia, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.

==Parts of tamburica==
The tamburica is made in three parts; body, neck and head. The body (sound box) was pear-shaped until the middle of the nineteenth century CE, and was built by scooping out the log. Today they are mostly built in the way of the guitar and even the smallest, the bisernica, has a constructed box. The fingerboard has frets . The head usually had a sharpened form, which can be found still on some bisernicas, but the &quot;snail&quot; design later got the supremacy. The snail headstock design dates from at least the 19th century and the Viennese guitars of Johann Georg Stauffer.

==Composers and ensembles==
Tamburica orchestras can have various formats from a trio to a large orchestra. A basic trio consists of a &quot;prim&quot;, a &quot;kontra&quot; and a &quot;čelo&quot;. Larger orchestras also have &quot;bas-prims&quot; and &quot;bass-prim-terc&quot; tamburas.

The first major composer for the tamburica was Pajo Kolarić, who formed the first amateur tamburica orchestra in Osijek in 1847. Kolarić&#x27;s student Mijo Majer formed the first tamburica choir led by a conductor, the &quot;Hrvatska Lira&quot;, in 1882. Croatian composers for the tamburica include Franjo Ksaver Kuhač, Siniša Leopold and Julije Njikoš. The instrument is associated with Croatian nationalism. Vinko Žganec, an associate of Béla Bartók, collected more than 19,000 Croatian folk songs.
The Grand Tamburica Orchestra of Radio Novi Sad was founded in 1951 under the leadership of Sava Vukosavljev, who composed and arranged many pieces for tamburica orchestra and published a comprehensive book &quot;Vojvođanska tambura&quot; (&quot;The Tambura of Vojvodina&quot;). There are also orchestras of Radio Belgrade and Radio Podgorica, Radio Kikinda etc. Janika Balaž, a member of the Radio Novi Sad orchestra who also had his own octet, was a popular performer whose name became synonymous with the tamburica. Famous tamburica orchestras of Serbia include those of Maksa Popov and Aleksandar Aranicki.

The village of Schandorf in Austria, whose Croatian-speaking inhabitants are descended from 16th Century Croatian immigrants, is the home of a tamburica orchestra, a reflection of its ethnic heritage. The orchestra performs frequently, often outside the village.

== In popular culture ==
=== Films about tamburicas ===
*&quot;The Popovich Brothers of South Chicago&quot; (1978)
*:Directed by Jill Godmilow, Martin Koenig and Ethel Raim. Produced by Mary Koenig, Ethel Raim and Jill Godmilow.
*&quot;Ziveli! Medicine for the Heart&quot; (1987)
*:Filmed and directed by Les Blank. Produced by Flower Films in association with the Center for Visual Anthropology, University of Southern California. Based on ethnography by Andre Simic. El Cerrito, California: Flower Films &amp; Video. .

== Publications ==
&quot;Svet Tambure&quot;, a magazine about tambura music, published triannually in Serbia.

==See also==
*Tambouras
*Tanpura
*Tambura
*Tanbur
*Tambur
*Marko Nešić (born 1872)
*Zvonko Bogdan

==References==
==External links==

*TamburicaOrg – tamburaški portal – tambura portal
*Tamburizza.at – Tamburizza Verein Ivan Vukovic-Parndorf
*Tambura.com.hr 
*Tamburica Association of America
*About tamburica – short history
*The Tamburitza and the preservation of Croatian folk music, by Michael B. Savor (Canada)
*The San Francisco Tamburitza Festival

===Music samples===
*&quot;Ugrós, lassú és friss csárdás&quot;, from Bátmonostor, Hungary 
*&quot;Aki leány akar lenni&quot; (csárdás), from Bogyiszló, Hungary Publikált népzenei felvételek -- On-line adatbázis
*&quot;Lassú csárdás&quot;, from Dávod, Hungary Publikált népzenei felvételek -- On-line adatbázis
*&quot;Zvečera se šečem&quot;, Tamburica ensemble &quot;Ivan Vuković&quot;, Parndorf, Austria Tamburaško društvo Ivan Vuković Pandrof - Shop
*Z. Tonković: &quot;Sjene&quot; (Croatia)
*Janika Balaž and his orchestra: &quot;Fala&quot; (Croatia/Zagorje) audio&amp;foto
*&quot;Deronjski valcer&quot;, from Deronje, Serbia audio&amp;foto</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1423158" start="0" end="9" title="Tamburica" label="Tamburica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423158" start="35" end="46" title="Tamburica" label="tamburrizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423158" start="50" end="60" title="Tamburica" label="tamburitza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423158" start="67" end="75" title="Tamburica" label="tamboura"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="115" end="119" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="132" end="148" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="153" end="167" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="180" end="202" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="204" end="211" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="261" end="268" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="270" end="276" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="281" end="290" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338801" start="292" end="297" title="Mačva" label="Mačva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="303" end="309" title="Posavo" label="Posavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102812" start="310" end="317" title="Tamnava" label="Tamnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="324" end="332" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43210" start="354" end="364" title="Burgenland" label="Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="366" end="373" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="429" end="435" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424319" start="437" end="443" title="tanbur" label="tanbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="466" end="474" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="479" end="485" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213460" start="520" end="527" title="pizzicato" label="plucked"/>
<link wikidata="Q731978" start="604" end="609" title="Musical mode" label="modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="842" end="856" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="884" end="900" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="910" end="916" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q911724" start="967" end="975" title="pandoura" label="pandoura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559944" start="986" end="995" title="tambouras" label="tambouras"/>
<link wikidata="Q322675" start="1025" end="1033" title="bouzouki" label="bouzouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129515" start="1135" end="1150" title="Digenis Akritas" label="Digenis Akritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="1262" end="1267" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="1271" end="1277" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178419" start="1339" end="1344" title="Šokci" label="Šokci"/>
<link wikidata="Q591964" start="1349" end="1357" title="Bunjevci" label="Bunjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="1368" end="1378" title="Sava" label="Sava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="1395" end="1402" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="1404" end="1410" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q470265" start="1573" end="1601" title="Great Serb Migration" label="Great Migration of the Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q508805" start="1804" end="1812" title="Balkan tambura" label="bratsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q528239" start="1814" end="1825" title="Baglamas" label="Turkish saz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451473" start="1834" end="1841" title="sargija" label="sargija"/>
<link wikidata="Q272827" start="1843" end="1851" title="çiftelia" label="çiftelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q322675" start="1856" end="1864" title="bouzouki" label="bouzouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="2545" end="2553" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271922" start="2651" end="2667" title="Sremski Karlovci" label="Sremski Karlovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="3491" end="3505" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="3514" end="3521" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="3540" end="3548" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="3660" end="3678" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="3696" end="3703" title="Bratislava" label="Pozsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q36574" start="3949" end="3954" title="1900s" label="1900s"/>
<link wikidata="Q36585" start="3981" end="3986" title="1910s" label="1910s"/>
<link wikidata="Q176224" start="4257" end="4263" title="unison" label="unison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409426" start="4400" end="4406" title="Samica (musical instrument)" label="Samica"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="4665" end="4673" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790230" start="4675" end="4682" title="Baranya (region)" label="Baranja"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="4687" end="4696" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216205" start="4709" end="4718" title="Dangubica" label="Dangubica"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="5005" end="5009" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779054" start="5269" end="5285" title="Bosanska Krajina" label="Bosanska Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785758" start="5290" end="5296" title="kozara" label="kozara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810441" start="5695" end="5710" title="lead instrument" label="lead instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="5770" end="5790" title="Serbian and Croatian" label="Serbian and Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="6547" end="6553" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231680" start="7497" end="7507" title="contrabass" label="contrabass"/>
<link wikidata="Q376339" start="7624" end="7633" title="bar stool" label="bar stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="7803" end="7810" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="7924" end="7942" title="symphony orchestra" label="symphony orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="7971" end="7976" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231680" start="8003" end="8013" title="contrabass" label="contrabass"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="8153" end="8159" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="8161" end="8168" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="8170" end="8178" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="8184" end="8198" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="8203" end="8211" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q660436" start="8306" end="8315" title="sound box" label="sound box"/>
<link wikidata="Q90229" start="8795" end="8816" title="Johann Georg Stauffer" label="Johann Georg Stauffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="8857" end="8866" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125313" start="9156" end="9168" title="Pajo Kolarić" label="Pajo Kolarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="9222" end="9228" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="9314" end="9323" title="conducting" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="9344" end="9348" title="lyre" label="Lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="9499" end="9507" title="Croats" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="9508" end="9519" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619580" start="9521" end="9533" title="Vinko Žganec" label="Vinko Žganec"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="9551" end="9562" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q366541" start="9645" end="9659" title="Radio Novi Sad" label="Radio Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="9873" end="9882" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q841151" start="9920" end="9934" title="Radio Belgrade" label="Radio Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="9945" end="9954" title="Podgorica" label="Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q309355" start="9962" end="9969" title="Kikinda" label="Kikinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394260" start="9975" end="9987" title="Janika Balaž" label="Janika Balaž"/>
<link wikidata="Q370131" start="10239" end="10248" title="Schandorf" label="Schandorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="10252" end="10259" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="10267" end="10275" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529244" start="10793" end="10802" title="Les Blank" label="Les Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q644711" start="10816" end="10828" title="Flower Films" label="Flower Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="10885" end="10918" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q996569" start="10957" end="10979" title="El Cerrito, California" label="El Cerrito, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975916" start="11035" end="11047" title="Svet Tambure" label="Svet Tambure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559944" start="11135" end="11144" title="Tambouras" label="Tambouras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164636" start="11146" end="11153" title="Tanpura" label="Tanpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q508805" start="11155" end="11162" title="Balkan tambura" label="Tambura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424319" start="11164" end="11170" title="Tanbur" label="Tanbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989127" start="11172" end="11178" title="Tambur" label="Tambur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771214" start="11180" end="11203" title="Marko Nešić (born 1872)" label="Marko Nešić (born 1872)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633794" start="11205" end="11218" title="Zvonko Bogdan" label="Zvonko Bogdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q853737" start="11646" end="11657" title="Bátmonostor" label="Bátmonostor"/>
<link wikidata="Q833491" start="11718" end="11727" title="Bogyiszló" label="Bogyiszló"/>
<link wikidata="Q595231" start="11821" end="11826" title="Dávod" label="Dávod"/>
<link wikidata="Q660886" start="11963" end="11971" title="Parndorf" label="Parndorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q304441" start="12189" end="12196" title="Deronje" label="Deronje"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="12198" end="12204" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262111" wikidata="Q1814559" url="?curid=1262111" title="Ometz LeSarev">
<text>Ometz LeSarev (, Courage to Refuse) is an organization of reserve officers and soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) who refuse to serve beyond the 1967 borders, but &quot;shall continue serving in the Israel Defense Forces in any mission that serves Israel&#x27;s defense.&quot; These conscientious objectors refer to themselves as &quot;refuseniks&quot;, a reference to the refusenik Jews of Soviet Russia. In 2004, Courage to Refuse and one of its founders, social activist David Zonsheine, were nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize by 1992 winner Rigoberta Menchú and 1996 winner Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo.

==History==
The movement began in January 2002 at the initiative of social activist and IDF reserve officer David Zonsheine and his fellow officer Yaniv Iczkovits, who drafted, then published an ad in the Israeli mainstream-left daily Haaretz signed by a nucleus of 51 reserve officers and soldiers. This would later come to be known as &quot;The Soldiers&#x27; Letter&quot; or &quot;The Combatants&#x27; Letter.&quot; Three years later the number of signatories had reached over 600.

The group started within the period of the Al-Aqsa Intifada.

By the 2023 Israel-Hamas War, the founders were divided. Now writer Iczkovits, while still critic of the occupation and Netanyahu governments, rejoined the army to fight Hamas. Zonsheine, with relatives among the Israeli dead and kidnapped during the Hamas attack, asks for a ceasefire. Tamir Sorek, in retrospect, sees the language of the letter as &quot;too patriotic&quot; and inappropriate towards a joint Israeli Palestinian activism.

==Reception==
At first, the IDF responded by sentencing any refusenik who refused to serve in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to jail. Seeing that this was not a deterrent and only raised awareness of refusal within the populace, it has stepped down its efforts and has simply stopped calling on the refuseniks or sent them to alternate duties within the 1967 borders – those borders that existed prior to the 1967 Six-Day War.

There are differing opinions in the Israeli public regarding the organization. The right wing opposes the movement, claiming its activities amount to treason during wartime and that activists&#x27; refusal to serve encourages Palestinians to step up suicide bombings in order to break Israeli society.

The left wing, which opposes the occupation, is split between those who see refusal as a legitimate political tool and those who believe that it is unlawful and only serves to undermine the IDF&#x27;s and the Israeli peace camp&#x27;s standing within the populace. Israeli left-wing activist professor Amnon Rubinstein has warned that the refusal to serve by soldiers on the left could encourage the refusal by soldiers on the right to remove Israeli settlements.

Courage to Refuse and one of its founders, David Zonsheine, were nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 2004.

==The &quot;refusenik letter&quot;==

* We, reserve combat officers and soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces, who were raised upon the principles of Zionism, sacrifice and giving to the people of Israel and to the State of Israel, who have always served in the front lines, and who were the first to carry out any mission, light or heavy, in order to protect the State of Israel and strengthen it.
* We, combat officers and soldiers who have served the State of Israel for long weeks every year, in spite of the dear cost to our personal lives, have been on reserve duty all over the Occupied Territories, and were issued commands and directives that had nothing to do with the security of our country, and that had the sole purpose of perpetuating our control over the Palestinian people. We, whose eyes have seen the bloody toll this Occupation exacts from both sides.
* We, who sensed how the commands issued to us in the Territories, destroy all the values we had absorbed while growing up in this country.
* We, who understand now that the price of Occupation is the loss of IDF&#x27;s human character and the corruption of the entire Israeli society.
* We, who know that the Territories are not Israel, and that all settlements are bound to be evacuated in the end.
* We hereby declare that we shall not continue to fight this War of the Settlements.
* We shall not continue to fight beyond the 1967 borders in order to dominate, expel, starve and humiliate an entire people.
* We hereby declare that we shall continue serving in the Israel Defense Forces in any mission that serves Israel&#x27;s defense.
* The missions of occupation and oppression do not serve this purpose – and we shall take no part in them.

==See also==
*Refusal to serve in the IDF
* Yesh Gvul

==References==
==External links==
*Peace, Propaganda and the Promised Land: Media &amp; the Israel-Palestine Conflict, documentary directed by Sut Jhally and Bathsheba Ratzkoff (2003) quotes Major Stav Adivi of Ometz Le&#x27;sarev</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1814559" start="0" end="13" title="Ometz LeSarev" label="Ometz LeSarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814559" start="17" end="34" title="Ometz LeSarev" label="Courage to Refuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="95" end="116" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="292" end="314" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q126214" start="382" end="391" title="refusenik" label="refusenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="523" end="540" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q188620" start="556" end="572" title="Rigoberta Menchú" label="Rigoberta Menchú"/>
<link wikidata="Q234001" start="589" end="615" title="Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo" label="Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034474" start="765" end="780" title="Yaniv Iczkovits" label="Yaniv Iczkovits"/>
<link wikidata="Q216393" start="853" end="860" title="Haaretz" label="Haaretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="1147" end="1163" title="Al-Aqsa Intifada" label="Al-Aqsa Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="1173" end="1194" title="2023 Israel-Hamas War" label="2023 Israel-Hamas War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1453" end="1464" title="Tamir Sorek" label="Tamir Sorek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="1705" end="1714" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="1719" end="1729" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="2019" end="2030" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2069" end="2075" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="2116" end="2126" title="right wing" label="right wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="2183" end="2190" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="2283" end="2298" title="suicide bombing" label="suicide bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="2340" end="2349" title="left wing" label="left wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890919" start="2638" end="2654" title="Amnon Rubinstein" label="Amnon Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="2779" end="2798" title="Israeli settlements" label="Israeli settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526321" start="4647" end="4674" title="Refusal to serve in the IDF" label="Refusal to serve in the IDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688045" start="4677" end="4686" title="Yesh Gvul" label="Yesh Gvul"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262116" wikidata="Q5447709" url="?curid=1262116" title="Figgy Duff">
<text>Figgy Duff was a Canadian folk-rock band from Newfoundland, Canada. They played a major role in the Newfoundland cultural renaissance of the 1970s and 1980s. Formed in 1976 by Noel Dinn, who named the band after a traditional pudding, Figgy Duff travelled across Newfoundland, learning traditional songs and performing them with distinct elements of rock and roll.

The band relied heavily on the research of ethnomusicologist Kenneth Peacock&#x27;s 1965 3-volume &quot;Songs of the Newfoundland Outports&quot; as a resource for songs that they adapted into a new rock-based sound called “trad-rock” — an amalgamation of rock music and traditional folk music of unknown authors.

They began working with Island Records early, though the album that resulted has yet to be released. Instead, they released their independent self-titled debut album: &quot;Figgy Duff&quot; in 1980. The album was also released by Ottawa-based Posterity Records. It was followed by &quot;After the Tempest&quot; in 1982.

Through the next thirteen years, Figgy Duff continued touring and released three more albums: &quot;Weather Out the Storm&quot; (1989), &quot;Downstream&quot; (1993) and the compilation &quot;Retrospective&quot; (1995). 

The band&#x27;s line-up changed several times, but the core of Noel Dinn and Pamela Morgan, singer-songwriter, stayed the same. &quot;Weather Out the Storm&quot; was nominated for a 1991 Juno Award. Dinn died of cancer in 1993, and Morgan disbanded Figgy Duff soon after.

The band has since reunited three times, once in 1999 for a silver anniversary tour, again in summer 2008 to celebrate the release of a CD of live recordings from the bands&#x27; previous reunion, and for the 2016 Newfoundland and Labrador Folk Festival, featuring Aaron Collis on accordion.

==Discography==
*1980: &quot;Figgy Duff&quot;
*1982: &quot;After the Tempest&quot;
*1989: &quot;Weather Out the Storm&quot;
*1993: &quot;Downstream&quot;
*1995: &quot;Retrospective&quot;
*2008: &quot;Figgy Duff Live Silver Reunion&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*Figgy Duff official site at Amber Music
*Figgy Duff – Encyclopedia of Newfoundland and Labrador, v. 2, p. 62
*Figgy Duff in The Canadian Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5447709" start="0" end="10" title="Figgy Duff" label="Figgy Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="26" end="35" title="folk-rock" label="folk-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="46" end="58" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447713" start="226" end="233" title="Figgy duff (pudding)" label="pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="350" end="363" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="409" end="426" title="ethnomusicologist" label="ethnomusicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390586" start="427" end="442" title="Kenneth Peacock" label="Kenneth Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042046" start="496" end="504" title="Outports" label="Outports"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="621" end="631" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="648" end="658" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="704" end="718" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112128" start="923" end="940" title="Posterity Records" label="Posterity Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244333" start="1300" end="1313" title="Pamela Morgan" label="Pamela Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314149" start="1405" end="1420" title="Juno Awards of 1991" label="1991 Juno Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262118" wikidata="Q7515436" url="?curid=1262118" title="Silly Sisters">
<text>The Silly Sisters is an English folk music duo, formed in 1976 by Maddy Prior and June Tabor. Both of their albums were well-received by reviewers.

== History ==
Prior and Tabor met at Oxford in the 1960s. At first, they performed together under their own names. They released their first album, &quot;Silly Sisters&quot;, in 1976, and later took this name as the name of their duo. They toured together in the 1980s, and released a subsequent album &quot;No More to the Dance&quot; in 1988, on the Shanachie Records label. &quot;The Silly Sisters was conceived as a one-off project,&quot; Tabor explained in 1990. &quot;We said, let&#x27;s see if we can still sing together, and we could.&quot; A &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; review of this second album called it &quot;nearly flawless&quot;, &quot;elegantly understated&quot; and &quot;brazenly witty&quot;.

In 2009 the song &quot;Hedger and Ditcher&quot; from &quot;No More to the Dance&quot; was included in the Topic Records 70th anniversary boxed set &quot;Three Score and Ten&quot;, as track 17 on the seventh CD.

== Discography ==
* 1976: &quot;Silly Sisters&quot; (as &quot;Maddy Prior &amp; June Tabor&quot;)
* 1988: &quot;No More to the Dance&quot;

== References ==
== External links ==
* Silly Sisters at allmusic.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7515436" start="4" end="17" title="Silly Sisters" label="Silly Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="24" end="31" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="32" end="42" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q449192" start="66" end="77" title="Maddy Prior" label="Maddy Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q454425" start="82" end="92" title="June Tabor" label="June Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="186" end="192" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="290" end="295" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020788" start="303" end="316" title="Silly Sisters (album)" label="Silly Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503081" start="500" end="517" title="Shanachie Records" label="Shanachie Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="705" end="720" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732965" start="967" end="980" title="Topic Records" label="Topic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q20814244" start="1014" end="1033" title="Three Score and Ten" label="Three Score and Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020788" start="1105" end="1118" title="Silly Sisters (album)" label="Silly Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1270" end="1282" title="allmusic.com" label="allmusic.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262131" wikidata="Q201876" url="?curid=1262131" title="Poon Lim">
<text>Poon Lim BEM (; 8 March 1918 – 4 January 1991) was a Chinese seafarer. He was born on the island of Hainan, China. In 1942–43, he survived 133 days alone in the South Atlantic.

Lim was Second Mess Steward on , a British cargo ship that the sank on 23 November 1942. He survived on an wooden raft with supplies. When the supplies ran low, Lim resorted to fishing, catching seabirds, and rainwater collection.

On 5 April 1943, three Brazilian fishermen rescued Lim as he neared the coast of Brazil. After Lim returned to the United Kingdom, King George VI awarded him the British Empire Medal. After the Second World War, Lim emigrated to the United States.

==Shipwreck==
In 1942 Lim was Second Mess Steward on the Ben Line cargo ship &quot;Benlomond&quot;, which was en route from Suez to New York via Cape Town and Paramaribo. Her officers were British, but most of her crew was Chinese. &quot;Benlomond&quot; was capable of about . She was defensively armed, but her voyage was unescorted.

On 23 November, &quot;U-172&quot; intercepted and hit &quot;Benlomond&quot; with two torpedoes at position , about north of the coast of Brazil. Lim, who was in his cabin, took his life jacket and went to his boat station, where two officers and a seaman were trying to launch one of the lifeboats. They had raised the boat off its chocks, and were about to lower it, when Lim was washed overboard. The ship sank within about two minutes of being hit, and Lim was dragged underwater. When he resurfaced, he found only a few planks floating, one of which he used for extra buoyancy.

Lim was spotted by the crew of &quot;U-172&quot; but instead of rescuing him, they laughed at him and waved him away. After about two hours in the water, Lim found and boarded a wooden life raft. In the distance he saw another raft, carrying four or five men, who waved to him to join them. Lim thought they were some of the ship&#x27;s DEMS gunners. But Lim had no means to propel his raft, and the two rafts drifted apart.

==Survival==
The raft was stocked with a can of fresh water containing , six boxes of hardtack, of chocolate, ten cans of pemmican, five cans of evaporated milk, one bottle of lime juice, and one can of massage oil. It also had flares, two smoke pots, and a flashlight, with which to signal for help.
Lim at first kept himself alive by drinking the water and eating the food on the raft, but later resorted to fishing, catching seabirds, and collecting rainwater in a canvas life jacket covering. He could not swim well, and often tied a rope from the boat to his wrist in case he fell into the sea. He took a spring from the flashlight and made it into a fishhook, unravelled hemp rope to make a fishing line, and crushed pieces of hardtack to make bait. He dug a nail from the boards on the wooden raft to make a stronger fish hook. When he caught a small fish, he used it as bait to catch bigger fish. He improvised a knife from part of a pemmican can. The water tank had an iron key, which Lim also used as a tool. When gulls settled on his raft, he caught and killed them. He soaked their meat in seawater to salt it, then dried it on deck to make jerky.

When Lim saw sharks, he caught one, using the remnants of gulls he had caught as bait. Lim had braided his fishing line to double thickness, and had wrapped his hands in canvas to give them a little protection. The shark attacked him after he hauled it aboard the raft, so he used a water container to beat it to death. Lim cut it open and sucked the blood from its liver. This quenched his thirst, since it had not rained and he was out of water. He sliced off the fins and let them dry in the sun.

Lim had lost all of his clothes except his shirt and vest. He made a skirt from a hessian bag that had contained the lime juice bottle. The raft had four poles and a canvas tarpaulin, which he rigged as a canopy. This both protected him from the sun and caught rainwater.

Occasionally, the crews of cargo ships saw him but did not pick him up or even greet him despite his proficient shouts in English. Lim contended that they would not rescue him because he was Asian and they may have assumed he was a stricken Japanese sailor, although another explanation is that German U-boats were rumored to set a &quot;survivor&quot; on a raft as a trap to get a rescuing ship to stop, which made it a to be sunk.

Once or twice, United States Navy patrol planes did see him, and one dropped a marker buoy in the water. The plane reported back to US Navy authorities in Belém, Brazil, but a storm hit the area at the same time and he was lost again.

At first, he counted the days by tying knots in a rope, but later decided that there was no point in counting the days and simply began counting full moons.

==Rescue==

By April 1943, Lim realized that he was nearing land, as the color of the sea was no longer a deep ocean blue. He had drifted westward about . On 5 April three Brazilian fishermen found him, about off the coast of Pará, east of Salinas. He was the sole survivor from &quot;Benlomond&quot;. Her Master, Captain John Maul had died, along with 43 of her officers and men, and all eight of her gunners.

Lim had lost in weight. He was so weak that his rescuers had to lift him off his raft. But he ate well, and when the fishermen landed him at Belém, three days later, he was able to walk again, although he was still weak.

On 10 April the British Consul in Pará telegraphed a report to the Ministry of War Transport in London, seeking confirmation of the loss of &quot;Benlomond&quot;. After two weeks in a Brazilian hospital, Lim was fit enough to travel. The Consul arranged for him to go to Britain via Miami and New York.

==Aftermath==
At a ceremony at the Seamen&#x27;s Church Institute of New York and New Jersey in New York on 16 July 1943, the Acting British Consul told Lim that King George VI was to award him the British Empire Medal. His citation states that &quot;Poon Lim displayed exceptional courage, fortitude and resource in overcoming the tremendous difficulties with which he was faced during the long and dangerous voyage on the raft&quot;. At the same ceremony, Ben Line presented Lim with a gold wristwatch. The Royal Navy incorporated his tale into manuals of survival techniques.

After being in the hospital for 35 days he left Brazil via plane going to Miami and later New York. He would end up getting a job for Curtiss-Wright in New Jersey working there until World War II ended in 1945 with the plant closing. When the plant closed he went back to being a sailor becoming a messman for the United States Lines and worked for them until retiring in 1983 as a Chief Steward. 

After the war, Lim wanted to emigrate to the United States, but the quota for Chinese immigrants had been reached. However, because of his fame and the aid of Senator Warren Magnuson, he received a special dispensation and eventually gained citizenship in 1952. Later that year, Lim would marry the daughter of one of his former shipmates aboard the &quot;S.S. Tanda&quot;, having three daughters and a son together. After becoming a US citizen, Lim was prohibited from returning to his homeland as travel was not permitted to the now People&#x27;s Republic of China, so he had to ask his parents to meet him in Hong Kong to visit them. Lim also applied to join the US Navy. His application was declined because he had flat feet. His son George Poon died from cancer in 2020.

When told no one had ever survived longer on a raft at sea, Lim replied, &quot;I hope no one will ever have to break that record.&quot; People have since lived longer lost at sea: three Mexican sailors floated for 10 months from 2005 to 2006 in the Pacific Ocean in a disabled fishing boat. In a similar situation, José Salvador Alvarenga, a fisherman from El Salvador, was apparently lost for 439 days, floating from Mexico to the Marshall Islands. , no one has broken Lim&#x27;s record on a life raft.

The writer Alfred Bester later stated that Lim&#x27;s ordeal was used in his novel &quot;The Stars My Destination&quot;, which opens with a man stranded in space.

Lim died in Brooklyn on 4 January 1991, aged 72.

== See also ==

* José Salvador Alvarenga – survived 438 days adrift in the Pacific Ocean
* Maurice and Maralyn Bailey – survived 117 days adrift in the Pacific Ocean
* Cornelis van der Slot, Nicolaas Hoogendam and Basil Izzi – survived 83 days on a raft in the Atlantic Ocean
* Steven Callahan – survived 76 days adrift in the Atlantic Ocean
* Louis Zamperini – survived 47 days adrift in the Pacific Ocean
* Dougal Robertson – survived 38 days adrift in the Pacific Ocean
* List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea

==Footnotes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201876" start="0" end="8" title="Poon Lim" label="Poon Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q918601" start="9" end="12" title="British Empire Medal" label="BEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="100" end="106" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="108" end="113" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="161" end="175" title="South Atlantic" label="South Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21888039" start="186" end="205" title="Steward&amp;#x27;s assistant" label="Second Mess Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="221" end="231" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="433" end="439" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="546" end="555" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q918601" start="572" end="592" title="British Empire Medal" label="British Empire Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="604" end="620" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130474907" start="716" end="724" title="Ben Line Agencies" label="Ben Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q134514" start="783" end="787" title="Suez" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995529" start="791" end="799" title="Port of New York and New Jersey" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066211" start="804" end="813" title="Port of Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001" start="818" end="828" title="Paramaribo" label="Paramaribo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251487" start="944" end="961" title="Defensively equipped merchant ship" label="defensively armed"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="1080" end="1087" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1176" end="1187" title="Personal flotation device#Life jacket" label="life jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685095" start="1243" end="1249" title="Ordinary seaman" label="seaman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1763" end="1772" title="Lifeboat (shipboard)#Liferaft versus lifeboat" label="life raft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251487" start="1915" end="1919" title="Defensively equipped merchant ship" label="DEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q836891" start="2090" end="2098" title="hardtack" label="hardtack"/>
<link wikidata="Q130097" start="2126" end="2134" title="pemmican" label="pemmican"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417087" start="2149" end="2164" title="evaporated milk" label="evaporated milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="2180" end="2184" title="Lime (fruit)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q179415" start="2207" end="2214" title="massage" label="massage"/>
<link wikidata="Q628261" start="2232" end="2237" title="flare" label="flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q659892" start="2244" end="2254" title="Smoke signal" label="smoke pots"/>
<link wikidata="Q235783" start="2262" end="2272" title="flashlight" label="flashlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="3028" end="3032" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072897" start="3157" end="3162" title="jerky" label="jerky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915329" start="3719" end="3723" title="Undershirt" label="vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q911285" start="3748" end="3755" title="Hessian fabric" label="hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347026" start="3839" end="3848" title="tarpaulin" label="tarpaulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4388" end="4406" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30026" start="4452" end="4463" title="Buoy" label="marker buoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829733" start="4528" end="4533" title="Belém" label="Belém"/>
<link wikidata="Q39517" start="4993" end="4997" title="Pará" label="Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008198" start="5007" end="5014" title="Salinópolis" label="Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785142" start="5073" end="5079" title="Master mariner" label="Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q849424" start="5081" end="5088" title="Sea captain" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="5425" end="5431" title="Consul (representative)" label="Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="5440" end="5451" title="Electrical telegraph" label="telegraphed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937208" start="5468" end="5493" title="Ministry of War Transport" label="Ministry of War Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440707" start="5740" end="5797" title="Seamen&amp;#x27;s Church Institute of New York and New Jersey" label="Seamen&amp;#x27;s Church Institute of New York and New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="5872" end="5881" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q918601" start="5903" end="5923" title="British Empire Medal" label="British Empire Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="6214" end="6224" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138291" start="6419" end="6433" title="Curtiss-Wright" label="Curtiss-Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q477312" start="6599" end="6618" title="United States Lines" label="United States Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800520" start="6667" end="6680" title="Chief steward" label="Chief Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6729" end="6742" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q505852" start="6752" end="6757" title="Magnuson Act" label="quota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335257" start="6851" end="6866" title="Warren Magnuson" label="Warren Magnuson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7040" end="7050" title="S.S. Tanda" label="S.S. Tanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411641" start="7183" end="7207" title="Travel ban" label="travel was not permitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7219" end="7250" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q653200" start="7403" end="7412" title="flat feet" label="flat feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188688" start="7641" end="7662" title="Jesús Vidaña" label="three Mexican sailors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715168" start="7776" end="7799" title="José Salvador Alvarenga" label="José Salvador Alvarenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="7818" end="7829" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="7879" end="7885" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="7893" end="7909" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q286116" start="7977" end="7990" title="Alfred Bester" label="Alfred Bester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063587" start="8055" end="8079" title="The Stars My Destination" label="The Stars My Destination"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="8142" end="8150" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715168" start="8198" end="8221" title="José Salvador Alvarenga" label="José Salvador Alvarenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793552" start="8272" end="8298" title="Maurice and Maralyn Bailey" label="Maurice and Maralyn Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8349" end="8405" title="MV Zaandam#Survivors on a life raft" label="Cornelis van der Slot, Nicolaas Hoogendam and Basil Izzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210065" start="8459" end="8474" title="Steven Callahan" label="Steven Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762840" start="8525" end="8540" title="Louis Zamperini" label="Louis Zamperini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301061" start="8590" end="8606" title="Dougal Robertson" label="Dougal Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65070295" start="8656" end="8706" title="List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea" label="List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262132" wikidata="Q3320817" url="?curid=1262132" title="Ota, Ogun">
<text>Ota (alternatively spelled Otta) is a town in Ogun State, Nigeria with an estimated 163,783 residents. Ota is the capital of the Ado–Odo/Ota Local Government Area. The traditional leader of Ota is the Olota of Ota, Oba Adeyemi AbdulKabir Obalanlege. Historically, Ota is the capital of the Awori Yoruba tribe.

As of 1999, Ota has the third largest concentration of industries in Nigeria. It also possesses a large market and an important road junction, found just north of the tollgate on the Lagos – Abeokuta Expressway. Ota is well known because it is home to Obasanjo Farms Nigeria Limited belonging to the former Nigerian president, Olusegun Obasanjo.

Otta is known as the home of some Yoruba ancient deities and festivals. Festivals usually celebrated in Otta includes Egungun festival, Iganmode Cultural Festival, Gelede Festival, etc.

==History==
Ota is an ancient Awori kingdom whose existence dated back several millenniums ago. The town is acknowledged to be the first kingdom in the entire Awori land, a sub- Yoruba ethnic group, known as the Awori Kingdom of &quot;Ota&quot; and equally ranks as one of the earliest or oldest kingdoms in Yoruba land. As an enviable and great kingdom of note, it has very strong, sacred, and, of course, fortress traditions of origin, custom, culture, history and anthropology spiced with ethnological settlements and certified prudence spanning several centuries.

Ota&#x27;s existence dates back to at least the period of  Orunmila (a contemporaneous with the Orunmila) as an established and organized human habitation or community with Obaship institution that no one could ascribe any specific date thus since the BC era. There were very few settlements then what is known as Yorubaland today. Apart from Ile-ife, the first place or source, Ota is a very, very ancient city ranking behind Ile-Ife only that Orunmila first visited. Other few places Orunmila visited after Ota, for one reason or the other, included Ado-Ekiti, Irun Akoko, Ilawe and Ifon. No doubt, Orunmila visited Ota at least on three occasions as confirmed by Ifa-Irete Olota (Owonrin) Corpus and Odu Osa Meji (Odu Eleye).

There had been Awori before Awori, and Ota stands the first long before arrival or emergence of Ogunfunminire and his Group between 15th and 17th centuries. Aworis are many, not all  the Aworis are children or descendants of Ogunfunminire or Olofin of Iseri Olofin. We had Olofins in Ota whose periods of migrations to Ota from Ife predated Iseri Olofin and others. The earliest Ota people set a fetish bowl according to Ifa divination on then river or stream, and sank on a river at Ota when others had not existed including Ogunfunminire, the progenitor of Isheri people but not the entire Aworiland because some Aworis denied vehemently the suggestion that their ancestors got to Isheri before moving to their present settlements. Nonetheless, Aworis are culturally linked up despite the differences in their mode or waves of migratory movements to what is known as Aworiland, Apart from Ota, there are other Awori towns whose ancestors bear Olofin not of Isheri, such towns include; Iworo, Imeke, Ado-odo, etc.

John Thabiti Willis in 2018 further adduced to the oral traditions known as Irete Olota (Owonrin) and Osa Meji in (Odu Eleye), IFA offers an alternative accounts of the originality and founding of Otta by the Terrestrial mothers commonly known as witches-Eleye or Iyami Osoronga; and have since domiciled Otta from antiquity offering strong support for the fact that a human community or existence preceded the migrations to Otta by Ife Oodaye and related people. These traditions, however chronicle the historical journey of Orunmila to Ota, the revered settlement of the renowned witches, Ilu Aje (or Ilu Olori Eleye Osoronga), typically translated as the city of &quot;Terrestrial mothers&quot;. Furthermore, to corroborate the above assertion on the traditions origin and founding of Otta, “The Archive of sound and vision, institute of African studies, University of Ibadan, the guiding and preservation of Irete Olota (Owonrin)

Ota today has grown from the ancient settlement founded by the Terrestrial mothers commonly known as witches-Eleye or Iyami Osoronga into a thriving economic hub in Ogun State and Nigeria. Ota began to grow into the industrial city it is today due to the economic development planning and lobbying by the Manufacturers Association of Nigeria and Chief Bisi Onabanjo, former governor of Ogun State. This led to the official designation of Ota as an industrial town, and the state government began to encourage industries to locate in and around the city.

==Education==
Traditionally, Ota only had a few schools, and all were sponsored by various Christian religious organizations. The Muslim community responded by forming a school operated by the Ansar-Ud-Deen Society. State schools began to be formed in the late 1970s, and there are now several private schools in the area. Iganmode Grammar School is the oldest, founded in 1960. Other notable schools include Ansar-Ud-deen Comprehensive College, Bells Comprehensive Secondary School and Faith Academy Secondary School.

There are also two universities in Ota: Covenant University and Bells University of Technology. And a private polytechnic, Allover Central Polytechnic.

The Nigerian Navy&#x27;s School of Music is also located in Ota.

==Economy==
Sections of the town are dominated by industries including Lagos - Abeokuta road and Idi-iroko road. Beginning in the early 1970s, many businesses began building factories in Ota partly because it was less congested than the industrial estates in Lagos. Businesses with facilities in Ota include:
* Farmex Meyer Limited 
* Nigerian Breweries 
* De United Foods Industries Limited
* Unique Pharmaceuticals 
* Intercontinental Distillers Limited.
* Honda Manufacturing (Nigeria), Ltd
* Veepee Industries Limited

== Demographics ==
The indigenes are predominantly Yoruba of the Awori dialect group. They trace their ancestry down from Ile-Ife and consider Iganmode as their patriarch. Other Aworis are located in the neighboring Lagos State.

The main occupation of Ota residents is trading and farming. The town&#x27;s proximity to Lagos and proximity to the border town of Idiroko have led to the creation of two large markets: Kayero Market in Sango and Oba T.T. Dada Market along Idiroko Road. These markets are each so large that they blend together and are more commonly just referred to as Sango-Ota Market.

There are a number of both Public and private healthcare centers in Ota. They include The Local Government Maternity, Sango Ota Primary Health Centre. Private medical centers include Ace Medicare , St Shiloh Medical Center , Central Specialist Hospital, Ojugbele Specialist Hospital etc

== Tourist Attractions in Ota ==




== Egungun Festival ==

Ota is referred to as the mecca of Egungun deity and festival in Yoruba land. The Egungun festival is part of the yoruba religious system sometimes referred to as Orisa.

Egugun festival in Ota is usually ushered in ceremoniously, via a night before the d-day- tagged &quot;Igbagan Day&quot;, meaning, a special night of blessing. The next day (Abode Oko) usually witnesses a jamboree of egungun with well over 178 notable family masquerades that will dance around the town under the leadership of the Ege- which is the head of the egunguns; and finally converged at the Oju Sango beside Enu-Owa in the evening. At this arena, the entire masquerade gave an insight into their acquired new skills and magical performances that were later displayed one after the other in a carnival-like environment.

Notable masquerades in otta numbering about 178 were classified into about 6 categories; in line with their functions and performances, namely: the Ege - which appeared to be the most beautiful, being the head of the masquerades came out in a well knitted expensive, colourful attire and covering it up with a highly decorated crown as a symbol of its authority.

But before proceeding to the square, the Ege, accompanied by the Egungun Alagbadas, would head to Iga Elerinko to pick the sere abalaye (ancestral bell charm) which will be used in making supplications for the city. Subsequently, it will return it and pick sere ide (decorative bell charm). With the sere ide, the Ege moves round the town along with other Egungun and participants, singing and dancing to the Bata drum.

It must be reiterated at this point that the Ege only comes out on this day. This is because it has performed its leading role at the commencement of the festival. This is closely followed by about 26 Alagbadas- whose appearance is also very expensive, fascinating and artistically colorful along with peculiar dancing steps and a demonstration of some magical dexterity. They are: Ayoka- Ibile, Ariwoola, Afebioye, Ayelabola, Ibu- owo, Labo Idire, Oya-Ogba, Ajofoyinbo (Iyesi), Owolafe, Ajofoyinbo (Ota), Obalolaye and Ayoka-Ese. Others are: Owolani, Eiyeba, Lebe-Oke, Labo-Ilawe, Lebe-Itimoko, Oya–Ijemo and Oya–Ikotun, all of which are danced and performed satisfactorily in quick succession at the square (Okede).

There are 38 other special masquerades called Olooguns. These sets of masquerades outfits are not really attractive. In fact, they are scary with sculpted artworks on their heads, but they are special in magical performances, thus cannot be easily ignored. There are also about 15, Baba-Mukomuko who are like prayer warriors and who also delivers messages from the dead to the living. The next in line are about 6 Alaredes - which specializes in dance and general entertainment of the people.


== Iganmode Cultural Festival Iganmode Cultural Festival ==
Iganmode Cultural festival (also known as Odun  Omo Iganmode) is an annual festival celebrated by the Awori Yoruba people of the ancient city of Ota in Ogun State, Nigeria. The week long annual festival usually takes place in December of every year, to showcase the cultural, spiritual and mystical heritage of the Ota Awori people. The festival is also a spiritual bugle , a home coming call for a cultural renaissance and re awakening call to all sons and daughters of Awori sub-nationality, in Lagos, Ogun, Osun, Republic of Benin, diaspora and wherever they be may be on the face of earth.

== History ==
The first edition of the festival was held in 1992 when the festival was then referred to as Iganmode Day. Over the years, the festival has hosted many prominent Nigerians and dignitaries, such as former Nigerian president Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, former Nigeria Attorney general and minister of justice the late Chief Bola Ige. others include former governors of Ogun State Chief Olusegun Osoba, Otunba Gbenga Daniel, Ibikunle Amosun and the present Governor and Deputy Governor Prince Dapo Abiodun and Engr. Noimot Salako Oyedele (a native of Ota). Taiwo Ajayi Lycett amongst others. The festival has also been chaired by a number of eminent personalities such as Asiwaju Bola Tinubu, Sir Kesington Adebukunola Adebutu and Senator Musiliu Obanikoro

== Key Highlights ==
One of the major highlights of the festival is the display by Egungun Masquerades in Ota Masquerade traditions are very sacred to the awori yoruba people of Ota

== Tourism ==
The festival is supported by the Ogun State Government. The events of the festival are done with the spiritual and traditional blessings of the Olota of Ota. The festival also seeks to promote the tourism potentials of Ota, Ogun State and Nigeria

It allows people to see different cultural displays and visits to tourist locations like the second storey building in Nigeria

==Other==
* Ota Traditional Chiefs

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3320817" start="0" end="3" title="Ota, Ogun" label="Ota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320817" start="27" end="31" title="Ota, Ogun" label="Otta"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="46" end="56" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="58" end="65" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510345" start="129" end="140" title="Ado-Odo/Ota" label="Ado–Odo/Ota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299260" start="141" end="162" title="Local Government Area" label="Local Government Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088526" start="201" end="213" title="Olota of Ota" label="Olota of Ota"/>
<link wikidata="Q21491387" start="290" end="295" title="Awori" label="Awori"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="296" end="302" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616479" start="494" end="521" title="Lagos - Abeokuta Expressway" label="Lagos – Abeokuta Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="638" end="655" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="4350" end="4370" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="4384" end="4392" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q60751105" start="4400" end="4436" title="Manufacturers Association of Nigeria" label="Manufacturers Association of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082909" start="4447" end="4460" title="Bisi Onabanjo" label="Bisi Onabanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="4698" end="4705" title="Private school" label="schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4741" end="4750" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="4780" end="4786" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="4866" end="4878" title="State school" label="State school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991469" start="4973" end="4996" title="Iganmode Grammar School" label="Iganmode Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884145" start="5096" end="5132" title="Bells Comprehensive Secondary School" label="Bells Comprehensive Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431141" start="5137" end="5167" title="Faith Academy Secondary School" label="Faith Academy Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q742241" start="5210" end="5229" title="Covenant University" label="Covenant University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884154" start="5234" end="5264" title="Bells University of Technology" label="Bells University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510333" start="5327" end="5340" title="Nigerian Navy" label="Nigerian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11108502" start="5724" end="5742" title="Nigerian Breweries" label="Nigerian Breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="5963" end="5969" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q21491387" start="5977" end="5982" title="Awori" label="Awori"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="5983" end="5990" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q180084" start="6034" end="6041" title="Ile-Ife" label="Ile-Ife"/>
<link wikidata="Q815913" start="6128" end="6139" title="Lagos State" label="Lagos State"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926874" start="6274" end="6281" title="Idiroko" label="Idiroko"/>
<link wikidata="Q117350746" start="9693" end="9719" title="Iganmode Cultural Festival" label="Iganmode Cultural Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="9732" end="9740" title="Culture" label="Cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="9741" end="9749" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="9798" end="9806" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830127" start="9825" end="9830" title="Awori tribe" label="Awori"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="9831" end="9837" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="9875" end="9885" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="9887" end="9894" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="10220" end="10225" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="10227" end="10231" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12197965" start="10233" end="10237" title="Osun State" label="Osun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108659" start="10239" end="10256" title="Republic of Benin (1967)" label="Republic of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="10258" end="10266" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="10357" end="10365" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="10536" end="10544" title="Nigerian" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="10545" end="10554" title="President (government title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="10561" end="10578" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="10587" end="10594" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="10595" end="10611" title="Attorney general" label="Attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="10628" end="10635" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511524" start="10651" end="10659" title="Bola Ige" label="Bola Ige"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="10683" end="10691" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="10696" end="10706" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088864" start="10713" end="10727" title="Olusegun Osoba" label="Olusegun Osoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11058541" start="10736" end="10749" title="Gbenga Daniel" label="Gbenga Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984059" start="10751" end="10766" title="Ibikunle Amosun" label="Ibikunle Amosun"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="10783" end="10791" title="Governor" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261033" start="10796" end="10811" title="Deputy governor" label="Deputy Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q61594908" start="10819" end="10831" title="Dapo Abiodun" label="Dapo Abiodun"/>
<link wikidata="Q96619780" start="10842" end="10863" title="Noimot Salako-Oyedele" label="Noimot Salako Oyedele"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667936" start="10883" end="10901" title="Taiwo Ajai-Lycett" label="Taiwo Ajayi Lycett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="11006" end="11017" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Bola Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13651307" start="11065" end="11082" title="Musiliu Obanikoro" label="Musiliu Obanikoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299119" start="11167" end="11174" title="Egungun" label="Egungun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088526" start="11425" end="11430" title="Olota of Ota" label="Olota"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="11478" end="11485" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108325" start="11669" end="11691" title="Ota Traditional Chiefs" label="Ota Traditional Chiefs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262135" wikidata="Q5361794" url="?curid=1262135" title="Elisha Perkins">
<text>Elisha Perkins (January 16, 1741September 6, 1799) was an American physician who created a fraudulent medical device, the Perkins Patent Tractors. Although they were made of steel and brass, Perkins claimed that they were made of unusual metal alloys. Perkins claimed his rods cured inflammation, rheumatism and pain in the head and the face; he applied the points on the aching body part and passed them over the part for about 20 minutes. The device was later the subject of the first placebo research.

==Biography==
Elisha Perkins was born 1741 in Norwich, Connecticut. He was educated by his father Joseph Perkins in Plainfield, Connecticut, where he later practiced medicine with success. When the American Revolutionary War broke out, Elisha Perkins served as a surgeon for the Continental Army during the Battle of Bunker Hill in the Siege of Boston. During the late 18th century, the progression of medicine due to the Enlightenment increased the consumer demand for new therapies, such as therapeutic devices and inventions. Consequently, around 1795–96, Perkins invented his &quot;Tractors&quot;, for which he took out a 14-year patent on February 19, 1796. The tractors consisted of two 3-inch metal rods with a pointed end; the term is from the old meaning of &quot;tractor&quot;, &quot;that which pulls&quot;, as in the term &#x27;tractor beams&#x27;. Although they were made of steel and brass, Perkins claimed that they were made of unusual metal alloys. Perkins claimed his rods cured inflammation, rheumatism and pain in the head and the face. He applied the points on the aching body part and passed them over the part for about 20 minutes. Perkins claimed they could &quot;draw off the noxious electrical fluid that lay at the root of suffering&quot;.

The Connecticut Medical Society condemned the tractors as &quot;delusive quackery&quot;, and expelled Perkins from membership on the grounds that he was &quot;a patentee and user of nostrums&quot;. Perkins nevertheless managed to convince three US medical faculties that his method worked. In Copenhagen, Denmark, twelve surgeons at the royal Frederiks Hospital also began to support the method. Even George Washington bought a set. Other physicians&#x27; criticisms were met with charges of elitism and professional arrogance. Perkins boasted of 5,000 cured cases. The cures were certified to by eight professors, forty physicians, and thirty clergymen. Of the purchase made by Washington, Perkins&#x27; son, Benjamin Perkins, said that the &quot;President of the United States, convinced of the importance of the discovery from experiments in his own family, availed himself of its advantages by purchasing a set of the Tractors for their use.&quot;

Benjamin Perkins was a bookseller and introduced the tractors to London. There a Perkinsian Institution for the benefit of the poor was founded under the presidency of Lord Rivers. In 1798, Benjamin published &quot;The Influence of Metallic Tractors on the Human Body&quot;. In October 1799, an advertisement in &quot;The Times&quot; said that &quot;The tractors, with every necessary direction for using them in Families, may be had for 5 guineas the set, of Mr. Perkins, of Leicester Square; or of Mr. Frederic Smith, Chemist &amp; Druggist, in the Haymarket&quot;.

Aylmer Bourke Lambert, a British botanist, is on record as having written in January 1800 to Richard Pulteney of Blandford (now Blandford Forum), in the English county of Dorset, as follows:
&quot;I breakfasted with Sir Joseph [Banks] on Monday morning who is recovered from the Gout and in high Spirits. We had a good deal of laughing about the Tractors. Perkins has published several Cases communicated by my Father, and presented me with a copy of his Book.&quot; 
Shortly before his death Elisha Perkins also invented purported antiseptic medicine and used it for dysentery and sore throat. Perkins also claimed to have discovered a cure for yellow fever. This consisted of vinegar with muriate of soda which he tested in New York City during an outbreak in 1799. The cure had no effect and Perkins contracted the fever and died.

After Perkins&#x27; death, British physicians began to have doubts about his tractors. In 1799, Dr. John Haygarth conducted a test in which he treated five rheumatic patients with wooden tractors that were made to resemble the metallic ones. Four of them reported that the pain was relieved. The next day the patients were treated with metallic tractors with the same results. Dr. Haygarth reported on his findings in a publication entitled &quot;On the Imagination as a Cause &amp; as a Cure of Disorders of the Body&quot;. Attempts to use the tractors to cure animals proved futile.

By this time, Perkins had numerous influential supporters and the sale of the tractors continued. In 1803, Thomas Green Fessenden published his poem &quot;Terrible Tractoration&quot; in favor of Perkins and as a satire on other physicians. Perkins&#x27; son died in 1810. After that the popularity of the tractors began to wane.

In 1932, Morris Fishbein commented that &quot;[u]nfortunately no one has yet been able to determine whether Elisha Perkins was merely a somewhat deluded physician or actually a great impostor.&quot;

Perkins was the father of Sarah Bushnell Perkins, who is remembered for her pastels.

==Further reading==
* Eric Jameson. (1961). &quot;The Natural History of Quackery&quot;. Charles C. Thomas Publisher. 
* Robert Medill McBride, Neil Pritchie. (1956). &quot;Great Hoaxes of All Time&quot;. R. M. McBride Company. 
* William Snow Miller. (1935). &quot;Elisha Perkins and His Metallic Tractors&quot;. &quot;Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine&quot; 8: 41–57.
* Benjamin Douglas Perkins. (1798). &quot;The Influence of Metallic Tractors on the Human Body&quot;. London: Printed for J. Johnson.

==References==
==External links==
* Image of Perkin&#x27;s metal &quot;tractors&quot;
* James Lind Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5361794" start="0" end="14" title="Elisha Perkins" label="Elisha Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="67" end="76" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="102" end="116" title="medical device" label="medical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="174" end="179" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="184" end="189" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="283" end="295" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="297" end="307" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="487" end="494" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q631402" start="552" end="572" title="Norwich, Connecticut" label="Norwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q755199" start="622" end="645" title="Plainfield, Connecticut" label="Plainfield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="704" end="730" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q774306" start="769" end="776" title="surgeon" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="785" end="801" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="813" end="834" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q815128" start="842" end="857" title="Siege of Boston" label="Siege of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="928" end="941" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="1140" end="1146" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q20147" start="1345" end="1358" title="Tractor beam" label="tractor beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="1393" end="1398" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="1403" end="1408" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="1502" end="1514" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="1516" end="1526" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q116826435" start="1777" end="1804" title="The Connecticut State Medical Society" label="Connecticut Medical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="1846" end="1854" title="quackery" label="quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="2066" end="2076" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2078" end="2085" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780842" start="2116" end="2134" title="Frederiks Hospital" label="Frederiks Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2174" end="2191" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2791" end="2797" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328900" start="2894" end="2905" title="Richard Savage, 4th Earl Rivers" label="Lord Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3044" end="3053" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="3166" end="3173" title="Guinea (coin)" label="guineas"/>
<link wikidata="Q893034" start="3277" end="3286" title="Haymarket, London" label="Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q374894" start="3295" end="3316" title="Aylmer Bourke Lambert" label="Aylmer Bourke Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378093" start="3388" end="3404" title="Richard Pulteney" label="Richard Pulteney"/>
<link wikidata="Q644530" start="3423" end="3438" title="Blandford Forum" label="Blandford Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3448" end="3455" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="3466" end="3472" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="3511" end="3528" title="Joseph Banks" label="Sir Joseph [Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="3863" end="3872" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292082" start="3877" end="3888" title="sore throat" label="sore throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="3941" end="3953" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="3973" end="3980" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q420060" start="3986" end="3993" title="muriate" label="muriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344833" start="4230" end="4243" title="John Haygarth" label="John Haygarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790174" start="4823" end="4845" title="Thomas Green Fessenden" label="Thomas Green Fessenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913696" start="5055" end="5070" title="Morris Fishbein" label="Morris Fishbein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34420797" start="5272" end="5294" title="Sarah Bushnell Perkins" label="Sarah Bushnell Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q189085" start="5322" end="5328" title="pastel" label="pastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709982" start="5652" end="5688" title="Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine" label="Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262141" wikidata="Q6140016" url="?curid=1262141" title="James Morison (physician)">
<text>James Morison (1770 – 3 May 1840) was a British quack-physician who sold Hygeian Vegetable Universal Medicine, a would-be cure-all.

==Life==
Morison was born at Bognie, Aberdeenshire, in 1770, the youngest son of Alexander Morison, 4th Baron of Bognie. After studying at Aberdeen University and Hanau in Germany, he established himself at Riga as a merchant, and subsequently in the West Indies, where he acquired property. Ill-health obliged him to return to Europe, and about 1814 he settled at Bordeaux.

After &quot;thirty-five years&#x27; inexpressible suffering&quot;, and experimenting with every imaginable course of medical treatment, he accomplished &quot;his own extraordinary cure&quot; about 1822 by the simple expedient of swallowing a few vegetable pills of his own compounding at bed-time and a glass of lemonade in the morning. His success led him to set up in 1825 as the vendor of what he called &quot;vegetable universal medicines&quot;, commonly known as &quot;Morison&#x27;s Pills&quot;, of which the principal ingredient was said to be gamboge. His medicines soon became highly popular, especially in the west of England, and in 1828 he opened an establishment for their sale in Hamilton Place, New Road, London, which he dignified with the title of &quot;The British College of Health&quot;.

Morison believed that bad blood was the cause of all disease and that purgation from vegetable laxatives was the only cure. He advertised his pills as curing all disease. He bought a pleasant residence at Finchley, Middlesex, called Strawberry Vale Farm, but later lived in Paris. It was said that the profits from the sale of his medicines in France alone were sufficient to cover his expenditure there. From 1830 to 1840, he paid £60,000 to the British government for medicine stamps.

In 1836, his business received heavy criticism as an apothecary Robert Salmon was indicted for the manslaughter of John M&#x27;Kenzie by administering large quantities of Morison&#x27;s pills.
Morison died in Paris on 3 May 1840. His body was interred within a substantial mausoleum in Kensal Green Cemetery, which was renovated in 2022.

==Personal life==
James Morison married twice, firstly to Anne Victoire de La Marre, Baroness of Remiremont. They had three daughters (Anna Jacquette Morison, Catherine Morison and Caroline Morison) and two sons, who were Capt. Alexander Morison of Larghan (later the 8th Baron of Bognie and Mountblairy) and John Morison (later the 9th Baron of Bognie and Mountblairy). The brothers developed their father&#x27;s pill empire, which continued to operate from the British College of Health. The only surviving child of James&#x27; second marriage with Clara Cotter (only daughter of Captain Cotter of the Royal Navy) was James Augustus Cotter Morison.

==Works==
Morison&#x27;s writings were simply puffs of his medicines. They included: 
*&quot;Some Important Advice to the World&quot; (with supplement entitled &quot;More New Truths&quot;), 1825
*&quot;A Letter Addressed to the Honorable the Court of Directors of the United East India Company; proposing an Easy and Safe Remedy for Prevention and Cure of the Cholera Morbus of India ...&quot;, 1825 
*&quot;The Hygeian Treatment of the Most Prevalent Diseases of India, and of Warm Climates Generally&quot;, 1836

His essays were collected together in a volume called &quot;Morisoniana, or Family Adviser of the British College of Health&quot; (2nd edition 1829; 3rd edition 1831), which was translated into several European languages. Prefixed to the volume is a portrait of the author from a picture by Clint.

==Popular culture==
*In Robert Wilkie&#x27;s farce, the &quot;Yalla Gaiters&quot; (1840), the hero is fascinated by the vocal powers of a countryman who is singing a ballad in praise of Morison&#x27;s &quot;Vegetable Pills&quot;; the verses are printed in &quot;Notes and Queries&quot;. 
*Thomas Carlyle&#x27;s &quot;Past and Present&quot; (1843) makes frequent scornful references to Morison&#x27;s pills.
*The pills&#x27; endurance is mentioned in Robert Louis Stevenson&#x27;s (1885) More New Arabian Nights: The Dynamiter..

==References==

;Attribution
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6140016" start="0" end="13" title="James Morison (physician)" label="James Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="40" end="47" title="British people" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="48" end="63" title="Quackery" label="quack-physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140016" start="73" end="109" title="James Morison (physician)" label="Hygeian Vegetable Universal Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q910154" start="122" end="130" title="Panacea (medicine)" label="cure-all"/>
<link wikidata="Q189912" start="170" end="183" title="Aberdeenshire" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742847" start="237" end="252" title="Baron of Bognie" label="Baron of Bognie"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="272" end="291" title="Aberdeen University" label="Aberdeen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802" start="296" end="301" title="Hanau" label="Hanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="340" end="344" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="384" end="395" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="498" end="506" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q909115" start="1060" end="1067" title="gamboge" label="gamboge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645103" start="1203" end="1217" title="Hamilton Place, London" label="Hamilton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011271" start="1219" end="1235" title="New Road, London" label="New Road, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="1344" end="1349" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="1413" end="1421" title="laxative" label="laxative"/>
<link wikidata="Q150217" start="1523" end="1531" title="Finchley" label="Finchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="1533" end="1542" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1592" end="1597" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131236" start="1859" end="1869" title="apothecary" label="apothecary"/>
<link wikidata="Q504853" start="2242" end="2252" title="Remiremont" label="Remiremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011681" start="2394" end="2401" title="Coupar Angus" label="Larghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742847" start="2417" end="2448" title="Baron of Bognie" label="Baron of Bognie and Mountblairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742847" start="2482" end="2513" title="Baron of Bognie" label="Baron of Bognie and Mountblairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128986" start="2765" end="2794" title="James Augustus Cotter Morison" label="James Augustus Cotter Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129889" start="3873" end="3890" title="Notes and Queries" label="Notes and Queries"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="3900" end="3914" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142925" start="3928" end="3944" title="Past and Present (book)" label="Past and Present"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="4061" end="4083" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4098" end="4136" title="More New Arabian Nights: The Dynamiter" label="More New Arabian Nights: The Dynamiter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262142" wikidata="Q954515" url="?curid=1262142" title="Rabbis for Human Rights">
<text>Rabbis for Human Rights is an Israeli human rights organization that describes itself as &quot;the rabbinic voice of conscience in Israel, giving voice to the Jewish tradition of human rights&quot;.

Their membership includes Reform, Orthodox, Conservative and Reconstructionist rabbis and students. According to their web site, the organization includes &quot;over one hundred ordained rabbis and rabbinical students&quot;.

The organization received the Niwano Peace Prize in 2006.

== Organization ==
The organization was founded in 1988 by Rabbi David Forman. Its membership consists of Israeli rabbis and rabbinical students. RHR has a nineteen-member board of directors. Rabbi Arik Ascherman served as co-director of Rabbis For Human Rights, becoming executive director in 1998. Ayala Levi took over as executive director in 2010. In the past, the organization received funds from the EU, UK and Spain.

==Activities==
RHR is best known for dispatching volunteers to act as a protective presence to protect the Palestinian olive harvest from vandalism and assault by settlers living on nearby land; every year, clashes are reported between settlers and Palestinian farmers. In 2008, the volunteer effort encompassed 40 villages. The effort was launched in 2002 when a Palestinian peace activist solicited RHR&#x27;s help to protect olive pickers against attacks by settlers living near the village of Yanun.

RHR opposes the construction of the Israeli West Bank barrier in any place where it entails the expropriation of Arab-owned land, the division of villages, or cutting farmers off from their fields. RHR achieved a major victory in 2006 when it won a lawsuit to prevent the division by the fence of the village of Sheikh Sa&#x27;ad.

In December 2004, RHR executive director Rabbi Arik Ascherman was among three defendants on trial in Jerusalem for standing in front of bulldozers in an effort to block the demolition of Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem. He was charged with &quot;interfering with police performance of duties on two occasions in 2003, and the intention to commit acts to prevent police from performing their duties.&quot; In March 2005, a magistrate court ruled Ascherman guilty, but said that he wouldn&#x27;t have a criminal record.

A movie produced in 2013 by RHR, &quot;Fiddler with No Roof&quot;, compares the Prawer Plan to Jews&#x27; expulsion during the antisemitic Tsarist regime.

==Durban UN Anti-Racism conferences==
David Bedein from &quot;Independent Media Review Analysis&quot; has criticized RHR, accusing it of joining &quot;forces with the PLO to support the idea that Israel, was indeed, an apartheid, racist regime&quot; at the 2001 UN Anti-Racism conference in Durban, South Africa. Rabbi Ascherman strongly denies this account, saying: &quot;I want to clarify that RHR’s representative at Durban, Rabbi Jeremy Milgrom, actively voiced our criticism of the inflammatory rhetoric and Israel-bashing&quot;.

Rabbi Ascherman and RHR also expressed concern about the second Durban conference, saying &quot;that Israel has committed human rights violations [is an issue that] can appropriately be discussed at a conference like this. But if you allow the conference to be hijacked as if Israel is the only place in the world where there are issues of racism and human rights, then it makes a farce of the whole thing. We&#x27;re not trying to protect Israel from being criticized, but as people who are really concerned with human rights and racism, and think it is important that there be a body among the community of nations dealing with these things, we don&#x27;t want to see another hijacking.&quot;

==Notes==
==External links==
* Official RHR Site
* VIDEO: Rabbi Arik Ascherman – Rabbis for Human Rights, talk at the Neveh Shalom Synagogue in Portland, Oregon, on May 5, 2003.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q954515" start="0" end="23" title="Rabbis for Human Rights" label="Rabbis for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="38" end="50" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="99" end="104" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="131" end="137" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="159" end="162" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="179" end="191" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="226" end="232" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="234" end="242" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="244" end="256" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q339284" start="261" end="278" title="Reconstructionist Judaism" label="Reconstructionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q337597" start="456" end="474" title="Niwano Peace Prize" label="Niwano Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790609" start="683" end="697" title="Arik Ascherman" label="Arik Ascherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="1029" end="1034" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048992" start="1407" end="1412" title="Yanun" label="Yanun"/>
<link wikidata="Q524253" start="1451" end="1476" title="Israeli West Bank barrier" label="Israeli West Bank barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804341" start="1727" end="1744" title="ash-Sheikh Sa&amp;#x27;d" label="Sheikh Sa&amp;#x27;ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790609" start="1794" end="1808" title="Arik Ascherman" label="Arik Ascherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="1848" end="1857" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="1883" end="1892" title="bulldozer" label="bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373806" start="1920" end="1951" title="demolition of Palestinian homes" label="demolition of Palestinian homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="1955" end="1969" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2350" end="2361" title="Negev Bedouin#Prawer Plan" label="Prawer Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="2409" end="2423" title="Tsarist autocracy" label="Tsarist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231245" start="2464" end="2476" title="David Bedein" label="David Bedein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918729" start="2683" end="2723" title="World Conference against Racism 2001" label="2001 UN Anti-Racism conference in Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2725" end="2737" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003790" start="3776" end="3798" title="Congregation Neveh Shalom" label="Neveh Shalom Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="3802" end="3810" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="3812" end="3818" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262145" wikidata="Q240709" url="?curid=1262145" title="Litany">
<text>Litany, in Christian worship and some forms of Jewish worship, is a form of prayer used in services and processions, and consisting of a number of petitions. The word comes through Latin &quot;&quot; from Ancient Greek (&quot;litaneía&quot;), which in turn comes from (&quot;litḗ&quot;), meaning &quot;prayer, supplication&quot;.

==Christianity==
===Western Christianity===
This form of prayer finds its model in Psalm 136: &quot;Praise the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever. Praise ye the God of gods . . . the Lord of lords . . . Who alone doth great wonders . . . Who made the heavens&quot;, etc., with the concluding words in each verse, &quot;for his mercy endures for ever.&quot;

The Litany originated in Antioch in the fourth century and from there was taken to Constantinople and through it to the rest of the East...From Constantinople the Litany was taken to Rome and the West. Josef Andreas Jungmann explains how the &quot;Kyrie&quot; in the Roman Mass is best seen as a vestige of a litany at the beginning of the Mass, like that of some Eastern churches.

Public Christian devotions became common by the fifth century and processions were frequently held. These processions were called &quot;litanies&quot;, and in them pictures and other religious emblems were carried. In Rome, pope and people would go in procession each day, especially in Lent, to a different church, to celebrate the Sacred Mysteries. Thus originated the Roman &quot;Stations&quot;, and what was called the &quot;Litania Maior&quot;, &quot;Major Rogation&quot;, was held on 25 April. The word &quot;rogation&quot; comes from the Latin verb &quot;rogare&quot;, meaning &quot;to ask&quot;, which reflects the beseeching of God for the appeasement of his anger and for protection from calamities. 

In 590, when an epidemic caused by an overflow of the Tiber was ravaging Rome, Gregory the Great commanded a litany; on the preceding day he exhorted the people to fervent prayer, and arranged the order to be observed in the procession, during which the Litany of the Saints was prayed. 

The &quot;Litania Minor&quot;, also called Minor Rogations or &quot;Gallicana&quot;, the Rogation Days before Ascension, was introduced (477) by St. Mamertus, Bishop of Vienne, on account of the earthquakes and other calamities then prevalent. It was prescribed for the whole of Frankish Gaul, in 511, by the First Council of Orléans. For Rome it was ordered by Leo III, in 799. In the Ambrosian Rite this litany was celebrated on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday after Ascension. In Spain, a similar litany is prayed from Thursday to Saturday after Pentecost. In England the Litany of Rogation Days was known in the earliest periods. In Germany it was ordered by a Synod of Mainz in 813. 

Because the Mass Litany became popular through its use in processions, numberless varieties were soon made, especially in the Middle Ages. Litanies appeared in honour of God the Father, of God the Son, of God the Holy Spirit, of the Precious Blood, of the Blessed Virgin, of the Immaculate Conception, of each of the saints honoured in different countries, for the souls in Purgatory, etc. In 1601 Baronius wrote that about eighty forms were in circulation. To prevent abuse, Pope Clement VIII, by decree of 6 September 1601, forbade the publication of any litany, except that of the saints as found in the liturgical books and that of Loreto. 

====Anglican litanies====

The Anglican Communion also includes a &quot;Litany&quot; in the 1662 &quot;Book of Common Prayer&quot;. This is substantially the same as Thomas Cranmer&#x27;s original English vernacular service from 1544, &quot;Exhortation and Litany&quot;. Cranmer drew on a variety of sources, chiefly two medieval litanies from the Sarum rite, but also the German Litany of Martin Luther. He originally retained the invocation of the Saints and the Blessed Virgin Mary in very shortened form, but these were omitted in 1549, and he made a notable change in the style of the service by expanding and grouping together several of the separate deprecations, intercessions, obsecrations and suffrages said by the priest into groups of several, providing a single response to the whole group. An anti-papal deprecation was omitted in 1559. The processional aspect was soon eliminated and the service said or sung kneeling in the church. The term &quot;Lesser Litany&quot; is sometimes used to refer to the versicles and responses, with the Lord&#x27;s Prayer, that follow the Apostles&#x27; Creed at Morning Prayer (or Mattins) and Evening Prayer (or Evensong). 

Many other litanies are used in private prayer. A Marian litany is one dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary; only one is authorised for public recitation (mentioned above).

====Catholic litanies====
In the Catholic Church, seven litanies are approved for public recitation:
* The Litany of the Holy Name of Jesus
* The Litany of the Sacred Heart of Jesus
* The Litany of the Most Precious Blood of Jesus
* The Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary (also known as the Litany of Loreto)
* The Litany of Saint Joseph
* The Litany of the Saints
* The Litany (in Divine Worship: The Missal Appendix 8)

For all of them the 2004 &quot;Enchiridion Indulgentiarum&quot; grants the partial indulgence to the faithfuls of Christ who piously pray the Litanies.

Several others, including the , the , and the Litany of humility are approved for private devotion.

====Lutheran litanies====
Much of the historic Litany was retained by the Lutheran Church. Luther hailed it as one of the greatest Christian prayers ever. When faced with the Turkish armies at the gates of Vienna in 1528/29, Luther exhorted pastors to call their Christian people to repentance and prayer. He recommended the use of the Litany during the Sunday mass or Vespers. In 1529, he, after modifying the traditional Litany of the Saints (mostly by removing the invocation of saints and prayers for the pope), began using the Litany at Wittenberg in Latin and German. Thomas Cranmer used Luther&#x27;s revised Litany as one of his main sources in the preparation of the Litany in the &quot;Book of Common Prayer&quot;. Today, a form of the Litany continues to be used in the various Lutheran Churches around the world.

====Methodist litanies====
The Methodist &quot;The Book of Worship for Church and Home&quot; (1965) contains the following litanies:
*The Litany of Recollection of Jesus
*The Litany on the Will of God
*The Litany of the Divine Will
*The Litany of Self-Examination
*The Litany of Confession
*The Litany of Supplication
*The Litany of Remembrance 
*The Litany of Commemoration 
*The Litany of Intercession
*The Litany for Peace

===Eastern Christianity===

In the Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Catholic churches, a litany is referred to as an &quot;ektenia&quot;. There are numerous ektenias during the Byzantine divine services: the Divine Liturgy, Vespers, Matins, the Sacraments, and numerous other services.

The petitions of the ektenias are usually chanted by a deacon (but if there is no deacon the priest will say the petitions), to each of which the choir (chanters) or congregation will respond. The response is usually &quot;Kyrie eleison&quot; (&quot;Lord, have mercy&quot;), but other responses are used at different ektenias. After the final petition, the priest makes the ekphonesis (exclamation) which summarizes the ektenia, and always involves an invocation of the Holy Trinity.

==Judaism==
Although used to a much lesser extent in Jewish worship, litanies do appear in Jewish liturgy. The most notable examples are the &quot;Hoshanot&quot; recited in the additional (&quot;musaf&quot;) service during all seven days of the Sukkot festival. These are mostly alphabetical acrostics to which the refrain at the end of each line is &quot;Hoshanah&quot;!, a contraction of the biblical &quot;Hoshi&#x27;a na&quot; (Psalm 118:25), &quot;Save us, please!&quot; These are recited in a procession around the sanctuary, with congregants holding the &quot;lulav&quot; and &quot;etrog&quot; (the biblical &quot;Four Species&quot; of Leviticus 23:40). They are essentially prayers for rain. 

Litanies are also recited during the Ten Days of Repentance. The most famous of these &quot;supplicatory&quot; prayers is &quot;Avinu Malkeinu&quot; (&quot;Our Father, Our King&quot;), which is recited during Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur liturgies. Certain Selichot prayers also take the form of a litany during the month of Elul, as do some prayers recited on fast days.

==Mandaeism==

Litanies are often recited in Mandaeism. The most commonly recited Mandaean litanies are the &quot;Asut Malkia&quot; and &quot;Tabahatan&quot;.

==Islam==
==Musical settings==

* Marc-Antoine Charpentier, &quot;Litany of Loreto, 9 settings,&quot; H.82 (1680), H.83 (1683–85), H.84 (1690), H.85 (1688–90), H.86 (1690), H.87 (1690), H.88 (1690), H.89 (1690), H.90 (1690).
* Henry Dumont, &quot;Litany of Loreto (1652)&quot;
*František Ignac Tuma, Lytaniae Lauretanae (18. century)
* Karol Szymanowski, &quot;Litany to the Virgin Mary&quot; Op.59 (1933)
* Francis Poulenc, &quot;Litanies de la Vierge noir.&quot; He wrote in 1936 &quot;Litanies à la Vierge Noire&quot; (Litanies to the Black Virgin) after a pilgrimage to the shrine of Rocamadour, setting a French local pilgrimage litany.
* American rapper, singer, songwriter, and record producer Kanye West composed a litany in his song &quot;Water&quot; released on October 25, 2019.
* Kolbe Ensemble (hr) released &quot;Sung litanies of St. Anthony&quot; in 2022 in Croatian, inspired by Italian setting of All Saint&#x27;s Litanies.

==See also==
*Exhortation and Litany (1544)
*Litany against fear
*Litany of humility
*Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary
*Lorica

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240709" start="0" end="6" title="Litany" label="Litany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539016" start="11" end="28" title="Christian worship" label="Christian worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777205" start="47" end="61" title="Jewish worship" label="Jewish worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="76" end="82" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q115665045" start="104" end="114" title="procession" label="procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="181" end="186" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="205" end="218" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="302" end="308" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644480" start="310" end="322" title="supplication" label="supplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q45466" start="909" end="931" title="Josef Andreas Jungmann" label="Josef Andreas Jungmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323729" start="1016" end="1022" title="Ektenia" label="litany"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="1377" end="1381" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1546" end="1560" title="Rogation Days#Major Rogation" label="Major Rogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1635" end="1640" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="1818" end="1826" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="1856" end="1861" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="1881" end="1898" title="Gregory the Great" label="Gregory the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q302141" start="2056" end="2076" title="Litany of the Saints" label="Litany of the Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q879080" start="2134" end="2149" title="Rogation days" label="Minor Rogations"/>
<link wikidata="Q879080" start="2180" end="2192" title="Rogation Day" label="Rogation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="2201" end="2210" title="Ascension of Jesus Christ" label="Ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335921" start="2236" end="2248" title="St. Mamertus" label="St. Mamertus"/>
<link wikidata="Q366189" start="2250" end="2266" title="Bishop of Vienne" label="Bishop of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="2370" end="2383" title="Frankish Gaul" label="Frankish Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q366127" start="2400" end="2424" title="First Council of Orléans" label="First Council of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q132086" start="2453" end="2460" title="Pope Leo III" label="Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q459494" start="2477" end="2491" title="Ambrosian Rite" label="Ambrosian Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="2639" end="2648" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q879080" start="2675" end="2688" title="Rogation Days" label="Rogation Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q317900" start="3178" end="3186" title="Baronius" label="Baronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="3256" end="3273" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Pope Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831847" start="3387" end="3402" title="liturgical book" label="liturgical book"/>
<link wikidata="Q548685" start="3416" end="3422" title="Litany of Loreto" label="Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="3457" end="3475" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837194" start="3518" end="3556" title="Book of Common Prayer (1662)" label="1662 &amp;quot;Book of Common Prayer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q199894" start="3592" end="3613" title="Thomas Cranmer" label="Thomas Cranmer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420243" start="3667" end="3689" title="Exhortation and Litany" label="Exhortation and Litany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731741" start="3774" end="3784" title="Sarum rite" label="Sarum rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="4477" end="4495" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993540" start="4651" end="4664" title="Marian litany" label="Marian litany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4808" end="4823" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409444" start="4878" end="4914" title="The Litany of the Holy Name of Jesus" label="The Litany of the Holy Name of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761876" start="4917" end="4956" title="The Litany of the Sacred Heart of Jesus" label="The Litany of the Sacred Heart of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104633790" start="4959" end="5005" title="The Litany of the Most Precious Blood of Jesus" label="The Litany of the Most Precious Blood of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q548685" start="5008" end="5045" title="Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary" label="The Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409443" start="5085" end="5111" title="The Litany of Saint Joseph" label="The Litany of Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q302141" start="5114" end="5138" title="Litany of the Saints" label="The Litany of the Saints"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5156" end="5182" title="Divine Worship: The Missal" label="Divine Worship: The Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334548" start="5227" end="5253" title="Enchiridion Indulgentiarum" label="Enchiridion Indulgentiarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44777" start="5279" end="5289" title="indulgence" label="indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647406" start="5395" end="5413" title="Litany of humility" label="Litany of humility"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="5524" end="5539" title="Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="5541" end="5547" title="Martin Luther" label="Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="5656" end="5662" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q302141" start="5873" end="5893" title="Litany of the Saints" label="Litany of the Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q199894" start="6024" end="6038" title="Thomas Cranmer" label="Thomas Cranmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="6239" end="6254" title="Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943101" start="6323" end="6362" title="Book of Worship for Church and Home (1965)" label="The Book of Worship for Church and Home"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6465" end="6476" title="Will_of_God#Christianity" label="Will of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q183959" start="6555" end="6565" title="Confession (religion)" label="Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644480" start="6581" end="6593" title="Supplication" label="Supplication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6667" end="6679" title="Intercession#Christianity" label="Intercession"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6696" end="6701" title="Religion_and_peacebuilding#Christianity_and_Peacebuilding" label="Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="6738" end="6754" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q617075" start="6759" end="6768" title="Byzantine Rite" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="6769" end="6777" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076567" start="6909" end="6923" title="Divine Liturgy" label="Divine Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q827135" start="6925" end="6932" title="Vespers" label="Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437648" start="6934" end="6940" title="Matins" label="Matins"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="7043" end="7049" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="7081" end="7087" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="7134" end="7139" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956374" start="7141" end="7148" title="chanter" label="chanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207828" start="7211" end="7224" title="Kyrie eleison" label="Kyrie eleison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="7345" end="7351" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q788419" start="7362" end="7372" title="ekphonesis" label="ekphonesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="7458" end="7470" title="Holy Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777205" start="7526" end="7540" title="Jewish worship" label="Jewish worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777205" start="7564" end="7578" title="Jewish liturgy" label="Jewish liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7620" end="7628" title="Hoshanot" label="Hoshanot"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="7718" end="7724" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q726204" start="7829" end="7837" title="Hosanna" label="Hoshanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="7905" end="7910" title="Psalm" label="Psalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877187" start="8040" end="8045" title="lulav" label="lulav"/>
<link wikidata="Q254872" start="8062" end="8067" title="etrog" label="etrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915727" start="8094" end="8106" title="Four Species" label="Four Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q41490" start="8116" end="8125" title="Leviticus" label="Leviticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219947" start="8212" end="8234" title="Ten Days of Repentance" label="Ten Days of Repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q791755" start="8303" end="8317" title="Avinu Malkeinu" label="Avinu Malkeinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="8384" end="8397" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="8402" end="8412" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188882" start="8432" end="8440" title="Selichot" label="Selichot"/>
<link wikidata="Q217168" start="8500" end="8504" title="Elul" label="Elul"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="8593" end="8602" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110269433" start="8662" end="8673" title="Asut Malkia" label="Asut Malkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110588659" start="8690" end="8699" title="Tabahatan" label="Tabahatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55524" start="8742" end="8766" title="Marc-Antoine Charpentier" label="Marc-Antoine Charpentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364326" start="8935" end="8947" title="Henri Dumont" label="Henry Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q295400" start="9044" end="9061" title="Karol Szymanowski" label="Karol Szymanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="9116" end="9131" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Francis Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864841" start="9196" end="9222" title="Litanies à la Vierge Noire" label="Litanies à la Vierge Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q382628" start="9296" end="9306" title="Rocamadour" label="Rocamadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="9409" end="9419" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q76285043" start="9456" end="9461" title="Water (Kanye West song)" label="Water"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9516" end="9518" title=":hr:Ansambl Kolbe" label="hr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="9581" end="9589" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420243" start="9664" end="9693" title="Exhortation and Litany (1544)" label="Exhortation and Litany (1544)"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="9695" end="9714" title="Litany against fear" label="Litany against fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647406" start="9716" end="9734" title="Litany of humility" label="Litany of humility"/>
<link wikidata="Q548685" start="9736" end="9769" title="Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870313" start="9771" end="9777" title="Lorica (prayer)" label="Lorica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262150" wikidata="Q744067" url="?curid=1262150" title="James Finlayson (industrialist)">
<text>James Finlayson (29 August 1772 Penicuik Scotland – 18 August 1852 Edinburgh Scotland) was a British Quaker who, in effect, brought the Industrial Revolution to Tampere, Finland, founding in 1820 the Finlayson company.

Finlayson was born 1772 in Penicuik and became a self-trained engineer. In 1817, he moved to St. Petersburg to found a textile factory with the backing of Tsar Alexander I of Russia.

In 1819 Finlayson visited the Grand Duchy of Finland, at the time under Russian rule. During his religious mission to sell bibles, he visited Tampere. The next year, Finlayson received permission from the Senate of Finland to build a factory in Tampere using water power from the Tammerkoski rapids. He moved to Tampere with his wife Margaret Finlayson.

At first, Finlayson had to import machinists from Britain to train new workers. The first factory was completed in 1823 with the aid of a state loan, with the stipulation that the technology employed could be freely inspected by the public to further civic technological advancement. Initially he manufactured machinery suitable for the textile industry, but in 1828 switched from machine manufacture to cotton mills. He also founded an orphanage.

==Finlayson &amp; Compagnie==

On 1 March 1836, Finlayson sold the factory to Georg Rauch and Karl Samuel Nottbeck on condition that they would retain his name for the factory. The new owners complied and founded Finlayson &amp; Compagnie. Finlayson worked in an advisory capacity for a couple of years before moving back to the United Kingdom, where he died in 1852 in Edinburgh.

The company grew to be Tampere&#x27;s largest employer, employing, at its peak, over 3,000 people. It still produces textiles. In 1995 the old factories in the center of Tampere were closed down, and the old buildings converted to a commercial and entertainment district.

A weaving hall, completed in 1877 and at the time the largest in the Nordic countries, housed a total of 1,200 power looms. In accordance with the custom of naming significant new buildings after recent or current events, it was named &quot;Plevna&quot; after the Siege of Plevna, under Ottoman control, by the joint army of Russian Empire and Kingdom of Romania. It now houses a brewpub and the cinema multiplex Finnkino Plevna.

===Electric lighting===
The &quot;Plevna&quot; building was the first in any of the Nordic countries and the fourth in Europe to be equipped with incandescent lighting. The lighting with 120 &quot;8 candle&quot; bulbs was first switched on 15 March 1882. The Edison &quot;dynamo&quot; No. 24 is still located in the building. The system used 110 volt direct current; this system was adopted for all of Tampere, resulting in a war of currents with the latter introduced Westinghouse alternating current.

==External links==
*Company web site

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q744067" start="0" end="15" title="James Finlayson (industrialist)" label="James Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816" start="17" end="26" title="August 29" label="29 August"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690" start="27" end="31" title="1772" label="1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011428" start="32" end="40" title="Penicuik" label="Penicuik"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="41" end="49" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826" start="52" end="61" title="August 18" label="18 August"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="62" end="66" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="67" end="76" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="77" end="85" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="101" end="107" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="136" end="157" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="161" end="168" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="170" end="177" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329236" start="200" end="209" title="Finlayson (company)" label="Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011428" start="247" end="255" title="Penicuik" label="Penicuik"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="313" end="327" title="Saint Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="375" end="379" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="380" end="401" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="434" end="456" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="476" end="483" title="Imperial Russia" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="546" end="553" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881775" start="609" end="626" title="Senate of Finland" label="Senate of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846380" start="638" end="645" title="Finlayson industrial area" label="factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="663" end="674" title="water power" label="water power"/>
<link wikidata="Q222028" start="684" end="695" title="Tammerkoski" label="Tammerkoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q196721" start="793" end="802" title="machinist" label="machinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="1163" end="1174" title="cotton mill" label="cotton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q160645" start="1196" end="1205" title="orphanage" label="orphanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="1578" end="1587" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="1838" end="1851" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="1865" end="1872" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="1932" end="1948" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353185" start="1974" end="1984" title="power loom" label="power loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661362" start="2104" end="2110" title="Plevna, Tampere" label="Plevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q780367" start="2127" end="2142" title="Siege of Plevna" label="Siege of Plevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2150" end="2157" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2188" end="2202" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="2207" end="2225" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153108" start="2266" end="2275" title="multiplex (movie theater)" label="multiplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q41776574" start="2276" end="2291" title="Finnkino Plevna" label="Finnkino Plevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="2440" end="2461" title="incandescent lighting" label="incandescent lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q83216" start="2493" end="2499" title="Candle (unit)" label="candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="2553" end="2559" title="Thomas Edison" label="Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q719861" start="2566" end="2572" title="dynamo (electrical)" label="dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="2645" end="2659" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q868337" start="2720" end="2735" title="war of currents" label="war of currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="2763" end="2775" title="Westinghouse Electric (1886)" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="2776" end="2795" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262152" wikidata="Q511736" url="?curid=1262152" title="Judith Exner">
<text>Judith Exner (January 11, 1934 – September 24, 1999) was an American woman who claimed to be the mistress of U.S. Senator, then U.S. president John F. Kennedy and Mafia leaders Sam Giancana and John Roselli. Several aspects of her claim of having known Kennedy have been verified by documents, phone records, and testimony. She was also known as Judith Campbell Exner, and Judith Campbell.

== Early life ==
She was born Judith Eileen Katherine Immoor in Fort Lee, New Jersey; Her parents were Frederick Immoor, an architect of German descent, and Katherine (née Shea), who was of Irish descent. When she was a child, her family moved to southern California, where she grew up in Pacific Palisades. With her father a successful architect, she was raised in the prosperous neighborhood of Pacific Palisades which influenced her future lifestyle and the social circles in which she would find friends and make social contacts. After her mother nearly died in an auto accident, Judith withdrew from school at the age of 14 and was tutored at home. Her older sister Jacqueline later became an actress and took the professional name Susan Morrow. Judith&#x27;s association with the acting community was established through her sister&#x27;s choice of careers, her own work as a model, and her association with her future husband, film actor William Campbell.

== Marriage and family ==
In 1952, at the age of 18, Judith married actor William Campbell; they divorced in 1958.

Exner was not the first or only party to claim she had a relationship with President John Kennedy. An FBI investigation into JFK’s assassination and certain mob dealings uncovered Exner’s name and brought them to expose her to the nation. She described the circumstances of the 18-month relationship she had with then-Senator John F. Kennedy, beginning in 1960, which continued after he was elected President of the United States. She had a son, David Bohrer, from a later relationship. In 1975, Campbell married again, to Dan Exner, a golfer. They separated in 1988.

== John F. Kennedy ==
According to Michael O&#x27;Brien of the &quot;Washington Monthly&quot;, on February 7, 1960, Frank Sinatra and Campbell were in Las Vegas, where Sinatra introduced her to John F. Kennedy, then a senator from Massachusetts and presidential candidate. In her 1977 memoir, she said that she became one of JFK&#x27;s mistresses for about two years, frequently visiting him in the White House after he was elected president. Her account was supported by phone records and other documentation, although Kennedy staff and supporters attacked her veracity when she published her memoir. A few months later in 1960, Sinatra introduced Campbell to &quot;Sam Flood,&quot; who was actually Sam Giancana, the leading figure in the Chicago Mafia. She also became involved with him and knew his associate John Roselli. Clearly, her extramarital affair with a former President made her story controversial, and her association as a channel of information between the American Mafia and Kennedy, greatly increased the public interest and controversial nature of the relationship. The additional attention brought to bear on her story caused by the investigation performed by both the Senate and FBI greatly increased the level of public interest in her relationship with the President and her version of the story that would be told by her book.

=== Church Committee ===
Exner received additional media attention on a national level when she testified in 1975 before the Church Committee investigating CIA assassination attempts on Fidel Castro. Roselli testified to the committee about Mafia involvement in the CIA attempt on Castro&#x27;s life. When the Church Committee report was released in December 1975, it said that a &quot;close friend&quot; of President Kennedy had also been a close friend of mobsters John Roselli and Sam Giancana.&quot; Campbell&#x27;s identity as the close friend was leaked to &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, which publicized it. William Safire in &quot;The New York Times&quot; also published it. The Committee had sent Exner a subpoena to make her testify. By then, married to Dan Exner, Judith Exner called a press conference that month and denied any knowledge of Mafia involvement with Kennedy. Exner may have changed certain aspects of how she told her story largely in the interest of her own safety and security and that of her family, and to protect the reputation of certain individuals whose reputations were at risk as a result of the intense media and public attention being focused on them, and not because her story was inherently fictitious, dishonest, or fabricated.

== Memoir ==
In 1977, Exner published &quot;Judith Exner: My Story&quot;. In her memoir, she said that her relationship with Kennedy was entirely personal. She also said that Frank Sinatra later introduced her to Sam Giancana, with whom she also became intimate. She said that Giancana never asked her for any information related to Kennedy. She also said that John Roselli was her friend.

Aside from her own alleged affair with JFK, Exner claimed to have knowledge of other women who had affairs with Kennedy. These affairs included one with Danish journalist Inga Arvad between late 1941 and early 1942. Many other authors and sources besides Exner, including Kennedy&#x27;s letters, Kennedy&#x27;s friends, the FBI, and FBI tape recordings have detailed Kennedy&#x27;s relationship with Arvad. Exner also said that Kennedy brought prostitutes to the White House swimming pool. Journalists and some historians have also alleged that Kennedy had a number of affairs, citing a memo by FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover as part of the evidence.

Exner said that President Kennedy&#x27;s Special Assistant David Powers helped set up encounters with President Kennedy. Powers later stated that Kennedy never had an affair with Exner.

== Later accounts ==
In a 1988 interview with Kitty Kelley of &quot;People&quot; magazine, Exner told a very different story about Giancana and Kennedy. She said that she had lied to the Church Committee and in her memoir out of fear of Mafia retaliation. She said Kennedy had asked her to contact Giancana, and she helped set up a meeting between them during the 1960 presidential election. For about 18 months in 1960–61, &quot;Exner claimed she served as the president&#x27;s link with the Mob. She crisscrossed the nation carrying envelopes between the president and Giancana, and arranged about 10 meetings between the two.&quot; She later claimed these messages concerned plans to assassinate the Cuban president Fidel Castro.

In 1997, Exner alleged more details and changed her story, in separate interviews with Liz Smith of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; and Seymour Hersh. She said Kennedy told her of his plans related to Cuba, and used her to carry money to Giancana, as well as to arrange numerous meetings between Kennedy, Giancana and Roselli. According to one source, in all, Exner claimed she arranged 10 meetings between Giancana and Kennedy to help Kennedy get elected. Exner claimed to Smith to have terminated a pregnancy resulting from a last encounter in 1962 with Kennedy. She said that she had carried payoffs from California defense contractors to the Kennedys, including Robert F. Kennedy. A witness of Hersh&#x27;s who appeared to support Exner&#x27;s story of carrying money to Giancana later dropped his story.

Critics have attacked these later accounts. They depend mostly on Exner and are not supported by what is known of Kennedy and his staff. Her earlier accounts of her affair with Kennedy were supported by FBI reports, Secret Service and White House phone logs and staff documentation. She has been described as an &quot;unreliable witness,&quot; with a history of instability, depression and paranoia and, by then, she was suffering from cancer.

=== Later years and death ===
Exner lived in Newport Beach and was a painter. She died on September 24, 1999, in Duarte, California, from breast cancer.

== In popular culture ==
Exner&#x27;s memoir was adapted as a made-for-TV movie, &quot;Power and Beauty&quot; (2002), directed by Susan Seidelman, in which she was played by Natasha Henstridge. Material was added from accounts published after her 1977 memoir.

In the Series 7 episode of Red Dwarf &quot;Tikka to Ride&quot; Exner is alluded to when, in an alternate timeline, it&#x27;s discovered that she had been the mistress of both Kennedy and Giancana, resulting in Kennedy being impeached. 

Judy Campbell was portrayed in the 1998 HBO movie &quot;The Rat Pack&quot; by Michelle Grace. In the 2004 episode &quot;In Camelot&quot; of the TV series &quot;The Sopranos&quot;, the character of Fran Felstein is based on Judith Exner. Campbell was portrayed by Megan Vincent in the 2011 TV series &quot;The Kennedys&quot;. In 2016, she appeared as a character in the third episode of the first season of the television series &quot;Timeless&quot;, played by Elena Satine.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q511736" start="0" end="12" title="Judith Exner" label="Judith Exner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="128" end="142" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. president"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="143" end="158" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="163" end="168" title="Italian-American Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q945576" start="177" end="189" title="Sam Giancana" label="Sam Giancana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655816" start="194" end="206" title="John Roselli" label="John Roselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q511736" start="346" end="367" title="Judith Exner" label="Judith Campbell Exner"/>
<link wikidata="Q511736" start="373" end="388" title="Judith Exner" label="Judith Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013261" start="455" end="475" title="Fort Lee, New Jersey" label="Fort Lee, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370207" start="680" end="697" title="Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles" label="Pacific Palisades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648210" start="1128" end="1140" title="Susan Morrow" label="Susan Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q179393" start="1429" end="1445" title="William Campbell (film actor)" label="William Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1789" end="1796" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="1797" end="1812" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1870" end="1900" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972062" start="2109" end="2127" title="Washington Monthly" label="Washington Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="2156" end="2169" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="2234" end="2249" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="2289" end="2311" title="President (government title)" label="presidential candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q945576" start="2741" end="2753" title="Sam Giancana" label="Sam Giancana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655816" start="2853" end="2865" title="John Roselli" label="John Roselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089721" start="3518" end="3534" title="Church Committee" label="Church Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="3579" end="3591" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q254983" start="4010" end="4024" title="William Safire" label="William Safire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4034" end="4052" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="4109" end="4117" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q945576" start="4878" end="4890" title="Sam Giancana" label="Sam Giancana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655816" start="5026" end="5038" title="John Roselli" label="John Roselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150911" start="5227" end="5237" title="Inga Arvad" label="Inga Arvad"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="5664" end="5679" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238684" start="5765" end="5777" title="David Powers" label="David Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418571" start="5939" end="5951" title="Kitty Kelley" label="Kitty Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="5961" end="5967" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="6257" end="6283" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808496" start="6571" end="6624" title="Assassination attempts on Fidel Castro" label="plans to assassinate the Cuban president Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="6733" end="6744" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="7285" end="7302" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="7632" end="7635" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="7645" end="7659" title="United States Secret Service" label="Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="7804" end="7814" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="7819" end="7827" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q927189" start="7987" end="8005" title="Duarte, California" label="Duarte, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="8012" end="8025" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q270372" start="8158" end="8173" title="Susan Seidelman" label="Susan Seidelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q230527" start="8202" end="8220" title="Natasha Henstridge" label="Natasha Henstridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="8316" end="8325" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801949" start="8332" end="8345" title="Tikka to Ride" label="Tikka to Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="8566" end="8569" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930454" start="8582" end="8594" title="The Rat Pack (film)" label="The Rat Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6009127" start="8646" end="8656" title="In Camelot" label="In Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="8686" end="8698" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8723" end="8736" title="List of characters from The Sopranos – friends and family#Fran Felstein" label="Fran Felstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203402" start="8831" end="8843" title="The Kennedys (TV series)" label="The Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647166" start="8960" end="8968" title="Timeless (TV series)" label="Timeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601137" start="8986" end="8998" title="Elena Satine" label="Elena Satine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262155" wikidata="Q2072004" url="?curid=1262155" title="Persian Princess">
<text>The Persian Princess or Persian Mummy is a mummy of an alleged Persian princess who surfaced in Pakistani Baluchistan in October 2000. After considerable attention and further investigation, the mummy proved to be an archaeological forgery and possibly a murder victim.

==Discovery==
The mummy was found on 19 October 2000. During a murder investigation, Pakistani authorities were alerted to a videotape recorded by Ali Aqbar, in which he claimed to have a mummy for sale. When questioned by the police, Aqbar told them where the mummy was located; at the house of tribal leader Wali Mohammed Reeki in Kharan, Baluchistan near the border of Afghanistan. Reeki claimed he had received the mummy from an Iranian named Sharif Shah Bakhi, who had said that he had found it after an earthquake near Quetta. The mummy had been put up for sale in the black antiquities market for 600 million rupees, the equivalent of $11 million. Reeki and Aqbar were accused of violating the country&#x27;s Antiquities Act, a charge which carries a maximum sentence of ten years in prison.

==Misidentification==
In a press conference on 26 October, Pakistani archaeologist Ahmad Hasan Dani of Islamabad&#x27;s Quaid-e-Azam University announced that the mummy seemed to be a princess dated circa 600 BC. The mummy was wrapped in ancient Egyptian style, and rested in a gilded wooden coffin with cuneiform carvings inside a stone sarcophagus. The coffin had been carved with a large faravahar image. The mummy was atop a layer of wax and honey, was covered by a stone slab and had a golden crown on its brow. An inscription on the golden chest plate claimed that she was the relatively unknown Rhodogune, a daughter of king Xerxes I of Persia and a member of the Achaemenid dynasty.

Hasan Dani speculated that she might have been an Egyptian princess married to a Persian prince, or a daughter of the Achaemenid king Cyrus the Great. However, because mummification had been primarily an Egyptian practice, they had not encountered any mummies in Persia before.

==Ownership==
The governments of Iran and Pakistan soon began to argue about the ownership of the mummy. The Iranian Cultural Heritage Organization claimed her as a member of Persian royal family and demanded the mummy&#x27;s return. Pakistan&#x27;s Archaeological Department HQ said that it belonged to Pakistan because it had been found in Baluchistan. The Taliban of Afghanistan also made a claim. People in Quetta demanded that the police should return the mummy to them. The Awan tribe in Balochistan also claimed ownership by saying that according to the inscription, the mummy might be a member of The House of Hika Munshi - an Awan royal family and demanded that it should be moved to Kallar Kahar Fossil Museum (Kallar Kahar is considered the primary settlement of Awan tribe).

In November 2000, the mummy was placed in display in the National Museum of Pakistan.

==Investigation==
News of the Persian Princess prompted American archaeologist Oscar White Muscarella to describe an incident the previous March when he was shown photographs of a similar mummy. Amanollah Riggi, a middleman working on behalf of an unidentified antiquities dealer in Pakistan, had approached him, claiming its owners were a Zoroastrian family who had brought it to the country. The seller had claimed that it was a daughter of Xerxes, based on a translation of the cuneiform of the breastplate.

The cuneiform text on the breastplate contained a passage from the Behistun inscription in western Iran. The Behistun inscription was carved during the reign of Darius, the father of Xerxes. When the dealer&#x27;s representative had sent a piece of a coffin to be carbon dated, analysis had shown that the coffin was only around 250 years old. Muscarella had suspected a forgery and severed contact. He had informed Interpol through the FBI.

When Asma Ibrahim, the curator of the National Museum of Pakistan, studied the item in police custody, she realised that the corpse was not as old as the coffin. The body had shown signs of decomposition fungus on the face, a sign of a recently deceased body, and the mat below the body was about five years old. During the investigation, Iran and the Taliban repeated their demands. The Taliban claimed that they had apprehended the smugglers who had taken the mummy out of Afghanistan.

The inscriptions on the breastplate were not in proper grammatical Persian. Instead of a Persian form of the daughter&#x27;s name, &quot;Wardegauna&quot;, the forgers had used a Greek version &quot;Rhodugune&quot;. CAT and X-ray scans in Agha Khan Hospital indicated that the mummification had not been made following ancient Egyptian custom – for example, the heart had been removed along with the rest of the internal organs, whereas the heart of a genuine Egyptian mummy would normally be left inside the body. Furthermore, tendons that should have decayed over the centuries were still intact.

Ibrahim published her report on 17 April 2001. In it, she stated that the &quot;Persian princess&quot; was in fact a woman about 21–25 years of age, who had died around 1996, possibly killed with a blunt instrument to the lower back/pelvic region (e.g., hit by vehicle from behind). A subsequent accelerator mass spectrometry dating also confirmed the mummy&#x27;s status as a modern fake. Her teeth had been removed after death, and her hip joint, pelvis and backbone damaged, before the body had been filled with powder. Police began to investigate a possible murder and arrested a number of suspects in Baluchistan.

==Fate==
The Edhi Foundation took custody of the body, and on 5 August 2005, announced that it was to be interred with proper burial rights. However, police and other government officials never responded to numerous requests, and it was not until 2008 that the foundation finally carried out the burial.

==Representations in contemporary art==
&quot;The Persian Princess&quot; is the name of an exhibition presented in August 2016 in Jerusalem, by artist Hili Greenfeld. The exhibition functions as a tribute to the anonymous woman who, in an instant, went from the status of a Princess in a gold-plated coffin displayed in a national museum, to the victim of a vicious murder in whom everyone quickly lost interest. The extreme transformation of the perception of the archeological object – from an honored Princess to a woman who was murdered – is what interests Greenfeld.
Greenfeld picked up the signs and symbols used by the forgers, such as engraved rosettes, Cypress gold, the icon of Ahura Mazda, Gold Crown, etc. She painted the symbols on artificial grass, and created a hybrid of lyrical abstract paintings, Persian rugs and graffiti murals. The works that are shown on the walls and on the floor seem to be graffiti murals and then seem to be rugs, but in both cases they are synthetic imitations of the original.

==See also==
*List of unsolved murders

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2072004" start="4" end="20" title="Persian Princess" label="Persian Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072004" start="24" end="37" title="Persian Princess" label="Persian Mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="43" end="48" title="mummy" label="mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="63" end="70" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q163239" start="96" end="117" title="Balochistan, Pakistan" label="Pakistani Baluchistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918418" start="217" end="239" title="archaeological forgery" label="archaeological forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="255" end="261" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740586" start="604" end="610" title="Kharan, Pakistan" label="Kharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="643" end="654" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="704" end="708" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="796" end="802" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775204" start="846" end="863" title="black antiquities" label="black antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q188289" start="887" end="892" title="Pakistani rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695333" start="1154" end="1170" title="Ahmad Hasan Dani" label="Ahmad Hasan Dani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047109" start="1191" end="1214" title="Quaid-e-Azam University" label="Quaid-e-Azam University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1309" end="1322" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="1375" end="1384" title="Cuneiform script" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="1409" end="1420" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161942" start="1462" end="1471" title="faravahar" label="faravahar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1673" end="1682" title="Rhodogune (daughter of Xerxes I)" label="Rhodogune"/>
<link wikidata="Q129165" start="1703" end="1721" title="Xerxes I of Persia" label="Xerxes I of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527812" start="1742" end="1760" title="Achaemenid dynasty" label="Achaemenid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="1897" end="1912" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q85976400" start="2151" end="2189" title="Iranian Cultural Heritage Organization" label="Iranian Cultural Heritage Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="2401" end="2408" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829787" start="2522" end="2532" title="Awan (tribe)" label="Awan tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q797139" start="2735" end="2747" title="Kallar Kahar" label="Kallar Kahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967486" start="2887" end="2914" title="National Museum of Pakistan" label="National Museum of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594833" start="2996" end="3018" title="Oscar White Muscarella" label="Oscar White Muscarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="3257" end="3268" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065480" start="3415" end="3426" title="Pectoral (Ancient Egypt)" label="breastplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q180012" start="3496" end="3516" title="Behistun inscription" label="Behistun inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="3590" end="3596" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="3693" end="3705" title="carbon dating" label="carbon dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="3845" end="3853" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q51858695" start="3877" end="3889" title="Asma Ibrahim" label="Asma Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="4539" end="4544" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="4576" end="4579" title="CAT scan" label="CAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="4584" end="4589" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690948" start="4599" end="4617" title="Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi" label="Agha Khan Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q530255" start="5256" end="5285" title="accelerator mass spectrometry" label="accelerator mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445332" start="5593" end="5608" title="Edhi Foundation" label="Edhi Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="6015" end="6024" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6036" end="6050" title="Hili Greenfeld" label="Hili Greenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q179575" start="6573" end="6584" title="Ahura Mazda" label="Ahura Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851307" start="6922" end="6946" title="List of unsolved murders (2000–present)" label="List of unsolved murders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262157" wikidata="Q4689570" url="?curid=1262157" title="Africa Leadership Forum">
<text>The Africa Leadership Foundation (ALF) (also known as the Africa Leadership Forum) is a not-for-profit organization founded in Nigeria in 1988 by Nigerian president Olusegun Obasanjo. 

The primary focus of ALF is to help improve the current quality of leadership in Africa while at the same time helping to train the next generation of leaders for the continent. ALF provided the first forum where leaders could meet and exchange experiences with the view to improving their performance.

ALF has spearheaded regional and continent-wide initiatives such as the Conference on Security, Stability, Development and Cooperation (CSSDCA), now a standing conference of the African Union, and the Africa Women&#x27;s Forum. Within Nigeria, ALF holds programs such as the Farmhouse Dialogs that allow participants on both sides of important and/or controversial issues to sit down together and discuss their concerns.

In 2001 ALF opened a new secretariat in Benja Village, Ota, Ogun State. This new complex includes a large conference hall, a digital library, Internet cafe, and training rooms. 

==External links==
* www.africaleadership.org Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4689570" start="4" end="32" title="Africa Leadership Forum" label="Africa Leadership Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="127" end="134" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="165" end="182" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="267" end="273" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="562" end="624" title="Conference on Security, Stability, Development and Cooperation" label="Conference on Security, Stability, Development and Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="668" end="681" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="691" end="716" title="Africa Women&amp;#x27;s Forum" label="Africa Women&amp;#x27;s Forum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="952" end="965" title="Benja Village" label="Benja Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320817" start="967" end="970" title="Ota, Nigeria" label="Ota"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="972" end="982" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun State"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262158" wikidata="Q6833469" url="?curid=1262158" title="Michael Pelligrino">
<text>Michael Pelligrino (born 1966) is a U.S. man who fooled publisher Simon &amp; Schuster into thinking that he was &quot;Michael Gambino&quot;, grandson of Mafioso Carlo Gambino.

In 1999, Pelligrino was jailed for theft and impersonating an FBI agent. In jail, he contacted literary agent Joel Gotler of the Artist Management Group, a talent agency in Hollywood, and convinced him that he was actually Michael Gambino, the illegitimate grandson of Carlo Gambino. 

When he was released in 2001, Gotler sold his story to Pocket Books, a division of Simon &amp; Schuster, for a $500,000 advance.

Pelligrino used a ghostwriter to make a book &quot;The Honored Society&quot;, a novel that was supposedly based on his own experiences as a gangster. In the book he claimed that he had been 12 years in prison for bribery, gambling, extortion, kidnapping, money laundering, murder and pimping, and had decided to come clean when serving time. The book was published in November 2001. Pelligrino appeared on &quot;Good Morning America&quot; to promote his book, claiming that he was a son of Carlo Gambino&#x27;s unknown son Vito, who had been born in Sicily and later immigrated to the United States.

As it happens, Carlo Gambino has a great-grandson named Michael, who lives in New York: Carlo Gambino&#x27;s son Thomas, upon hearing of these events, instructed his own lawyer Michael Rosen to expose the impostor, and Rosen promptly contacted the publisher to inform them of the fraud.

Simon &amp; Schuster withdrew the book. On August 27, 2002, Simon &amp; Schuster sued Artist Management Group, accusing it of misrepresenting Michael Gambino and demanding return of the money and millions of dollars in damages. Pelligrino&#x27;s lawyers defended their client by stating that he did believe he was Gambino&#x27;s grandson and that the book was fiction, not a biography.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6833469" start="0" end="18" title="Michael Pelligrino" label="Michael Pelligrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="36" end="40" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="66" end="86" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="154" end="161" title="American Mafia" label="Mafioso"/>
<link wikidata="Q452127" start="162" end="175" title="Carlo Gambino" label="Carlo Gambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="213" end="218" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="240" end="243" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="307" end="330" title="Artist Management Group" label="Artist Management Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354754" start="334" end="347" title="talent agency" label="talent agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="351" end="360" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206385" start="519" end="531" title="Pocket Books" label="Pocket Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="612" end="623" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q46961" start="734" end="742" title="gangster" label="gangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="807" end="814" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="816" end="824" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="826" end="835" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="837" end="847" title="kidnapping" label="kidnapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="849" end="865" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="867" end="873" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="878" end="885" title="pimping" label="pimping"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="1006" end="1026" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992899" start="1308" end="1314" title="Thomas Gambino" label="Thomas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262162" wikidata="Q5669310" url="?curid=1262162" title="Harry Grindell Matthews">
<text>Harry Grindell Matthews (17 March 1880 – 11 September 1941) was an English inventor who claimed to have invented a death ray in the 1920s.

==Earlier life and inventions==
Harry Grindell Matthews was born on 17 March 1880 in Winterbourne, Gloucestershire. Matthews studied at the Merchant Venturers&#x27; School in Bristol and became an electronic engineer. During the Second Boer War, Matthews served in the South African Constabulary and was twice wounded.

In 1911, Matthews claimed that he had invented an Aerophone device, a radiotelephone, and transmitted messages between a ground station and an aeroplane from a distance of . His experiments attracted government attention, and on 4 July 1912, Matthews visited Buckingham Palace. However, when the British Admiralty requested a demonstration of the Aerophone, Matthews demanded that no experts be present at the scene. When four observers dismantled part of the apparatus before the demonstration began and took notes, Matthews cancelled the demonstration and drove observers away.

Newspapers rushed to Matthews&#x27; defence. The War Office denied tampering and claimed the demonstration was a failure. The government later stated that the affair was just a misunderstanding.

In 1914, after the outbreak of the First World War, the British government announced an award of £25,000 to anyone who could create a weapon against zeppelins or remotely control uncrewed vehicles. Matthews claimed he had developed a remote control system using selenium cells. Matthews successfully demonstrated it with a remotely controlled boat to representatives of the Admiralty at Richmond Park&#x27;s Penn Pond. Matthews received his £25,000, but the Admiralty never used the invention.

Next, Matthews appeared in public in 1921 and claimed to have invented the world&#x27;s first talking picture, a farewell interview of Ernest Shackleton recorded on 16 September 1921, shortly before Shackleton&#x27;s last expedition. The film was not commercially successful. Other talking-picture processes had been developed before that of Matthews, including processes by William K. L. Dickson, Photokinema (Orlando Kellum) and Phonofilm (Lee DeForest). However, Matthews claimed his process was the first sound-on-film.

==Death ray==

In 1923, Matthews claimed that he had invented an electric ray that would put magnetos out of action. In a demonstration to some select journalists Matthews stopped a motorcycle engine from a distance. Matthews also claimed that with enough power, it could shoot down aeroplanes, explode gunpowder, stop ships, and incapacitate infantry from the distance of . Newspapers obliged by publishing sensational accounts of his invention.

The War Office contacted Matthews in February 1924 to request a demonstration of his ray. Matthews did not reply to them but spoke to journalists and demonstrated the ray to a &quot;Star&quot; reporter by igniting gunpowder from a distance. Matthews still refused to say how the ray worked but insisted it did. When the British government still refused to rush to buy his ideas, Matthews announced that he had an offer from France.

The Air Ministry was wary, partly because of previous bad experiences with would-be inventors. Matthews was invited back to London to demonstrate his ray to the armed forces on 26 April. In Matthews&#x27;s laboratory, they saw how his ray switched on a light bulb and cut off a motor. Matthews failed to convince the officials, who also suspected trickery or a confidence game. When the British Admiralty requested further demonstration, Matthews refused to give it.

On 27 May 1924, the High Court in London granted an injunction to Matthew&#x27;s investors that forbade him from selling the rights to the death ray. When Major Wimperis arrived at Matthews&#x27;s laboratory to negotiate a new deal, Matthews had already flown to Paris. Matthews&#x27;s backers also appeared on the scene and rushed to Croydon airport to stop him, but it was too late.

Public furore attracted the interest of other would-be inventors who wanted to demonstrate death rays to the War Office. None of them were convincing. On 28 May, Commander Kenworthy asked in the House of Commons what the government intended to do to stop Matthews from selling the ray to a foreign power. The Under Secretary for Air answered that Matthews was not willing to let them investigate the ray to their satisfaction. A government representative also stated that one ministry official had stood before the ray and survived. Newspapers continued to root for Matthews.

The government required that Matthews use the ray to stop a petrol motorcycle engine in the conditions that would satisfy the Air Ministry. Matthews would receive £1000 and further consideration. From France, Matthews answered that he was unwilling to give proof of that kind and already had eight bids to choose from. Matthews also claimed that he had lost sight in his left eye because of his experiments. His involvement with his French backer Eugene Royer aroused further suspicions in Britain.

Sir Samuel Instone and his brother Theodore offered Matthews a huge salary if he kept the ray in Britain and demonstrated that it actually worked. Matthews refused again—he did not want to give any proof that the ray worked as he claimed it would.

Matthews returned to London on 1 June 1924 and gave an interview to the &quot;Sunday Express&quot;. Matthews claimed that he had a deal with Royer. The press again took his side. The only demonstration Matthews was willing to give was to make a &quot;Pathé&quot; film &quot;The Death Ray&quot; to propagate his ideas to his satisfaction. The device in the movie bore no resemblance to the one government officials had seen.

In July 1924, Matthews left for the US to market his invention. When Matthews was offered $25,000 to demonstrate his beam to the Radio World Fair at Madison Square Garden, he again refused and claimed, without foundation, that he was not permitted to demonstrate it outside England. US scientists were not impressed. One Professor Woods offered to stand before the death ray device to demonstrate his disbelief. Regardless, when Matthews returned to Britain, he claimed that the USA had bought his ray but refused to say who had done it and for how much. Matthews moved to the US and began to work for Warner Bros.

==Further inventions==
In 1925, Matthews invented what he called the &quot;luminaphone&quot;.

On 24 December 1930, Matthews was back in England with his new creation – a Sky Projector that projected pictures onto clouds. Matthews demonstrated it in Hampstead by projecting an angel, the message &quot;Happy Christmas&quot;, and a reportedly &quot;accurate&quot; clock face. Matthews demonstrated it again in New York. This invention was unsuccessful, and by 1931, Matthews faced bankruptcy. Matthews used most of his investors&#x27; money to live in expensive hotels.

In 1934, Matthews had a new set of investors and relocated to Tor Clawdd, Betws, South Wales. Matthews built a fortified laboratory and airfield. In 1935, Matthews claimed that he worked on aerial mines and, in 1937, invented a system for detecting submarines. In 1938, Matthews married Ganna Walska, a Polish-American opera singer, perfumer, and feminist, whose four previous husbands had owned fortunes totalling $125,000,000.

In 1935, Matthews became involved with the right-wing Lucy, Lady Houston, and intended to conduct experiments in French naval submarine detection from her luxury yacht, the &quot;Liberty&quot;. In 2010, new research chronicled the episode, explaining how Matthews was frustrated in carrying out his aims.

Later, Matthews propagated the idea of the &quot;stratoplane&quot; and joined the British Interplanetary Society. His reputation preceded him, and the British Government was no longer interested in his ideas.

==Personal life==
Harry Grindell Matthews was the fifth husband of singer Ganna Walska; they married in 1938. Matthews died of a heart attack on 11 September 1941.

==See also==
*Samuel Alfred Warner – a purported inventor of naval weapons in the first half of the 19th century.

==References==
==External links==
*
*H. Grindell-Matthews, &quot;Diabolic Rays&quot;, &quot;Popular Radio&quot; magazine, New York, Vol. 6, No. 4, August 1924, p. 149-154. In the article, Grindell-Matthews briefly describes the rays and what they can do.
*Harry Grindell Matthews website archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5669310" start="0" end="23" title="Harry Grindell Matthews" label="Harry Grindell Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638786" start="115" end="124" title="death ray" label="death ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215896" start="225" end="254" title="Winterbourne, Gloucestershire" label="Winterbourne, Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487452" start="280" end="311" title="Society of Merchant Venturers" label="Merchant Venturers&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q126095" start="337" end="356" title="electronic engineer" label="electronic engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="369" end="384" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166379" start="409" end="435" title="South African Constabulary" label="South African Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313348" start="530" end="544" title="radiotelephone" label="radiotelephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="719" end="736" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="756" end="773" title="British Admiralty" label="British Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1272" end="1287" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="1386" end="1394" title="zeppelin" label="zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185091" start="1399" end="1415" title="remote control" label="remotely control"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="1499" end="1507" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="1611" end="1620" title="Admiralty (United Kingdom)" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142072" start="1624" end="1637" title="Richmond Park" label="Richmond Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q957543" start="1867" end="1884" title="Ernest Shackleton" label="Ernest Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q465350" start="2107" end="2128" title="William K. L. Dickson" label="William K. L. Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381590" start="2130" end="2141" title="Photokinema" label="Photokinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381432" start="2163" end="2172" title="Phonofilm" label="Phonofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682774" start="2241" end="2254" title="sound-on-film" label="sound-on-film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773501" start="2350" end="2357" title="ignition magneto" label="magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="2560" end="2569" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="3142" end="3154" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="3391" end="3401" title="light bulb" label="light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="3499" end="3514" title="confidence game" label="confidence game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="3658" end="3668" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="3941" end="3956" title="Croydon airport" label="Croydon airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="4101" end="4111" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284578" start="4154" end="4173" title="Joseph Kenworthy, 10th Baron Strabolgi" label="Commander Kenworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="4187" end="4203" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883043" start="4301" end="4324" title="Under-Secretary of State for Air" label="Under Secretary for Air"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5016" end="5028" title="Eugene Royer" label="Eugene Royer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411775" start="5069" end="5087" title="Samuel Instone" label="Sir Samuel Instone"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="5396" end="5410" title="Sunday Express" label="Sunday Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="5569" end="5574" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="5892" end="5913" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="6345" end="6357" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6530" end="6543" title="Sky Projector" label="Sky Projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q311666" start="6549" end="6558" title="Image projector" label="projected"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="6609" end="6618" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6991" end="7001" title=":cy:Tor_Clawdd" label="Tor Clawdd"/>
<link wikidata="Q850566" start="7003" end="7008" title="Betws, Carmarthenshire" label="Betws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="7010" end="7021" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="7178" end="7187" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521415" start="7216" end="7228" title="Ganna Walska" label="Ganna Walska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698142" start="7419" end="7431" title="Lucy, Lady Houston" label="Lady Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q981349" start="7747" end="7777" title="British Interplanetary Society" label="British Interplanetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521415" start="7949" end="7961" title="Ganna Walska" label="Ganna Walska"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859196" start="8054" end="8074" title="Samuel Alfred Warner" label="Samuel Alfred Warner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262163" wikidata="Q241660" url="?curid=1262163" title="Angie Stone">
<text>Angela Laverne Brown (born December 18, 1961), known professionally as Angie Stone, is an American singer, songwriter, actress, and record producer. She rose to fame in the late 1970s as member of the hip hop trio the Sequence. In the early 1990s, she became a member of the R&amp;B trio Vertical Hold. Stone then signed with Arista Records to release her debut solo album &quot;Black Diamond&quot; (1999), which received gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and spawned the single &quot;No More Rain (In This Cloud)&quot;.

After transitioning to J Records, she released her second album, &quot;Mahogany Soul&quot; (2001), which spawned the hit single &quot;Wish I Didn&#x27;t Miss You&quot;. It was followed by &quot;Stone Love&quot; (2004) and &quot;The Art of Love &amp; War&quot; (2007), her first number-one album on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.

Stone ventured into acting in the 2000s, making her film debut in the 2002 comedy film &quot;The Hot Chick&quot;, and her stage debut in 2003, in the role of Big Mama Morton in the Broadway musical &quot;Chicago&quot;. She has since appeared in supporting roles in films and television series as well as several musical productions, including VH1’s &quot;Celebrity Fit Club&quot; and TV One&#x27;s &quot;R&amp;B Divas&quot;, and movies such as &quot;The Fighting Temptations&quot; (2003), &quot;Pastor Brown&quot; (2009) and &quot;School Gyrls&quot; (2010).

Stone has been nominated for three Grammy Awards, and has won two Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards. In 2021, she received the Soul Music Icon Award at the Black Music Honors. In 2024, she was a featured vocalist on Damon Little&#x27;s &quot;No Stressing&quot;, which peaked at #1 on Billboard&#x27;s Gospel Airplay chart.

==Early life==
Stone was born in Columbia, South Carolina, where she began singing gospel music at First Nazareth Baptist Church, under the leadership of Reverend Blakely N. Scott. Her father, a member of a local gospel quartet, took Stone to see performances by gospel artists such as the Singing Angels and the Gospel Keynotes.

==Career==
===1979–1985: The Sequence===

In the late 1970s, when Stone was 16, she formed the rap trio The Sequence, a female hip-hop act, also consisting of Cheryl &quot;The Pearl&quot; Cook and Gwendolyn &quot;Blondie&quot; Chisolm. They were the second rap group signed to the Sugar Hill Records after auditioning for manager Sylvia Robinson backstage at a Sugar Hill Gang concert in South Carolina. In 1980, The Sequence scored a hit with their single &quot;Funk You Up&quot;, which reached number 15 on the US Top Black Singles chart. The trio enjoyed a series of rap hits as the first female rap group during the early years of hip hop. Singles such as &quot;Monster Jam&quot; featuring rapper Spoonie Gee and &quot;Funky Sound (Tear The Roof Off)&quot; kept the band touring, with Robinson acting as their mentor. The group faded into obscurity as hip hop changed from its original party sound to a more gritty street art form and the trio eventually disbanded in 1985.

===1986–2005: Vertical Hold, &quot;Black Diamond&quot; and career breakthrough===
Stone then worked with hip hop and electro funk music group Mantronix, before becoming the lead vocalist of the trio Vertical Hold which released the popular single &quot;Seems You&#x27;re Much Too Busy&quot; as well as two albums: &quot;A Matter of Time&quot; (1993) and &quot;Head First&quot; (1995). In 1996, Stone teamed up with Gerry DeVeaux, singer Lenny Kravitz&#x27;s cousin, and Charlie Mole to form the group Devox. They recorded one album, &quot;Devox featuring Angie B. Stone&quot;, released in Japan by Toshiba EMI. Selected cuts were featured on Gerry DeVeaux&#x27;s &quot;Front of the Line&quot; via the Expansion Records, which also included Stone-penned material. Signed to Jocelyn Cooper&#x27;s Midnight Songs, Stone also shared songwriting credits on D&#x27;Angelo&#x27;s first two studio albums, &quot;Brown Sugar&quot; (1995) and &quot;Voodoo&quot; (2000), as well as provided backing vocals when on tour with him. She also served as a backing vocalist on Lenny Kravitz&#x27;s fifth studio album, &quot;5&quot; (1998).
In the late 1990s, Arista Records then A&amp;R manager Peter Edge brought Stone to label head Clive Davis&#x27;s attention. He offered her a solo recording contract with the label and in September 1999, her debut solo album, &quot;Black Diamond&quot;, was released. Named after her then-teenage daughter Diamond Ti&#x27;ara, it was released to positive reviews from music critics, and reached the top ten on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s US Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. &quot;Black Diamond&quot; was eventually certified gold by both the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) and spawned the Adult R&amp;B Songs number-one hit &quot;No More Rain (In This Cloud)&quot;. The single earned Stone two nominations at the 2000 Soul Train Music Awards.

In 2000, Stone transitioned from Arista to music manager Clive Davis&#x27;s venture J Records. Also that year, she recorded the theme song for the UPN/The CW sitcom &quot;Girlfriends&quot;, starring Tracee Ellis Ross, as well as a cameo appearance from the third season episode &quot;Blinded by the Lights&quot;. She then released her second album &quot;Mahogany Soul&quot; on October 16, 2001, with the label. Involving a wider range of contemporary R&amp;B musicians, Stone collaborated with Carvin &amp; Ivan, Raphael Saadiq, Swizz Beatz, Alicia Keys and Eve on much of the album. Released to favorable reviews,
 it peaked at number four on the US Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums, while reaching the top twenty of the Dutch, Finnish and Flemish Album Charts.

Again, Stone was awarded gold by BPI and RIAA for &quot;Mahogany Soul&quot;. &quot;Wish I Didn&#x27;t Miss You&quot;, the album&#x27;s second single, became her biggest international hit yet, reaching the top ten in Australia and Belgium as well as the top of &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Dance Club Songs. &quot;More Than Woman&quot;, a duet with singer Joe, earned Stone her first Grammy Award nomination in the Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals category at the 45th ceremony.

In 2002, Stone had a guest role on &quot;Girlfriends&quot; and played store owner Madame Mambuza in the American teen comedy &quot;The Hot Chick&quot;, starring Rob Schneider. The film scored generally negative reviews from film critics for its vulgar and lowbrow humor, but became a moderate box office success in the US. The following year, the singer appeared in the role of Alma in the Jonathan Lynn&#x27;s musical comedy-drama &quot;The Fighting Temptations&quot; alongside Cuba Gooding, Jr. and Beyoncé. Released to mixed reviews, it was commercially less successful than &quot;The Hot Chick&quot;. Stone recorded &quot;Rain Down&quot;, a duet with Eddie Levert, for the accompanying soundtrack.

&quot;Stone Love&quot;, her third album, was released in June 2004. Davis consulted Warryn Campbell, Jazze Pha and Missy Elliott to work with Stone, who penned and produced half of the final track listing herself. The album debuted at number 14 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling 53,000 copies in its first week of release, and entered the top twenty in Belgium, Finland, Sweden and the Netherlands. Its release was preceded by the single &quot;I Wanna Thank Ya&quot; featuring Snoop Dogg, a top five hit in Belgium and Stone&#x27;s second chart topper on the US Dance Club Songs. In 2005, Stone began recording what as expected to become her fifth regular album, but to save costs J Records asked her to transfer her new material, including the previously unreleased single &quot;I Wasn&#x27;t Kidding&quot;, to her first compilation album &quot;Stone Hits: The Very Best of Angie Stone&quot;, compromising songs from her first three albums. After five years with the company, Stone subsequently asked for and received an unconditional release from the label at the end of 2005.

===2006–2014: &quot;The Art of Love and War&quot; and subsequent releases===

In 2006, Stone appeared on the VH1&#x27;s reality television series &quot;Celebrity Fit Club&quot; for the fourth season, which began on August 6, 2006. While on the show, she lost eighteen pounds, the second lowest loss in the history of the show. The same year, Stone signed to the reworked Stax Records. Her fourth studio album &quot;The Art of Love &amp; War&quot;, a reference to her experiences in her final days at J Records, where it had become expected that she would help develop new talent, was released on October 15, 2007. The album debuted at number eleven on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling 45,000 copies in its first week, becoming Stone&#x27;s highest-charting album to date, as well as her first and only album to date to top the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. Lead single &quot;Baby&quot;, a duet with Betty Wright, became her second number-one hit on the US Adult R&amp;B Songs and earned Stone her third nomination at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards.

Stone&#x27;s second effort with Stax Records, her fifth studio album &quot;Unexpected&quot;, was released in November 2009. With its title partly referencing Stone&#x27;s sudden and devastating loss of her father who unexpectedly died in the midst of her recording sessions for the album, it marked a slight move away from Stone&#x27;s signature sound in favor of more upbeat R&amp;B and funk influences. A commercial failure, the album debuted and peaked at number 133 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and failed to chart elsewhere. &quot;I Ain&#x27;t Hearin&#x27; U&quot;, the album&#x27;s lead single reached number 14 on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Adult R&amp;B Songs. In 2009, Stone had a minor role as a strip-club owner in Rockmond Dunbar&#x27;s comedy drama &quot;Pastor Brown&quot;. Also that year, she sang &quot;Wade in the Water&quot; in the civil rights documentary &quot;Soundtrack for a Revolution&quot; (2009). In 2010, Stone then played the head matron of an all-girls school in the film, &quot;School Gyrls&quot; (2010), directed by Nick Cannon, which featured many Def Jam artists.

In May 2011, along with NeNe Leakes, Stone co-starred in the play &quot;Loving Him is Killing Me&quot; that was performed in Washington, DC, Miami, and Philadelphia. The play was written by Theo London and also starred Tyson Beckford and Christopher Williams. In 2012, Stone signed to Saguaro Road Records, an in-house music recording label of Time-Life, and released &quot;Rich Girl&quot; September 25, 2012. actor Malcolm-Jamal Warner contributed a poetry-slam-style spoken-word interlude to the record. Stone and Brian McKnight, who starred together in &quot;Chicago&quot; on Broadway, toured nationally in a production of Hinton Battle&#x27;s &quot;Love Lies&quot;, which started with an engagement at the Warner Theatre in Washington, D.C. in April 2013. The cast also included Crystal Aikin and Elise Neal. Also in 2013, Stone appeared on season two of TVOne&#x27;s &quot;R&amp;B Divas&quot;. Stone&#x27;s role was that of a mentor and life coach.

===2015–present: &quot;Dream&quot; and &quot;Full Circle&quot;===
In November 2015, Stone released her seventh studio album &quot;Dream&quot; on Shanachie Entertainment in collaboration with TopNotch Music and Conjunction Entertainment. Producer Walter Millsap III and Stone co-wrote the majority of the album with a core group that also included former The Clutch members Candice Nelson, Balewa Muhammad and producer Hallway Productionz. The album received positive reviews from critics who called the record &quot;another solid and empowering effort,&quot; and debuted at number three at Top Hip-Hop/R&amp;B Albums chart, with approximately 9,000 copies sold in its opening week.

The album&#x27;s first single, &quot;2 Bad Habits&quot; became a minor hit on the Adult R&amp;B Songs chart. Following another label change, Stone released the cover album &quot;Covered in Soul&quot; through Goldenlane Records, comprising renditions of popular Phil Collins, Hot Chocolate, and Neil Diamond songs. Preceded by the single &quot;These Eyes&quot;, a cover of the same-titled The Guess Who song, it failed to chart.

In July 2019, Stone released her ninth studio album &quot;Full Circle&quot;, on Conjunction Entertainment and Cleopatra Records. The album features the lead single &quot;Dinosaur&quot;, produced by Walter Millsap III &amp; Hallway Productionz.

In June 2024, Stone was inducted into the Women Songwriters Hall of Fame.

==Personal life==
Stone has two children. Stone&#x27;s daughter, Diamond, was born in 1984 and is from her marriage to Rodney Stone, also known as Lil&#x27; Rodney C!, from the hip-hop group Funky Four Plus One. Diamond contributed background vocals to Stone&#x27;s 2007 song &quot;Baby&quot;. Diamond gave birth to Stone&#x27;s grandson in 2008 and another grandchild in July 2012.

During the 1990s, Stone was in a relationship with neo soul singer D&#x27;Angelo. They have a son named Michael D&#x27;Angelo Archer II. He was born in 1998.

Stone lives in Atlanta, Georgia with her son, Michael and her daughter, Diamond.

In March 2015, it was reported that Stone had been arrested for assaulting her 30-year-old daughter.

In 1999, Stone was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes and, along with comedian-actor Anthony Anderson, was part of the F.A.C.E Diabetes (Fearless African-Americans Connected and Empowered) program sponsored by Eli Lilly and Company, which helps African Americans understand their risk for diabetes and how to control it. Stone said that both her mother and her mother&#x27;s sister were diabetic.

Stone is an honorary member of Zeta Phi Beta sorority. She was inducted in July 2024 at the sorority&#x27;s Boulé in Indianapolis, Indiana.

==Discography==
Studio albums
* &quot;Black Diamond&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Mahogany Soul&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Stone Love&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The Art of Love &amp; War&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Unexpected&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Rich Girl&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Dream&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Covered in Soul&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Full Circle&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Love Language&quot; (2023)

==Filmography==
===Films===
===Television===
===Theatre===
==Awards and nominations==

===Wins===
* 2000: Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards: Best R&amp;B/Soul Single, Solo for &quot;No More Rain (In This Cloud)&quot;
* 2000: Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards: Best R&amp;B/Soul or Rap New Artist, Solo
* 2004: Edison Award for &quot;Stone Love&quot;

===Nominations===
* 2003 Grammy Awards: Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for &quot;More Than a Woman&quot; (with Joe)
* 2004 Grammy Awards: Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance for &quot;U-Haul&quot;
* 2008 Grammy Awards: Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for &quot;Baby&quot; (with Betty Wright)
* 2008: BET Awards: BET J Award
* 2008: BET J Virtual Awards: Album of the Year for &quot;The Art of Love &amp; War&quot;

==See also==
* Honorific nicknames in popular music

==References==
==External links==
*
*Angie Stone 2016 Interview at Soulinterviews.com </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q241660" start="0" end="20" title="Angie Stone" label="Angela Laverne Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q241660" start="71" end="82" title="Angie Stone" label="Angie Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763337" start="214" end="226" title="the Sequence" label="the Sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q664167" start="326" end="340" title="Arista Records" label="Arista Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035151" start="379" end="392" title="Black Diamond (Angie Stone album)" label="Black Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="448" end="489" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045404" start="526" end="554" title="No More Rain (In This Cloud)" label="No More Rain (In This Cloud)"/>
<link wikidata="Q121698" start="586" end="595" title="J Records" label="J Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951138" start="634" end="647" title="Mahogany Soul" label="Mahogany Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053193" start="697" end="724" title="Wish I Didn&amp;#x27;t Miss You" label="Wish I Didn&amp;#x27;t Miss You"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050200" start="757" end="767" title="Stone Love" label="Stone Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951913" start="791" end="816" title="The Art of Love &amp;amp; War" label="The Art of Love &amp;amp; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="890" end="916" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131279" start="1018" end="1031" title="The Hot Chick" label="The Hot Chick"/>
<link wikidata="Q656285" start="1129" end="1136" title="Chicago (musical)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="1268" end="1271" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057731" start="1280" end="1298" title="Celebrity Fit Club" label="Celebrity Fit Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503321" start="1309" end="1315" title="TV One (U.S. TV network)" label="TV One"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1329" end="1342" title="R&amp;amp;B Divas: Atlanta" label="R&amp;amp;B Divas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623056" start="1375" end="1399" title="The Fighting Temptations" label="The Fighting Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143030" start="1420" end="1432" title="Pastor Brown" label="Pastor Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248845" start="1456" end="1468" title="School Gyrls" label="School Gyrls"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1519" end="1531" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q959013" start="1550" end="1580" title="Soul Train Music Awards" label="Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q131178548" start="1697" end="1709" title="Damon Little" label="Damon Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="1765" end="1774" title="Billboard charts" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="1838" end="1846" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="1888" end="1900" title="gospel music" label="gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764402" start="2095" end="2109" title="Singing Angels" label="Singing Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763337" start="2240" end="2252" title="The Sequence" label="The Sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386070" start="2417" end="2435" title="Sugar Hill Records (bluegrass label)" label="Sugar Hill Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346186" start="2466" end="2481" title="Sylvia Robinson" label="Sylvia Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="2524" end="2538" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509236" start="2599" end="2610" title="Funk You Up" label="Funk You Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="2652" end="2669" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Top Black Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966988" start="2837" end="2848" title="Spoonie Gee" label="Spoonie Gee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569035" start="3257" end="3266" title="Mantronix" label="Mantronix"/>
<link wikidata="Q180224" start="3552" end="3565" title="Lenny Kravitz" label="Lenny Kravitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365614" start="3713" end="3724" title="EMI Music Japan" label="Toshiba EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420775" start="3816" end="3833" title="Expansion Records" label="Expansion Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q933598" start="3967" end="3980" title="D&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="D&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q779719" start="4019" end="4030" title="Brown Sugar (D&amp;#x27;Angelo album)" label="Brown Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748045" start="4054" end="4060" title="Voodoo (D&amp;#x27;Angelo album)" label="Voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180224" start="4174" end="4187" title="Lenny Kravitz" label="Lenny Kravitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q245405" start="4221" end="4222" title="5 (Lenny Kravitz album)" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q664167" start="4256" end="4270" title="Arista Records" label="Arista Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173812" start="4292" end="4302" title="Peter Edge" label="Peter Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101938" start="4331" end="4342" title="Clive Davis" label="Clive Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035151" start="4468" end="4481" title="Black Diamond (Angie Stone album)" label="Black Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="4672" end="4698" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="4774" end="4815" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="4831" end="4860" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087026" start="4883" end="4902" title="Adult R&amp;amp;B Songs" label="Adult R&amp;amp;B Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045404" start="4924" end="4952" title="No More Rain (In This Cloud)" label="No More Rain (In This Cloud)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597836" start="5007" end="5035" title="2000 Soul Train Music Awards" label="2000 Soul Train Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101938" start="5095" end="5106" title="Clive Davis" label="Clive Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q121698" start="5122" end="5131" title="J Records" label="J Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="5185" end="5188" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="5189" end="5195" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526781" start="5209" end="5220" title="Girlfriends (2000 TV series)" label="Girlfriends"/>
<link wikidata="Q534371" start="5237" end="5254" title="Tracee Ellis Ross" label="Tracee Ellis Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951138" start="5392" end="5405" title="Mahogany Soul" label="Mahogany Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047570" start="5532" end="5549" title="Carvin &amp;amp; Ivan" label="Carvin &amp;amp; Ivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337779" start="5551" end="5565" title="Raphael Saadiq" label="Raphael Saadiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q240523" start="5567" end="5578" title="Swizz Beatz" label="Swizz Beatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="5580" end="5591" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="5596" end="5599" title="Eve (rapper)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q658870" start="5773" end="5793" title="Ultratop" label="Flemish Album Charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053193" start="5879" end="5906" title="Wish I Didn&amp;#x27;t Miss You" label="Wish I Didn&amp;#x27;t Miss You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="6080" end="6096" title="Dance Club Songs" label="Dance Club Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55517360" start="6104" end="6119" title="More Than a Woman (Angie Stone song)" label="More Than Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077266" start="6146" end="6149" title="Joe (singer)" label="Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="6174" end="6186" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113378" start="6205" end="6259" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542326" start="6276" end="6289" title="45th Annual Grammy Awards" label="45th ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131279" start="6423" end="6436" title="The Hot Chick" label="The Hot Chick"/>
<link wikidata="Q192217" start="6453" end="6466" title="Rob Schneider" label="Rob Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q524711" start="6682" end="6695" title="Jonathan Lynn" label="Jonathan Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623056" start="6730" end="6754" title="The Fighting Temptations" label="The Fighting Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q136209" start="6771" end="6788" title="Cuba Gooding, Jr." label="Cuba Gooding, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="6793" end="6800" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q737445" start="6947" end="6959" title="Eddie Levert" label="Eddie Levert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050200" start="7001" end="7011" title="Stone Love" label="Stone Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970853" start="7079" end="7094" title="Warryn Campbell" label="Warryn Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q960935" start="7096" end="7105" title="Jazze Pha" label="Jazze Pha"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="7110" end="7123" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="7250" end="7275" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038118" start="7450" end="7466" title="I Wanna Thank Ya" label="I Wanna Thank Ya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="7483" end="7493" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="7568" end="7584" title="Dance Club Songs" label="Dance Club Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038062" start="7786" end="7807" title="I Wasn&amp;#x27;t Kidding" label="I Wasn&amp;#x27;t Kidding"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7852" end="7892" title="Stone Hits: The Very Best of Angie Stone" label="Stone Hits: The Very Best of Angie Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="8195" end="8198" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8238" end="8256" title="Celebrity Fit Club (US TV series)#Season 4 - 2006" label="Celebrity Fit Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546001" start="8457" end="8469" title="Stax Records" label="Stax Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951913" start="8501" end="8526" title="The Art of Love &amp;amp; War" label="The Art of Love &amp;amp; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="8922" end="8948" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016643" start="8974" end="8978" title="Baby (Angie Stone song)" label="Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q547181" start="8998" end="9010" title="Betty Wright" label="Betty Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518357" start="9120" end="9145" title="50th Annual Grammy Awards" label="50th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052380" start="9223" end="9233" title="Unexpected (Angie Stone album)" label="Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q62587182" start="9691" end="9718" title="I Ain&amp;#x27;t Hearin&amp;#x27; U" label="I Ain&amp;#x27;t Hearin&amp;#x27; U"/>
<link wikidata="Q314508" start="9878" end="9893" title="Rockmond Dunbar" label="Rockmond Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143030" start="9920" end="9932" title="Pastor Brown" label="Pastor Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017638" start="9971" end="9988" title="Wade in the Water" label="Wade in the Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564989" start="10033" end="10060" title="Soundtrack for a Revolution" label="Soundtrack for a Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248845" start="10160" end="10172" title="School Gyrls (film)" label="School Gyrls"/>
<link wikidata="Q348533" start="10199" end="10210" title="Nick Cannon" label="Nick Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="10232" end="10239" title="Def Jam Recordings" label="Def Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983877" start="10274" end="10285" title="NeNe Leakes" label="NeNe Leakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q738212" start="10469" end="10483" title="Tyson Beckford" label="Tyson Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113434" start="10488" end="10508" title="Christopher Williams (singer)" label="Christopher Williams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10535" end="10555" title="Time–Life#Saguaro Road Records" label="Saguaro Road Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806643" start="10594" end="10603" title="Time-Life" label="Time-Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323272" start="10624" end="10633" title="Rich Girl (album)" label="Rich Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349215" start="10666" end="10686" title="Malcolm-Jamal Warner" label="Malcolm-Jamal Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153370" start="10766" end="10780" title="Brian McKnight" label="Brian McKnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095462" start="10812" end="10819" title="Chicago (play)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q711711" start="10876" end="10889" title="Hinton Battle" label="Hinton Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969769" start="10960" end="10974" title="Warner Theatre (Washington, D.C.)" label="Warner Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191108" start="11033" end="11046" title="Crystal Aikin" label="Crystal Aikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319793" start="11051" end="11061" title="Elise Neal" label="Elise Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503321" start="11109" end="11114" title="TV One (US TV network)" label="TVOne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273213" start="11128" end="11141" title="R&amp;amp;B Divas (TV series)" label="R&amp;amp;B Divas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21427366" start="11335" end="11340" title="Dream (Angie Stone album)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503081" start="11350" end="11373" title="Shanachie Entertainment" label="Shanachie Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688849" start="11396" end="11410" title="TopNotch" label="TopNotch Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653037" start="11559" end="11569" title="The Clutch" label="The Clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643236" start="11623" end="11642" title="Hallway Productionz" label="Hallway Productionz"/>
<link wikidata="Q26252734" start="12066" end="12081" title="Covered in Soul" label="Covered in Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397901" start="12096" end="12114" title="Goldenlane Records" label="Goldenlane Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="12149" end="12161" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368881" start="12163" end="12176" title="Hot Chocolate (band)" label="Hot Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q294531" start="12182" end="12194" title="Neil Diamond" label="Neil Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031919" start="12231" end="12241" title="These Eyes" label="These Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141238" start="12276" end="12289" title="The Guess Who" label="The Guess Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086292" start="12375" end="12386" title="Full Circle (Angie Stone album)" label="Full Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397901" start="12427" end="12444" title="Cleopatra Records" label="Cleopatra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643236" start="12540" end="12559" title="Hallway Productionz" label="Hallway Productionz"/>
<link wikidata="Q126009074" start="12604" end="12634" title="Women Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Women Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="12814" end="12821" title="hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527845" start="12828" end="12847" title="Funky Four Plus One" label="Funky Four Plus One"/>
<link wikidata="Q268253" start="13072" end="13080" title="neo soul" label="neo soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q933598" start="13088" end="13101" title="D&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="D&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="13195" end="13202" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="13398" end="13413" title="Type 2 diabetes" label="Type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q313918" start="13445" end="13461" title="Anthony Anderson" label="Anthony Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q632240" start="13570" end="13591" title="Eli Lilly and Company" label="Eli Lilly and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069719" start="13789" end="13802" title="Zeta Phi Beta" label="Zeta Phi Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="13875" end="13896" title="Indianapolis, Indiana" label="Indianapolis, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035151" start="13937" end="13950" title="Black Diamond (Angie Stone album)" label="Black Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951138" start="13972" end="13985" title="Mahogany Soul" label="Mahogany Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050200" start="14007" end="14017" title="Stone Love" label="Stone Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951913" start="14039" end="14064" title="The Art of Love &amp;amp; War" label="The Art of Love &amp;amp; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052380" start="14086" end="14096" title="Unexpected (Angie Stone album)" label="Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323272" start="14118" end="14127" title="Rich Girl (album)" label="Rich Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q21427366" start="14149" end="14154" title="Dream (Angie Stone album)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q26252734" start="14176" end="14191" title="Covered in Soul" label="Covered in Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086292" start="14213" end="14224" title="Full Circle (Angie Stone album)" label="Full Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q118876016" start="14246" end="14259" title="Love Language (Angie Stone album)" label="Love Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q959013" start="14380" end="14410" title="Soul Train Music Awards" label="Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284835" start="14578" end="14590" title="Edison Award" label="Edison Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542326" start="14639" end="14657" title="45th Grammy Awards" label="2003 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113378" start="14659" end="14713" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077266" start="14754" end="14757" title="Joe (singer)" label="Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542330" start="14761" end="14779" title="46th Grammy Awards" label="2004 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934625" start="14781" end="14818" title="Grammy Award for Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance" label="Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518357" start="14844" end="14862" title="50th Grammy Awards" label="2008 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q547181" start="14946" end="14958" title="Betty Wright" label="Betty Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q795848" start="14968" end="14978" title="BET Awards" label="BET Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876998" start="15000" end="15005" title="BET Her" label="BET J"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375931" start="15098" end="15134" title="Honorific nicknames in popular music" label="Honorific nicknames in popular music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262165" wikidata="Q536102" url="?curid=1262165" title="Emmanuel d'Astier de La Vigerie">
<text>Emmanuel d&#x27;Astier de La Vigerie (6 January 190012 June 1969) was a French journalist, politician and member of the French Resistance.

==Biography==
Born in Paris, he attended the Naval Academy but resigned from the French Navy in 1923. He became a journalist and a poet and was involved with the integralist and monarchist journal &quot;Action Française&quot;, but turned towards the Left after the Spanish Civil War (1936–39).

When the Second World War broke out, d&#x27;Astier re-enlisted into the French Navy and became the head of naval intelligence. However, after the fall of France and the proclamation of Vichy France, he was dismissed for his political dossier.

In Clermont-Ferrand, d&#x27;Astier formed the Resistant group &quot;La Dernière Colonne&quot;, later known as Libération-sud, with Raymond Aubrac, Lucie Aubrac and Jean Cavaillès. During 1941, the group carried out two sabotage attacks at train stations in Perpignan and Cannes. In February, they organised the distribution of 10,000 propaganda flyers, but one of the distributors was caught by the police, leading to the arrest of d&#x27;Astier&#x27;s niece and uncle. The group decided to cease activities. After a few months&#x27; hiatus, they began to work on an underground newspaper, &quot;Libération&quot;. The first edition was put together with the help of the typographers from a local newspaper and printed on paper supplied by local trade-unionists. 10,000 copies were produced in July 1941.

In 1942 d&#x27;Astier met with Jean Moulin to discuss the unification of the Resistance and eventually joined forces into the &quot;Conseil National de la Résistance&quot; (CNR, National Council of Resistance). In 1943 he met Charles de Gaulle in Algiers and joined his Free French Forces government-in-exile as a Commissioner to the Interior.

While in London in 1943, he wrote the lyrics for the song &quot;La Complainte du partisan&quot; with Anna Marly, who wrote the music. In English, it is known as &quot;The Partisan&quot; and was recorded by Leonard Cohen, Joan Baez, Buffy Saint Marie and many others.

After the Liberation, d&#x27;Astier became Minister of Interior in the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF). He continued to publish &quot;Libération&quot; and wrote books based on his experiences. He ran as an ally of the French Communist Party on the &quot;Union républicaine et résistante&quot; list in the November 1946 French legislative elections, and won a seat in the National Assembly for Ille-et-Vilaine. He was later among the founders of the Union progressiste. In 1958 he received the Lenin Peace Prize. D&#x27;Astier was one of the founders of the Stockholm Committee; he denounced the Soviet Union leadership under Nikita Khrushchev after the crushing of the Hungarian uprising, and broke ties with communists.

His brother, Henri d&#x27;Astier de la Vigerie, was from the far right, and, initially a member of the &quot;Action Française&quot;, may even have been involved with the &quot;Cagoule&quot; terrorist group. Ultimately, Henri d&#x27;Astier also took part in the Résistance.

Emmanuel d&#x27;Astier died in Paris in 1969. His wife Liubov was the second spouse of French politician Gaston Bergery (divorced in 1928) and the daughter of Bolshevik Leonid Krasin. They had three sons Jean-François, Christophe and Jérôme.

Family friend Joan Baez wrote and recorded a song, &quot;Luba the Baroness&quot;, about learning of the death of the oldest son, Jean-François.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q536102" start="0" end="36" title="Emmanuel d&amp;#x27;Astier de La Vigerie" label="Emmanuel d&amp;#x27;Astier de La Vigerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="79" end="89" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="91" end="101" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="120" end="137" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="221" end="232" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q592832" start="302" end="313" title="Integralism" label="integralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="343" end="359" title="Action Française" label="Action Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137232" start="390" end="394" title="History of the Left in France" label="Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="405" end="422" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="542" end="560" title="naval intelligence" label="naval intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="581" end="595" title="Battle of France" label="fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="620" end="632" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q42168" start="682" end="698" title="Clermont-Ferrand" label="Clermont-Ferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="725" end="740" title="French Resistance" label="Resistant group"/>
<link wikidata="Q829453" start="789" end="803" title="Libération-sud" label="Libération-sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q567529" start="810" end="824" title="Raymond Aubrac" label="Raymond Aubrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q437091" start="826" end="838" title="Lucie Aubrac" label="Lucie Aubrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q515633" start="843" end="857" title="Jean Cavaillès" label="Jean Cavaillès"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730" start="936" end="945" title="Perpignan" label="Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="950" end="956" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q632" start="1515" end="1526" title="Jean Moulin" label="Jean Moulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="1616" end="1649" title="Conseil National de la Résistance" label="Conseil National de la Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="1710" end="1727" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="1731" end="1738" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="1754" end="1772" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q678116" start="1773" end="1792" title="government-in-exile" label="government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207674" start="1893" end="1918" title="La Complainte du partisan" label="La Complainte du partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q464853" start="1930" end="1940" title="Anna Marly" label="Anna Marly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207674" start="1996" end="2008" title="The Partisan" label="The Partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="2035" end="2048" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="2050" end="2059" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q467027" start="2061" end="2078" title="Buffy Saint Marie" label="Buffy Saint Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518496" start="2140" end="2160" title="Minister of Interior (France)" label="Minister of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q783684" start="2168" end="2213" title="Provisional Government of the French Republic" label="Provisional Government of the French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="2336" end="2358" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080447" start="2423" end="2465" title="November 1946 French legislative elections" label="November 1946 French legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="2489" end="2506" title="French National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12549" start="2511" end="2526" title="Ille-et-Vilaine" label="Ille-et-Vilaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q982380" start="2567" end="2585" title="Union progressiste" label="Union progressiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q308907" start="2611" end="2628" title="Lenin Peace Prize" label="Lenin Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2713" end="2725" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="2743" end="2760" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="2787" end="2805" title="1956 Hungarian Revolution" label="Hungarian uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132207" start="2853" end="2886" title="Henri d&amp;#x27;Astier de la Vigerie" label="Henri d&amp;#x27;Astier de la Vigerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="2949" end="2965" title="Action Française" label="Action Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q83687" start="3016" end="3023" title="La Cagoule" label="Cagoule"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="3101" end="3111" title="Résistance" label="Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366460" start="3219" end="3233" title="Gaston Bergery" label="Gaston Bergery"/>
<link wikidata="Q373421" start="3283" end="3296" title="Leonid Krasin" label="Leonid Krasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="3371" end="3380" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262166" wikidata="Q722394" url="?curid=1262166" title="Aschenbrödel">
<text>Aschenbrödel (&quot;Cinderella&quot;) is a ballet written by Johann Strauss II. He had written all the principal parts of the ballet, and was intending to fill in the orchestration as time permitted. However, Strauss died in 1899, and it was finished by composer Josef Bayer in 1900.

==History==
The idea for Strauss to write a ballet came from Rudolf Lothar, editor of the influential magazine &quot;Die Waage&quot; (The Weighing Scales). This occurred after the music and dance critic Eduard Hanslick, having been encouraged by Strauss&#x27; impressive act 3 ballet score in his only opera, &quot;Ritter Pázmán&quot;, suggested that Strauss should write a full-score ballet. On 5 March 1898, a contest was organised in order to decide a proper scenario for Strauss&#x27; new ballet. The panel of judges consists of Hanslick; Gustav Mahler, the controversial conductor and composer who at the time also directed the Vienna Court Opera (including its ballet company); patron Nikolaus Dumba; Strauss himself, and Rudolf Lothar.

Finally, it was decided (after receiving over 700 entries) that the winner was a certain A. Kollmann from Salzburg. The prize money was even effected through a lawyer representative and there were even rumors circulated that Kollmann was a pseudonym and that he may even be a member of the royalty in Emperor Franz Josef&#x27;s court.

Strauss was not particularly impressed with the scenario set in a modern department store, although he set to work almost immediately. He worked at his pace and refused to be rushed, and by the winter of 1898, he had completed act 1 and was able to perform small parts of the orchestral version on the piano. By the time Strauss died in Vienna on 3 June 1899, the work lay unfinished, although sketches of the entire work were already done.

Josef Bayer completed the work in 1900 and presented the score to Gustav Mahler for future production at the Vienna Court Opera. Mahler refused to appraise the score, doubting the originality of the work, as Bayer himself was also a ballet composer, and when shown the original score in Strauss&#x27; writing, he claimed that he could not care for the music. Many persistent rumors suggested that he was not interested in ballet at all and only concentrated on full-scale opera works. This has been disputed by the fact that Mahler himself was eager to obtain the rights to stage Tchaikovsky&#x27;s &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot; ballet and that due to the lack of budget, he was not able to stage &quot;Aschenbrödel&quot; as envisioned in the scenario.

In 1901, Berlin&#x27;s Royal Opera took interest in the score, with its directors captivated by the music, although they disapproved of the scenario. Their choreographer, Emil Graeb, suggested a change to the scenario and the task fell to Austrian writer Henrich Regel. The work&#x27;s premiere on 2 May 1901 was a success, although reservations were made by Strauss&#x27; biographer, Ignaz Schnitzer, who commented that Bayer&#x27;s orchestration fell short of Vienna&#x27;s light-heartedness and the now-revised scenario was too &quot;puritanical&quot;.

Mahler left the Vienna Court Opera at the end of the 1907 season. The new director, Felix Weingartner, who was impressed with the score, eagerly sought it out and conducted the orchestra himself at the premiere in Vienna on 4 October 1908. The ballet was regularly performed for seven years, achieving forty-six performances until the outbreak of World War I. Ironically, Mahler proved to be more accurate in his judgment as to the cost of the production, as the Viennese performances were expensive, and it was neglected until 1975 when the ballet was resurrected.

== Summary of plot ==

The action takes place in a department store, The Four Seasons. The leading characters are Gustav, owner of the store, and Franz, his younger brother and rival for the love of Grete (Cinderella), who works in the women&#x27;s fashions department. Grete&#x27;s stepmother, Mme. Leontine, is the department&#x27;s supervisor. She has, of course, two daughters who lord it over Grete and do not seem to work though they are often in the store. Another key character, Piccolo, Gustav&#x27;s valet, is a travesty role. As mentioned, the ballerina (the part is referred to as &quot;Floral&quot;) appears only in the ballroom (act 2) for the floral divertissement.

Typically, the printed program for Cinderella lists all the dances. From this inventory one gets an inkling how Viennese ballets at the time differed from those of Saint Petersburg, which we know at least a little. There are four dances in act 1. The first, called &quot;Franz&#x27;s Self-portrait&quot;, introduces the ballet&#x27;s junior male lead (probably demicaractère) to the female cast of characters and to the audience. In this solo, Franz (Ferdinand Rathner) proclaims who he is and what he does. One of the things he masters is driving an automobile—dancemiming this topic seems very Léonide Massine. The stepsisters (danced by real sisters, Lydia and Olga Berger) have a Promenade Adventure and Piccolo (Luise Wopalenski) does a &quot;Love Letter Delivery&quot; to Grete (Marie Kohler) who, with her trained birds, dances the &quot;Waltz of the Doves&quot;.

Apparently there are no ensemble dances in act 1, though there are several in act 2, at the party thrown by Gustav. First comes the &quot;Marveilleusen Quadrille&quot; for Franz and the female corps. A pas de trois, &quot;Masked Game&quot;, is for the stepsisters and Gustav (Karl Godlewski, one of &#x27;s deputy choreographers). Grete dances a solo named the &quot;Blue Domino&quot; after the costume she wears (probably as covering as she arrives at the party). The &quot;Confections Waltz&quot; (which may have something to do with the refreshments being served) features nine female soloists and the female corps; this is followed by a &quot;Salon Quadrille&quot; for four couples, a mazurka for the stepsisters, and Grete&#x27;s big solo, the &quot;Cinderella Waltz&quot;. The ballerina (Cäcilie Cerri, Vienna&#x27;s last Italian prima, was &quot;Flora&quot;) enters in a &quot;Welcome with Flowers&quot;, which leads into the biggest dance number, the &quot;Flowertorch Polonaise&quot; with &quot;Flora,&quot; Grete, thirteen female soloists, Gustav, four male soloists, the adult female corps and the group of female students.

An &quot;Amoretten Polka&quot; is the first dance in act 3, followed by the &quot;Bridal-Treasure Waltz&quot; for Grete, a female soloist, Piccolo, Gustav, and the female students. The next dance, &quot;Old Vienna Porcelain&quot;, for Piccolo plus four solo women and four solo men, may represent a wedding present, and the final &quot;Jewels Waltz&quot; for Piccolo, nine female soloists and the female corps, is perhaps, the setting for the bridegroom&#x27;s gift to his bride.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="43" end="49" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="61" end="78" title="Johann Strauss II" label="Johann Strauss II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="167" end="180" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q668930" start="263" end="274" title="Josef Bayer" label="Josef Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215158" start="346" end="359" title="Rudolf Lothar" label="Rudolf Lothar"/>
<link wikidata="Q84246" start="488" end="503" title="Eduard Hanslick" label="Eduard Hanslick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632179" start="600" end="613" title="Ritter Pázmán" label="Ritter Pázmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="828" end="841" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="918" end="936" title="Vienna Court Opera" label="Vienna Court Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q113818" start="976" end="990" title="Nikolaus Dumba" label="Nikolaus Dumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="1269" end="1278" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="1338" end="1349" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Josef"/>
<link wikidata="Q668930" start="1807" end="1818" title="Josef Bayer" label="Josef Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="1873" end="1886" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="1916" end="1934" title="Vienna Court Opera" label="Vienna Court Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="2279" end="2284" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="2387" end="2398" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="2412" end="2431" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="The Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q312576" start="2572" end="2597" title="Berlin State Opera" label="Berlin&amp;#x27;s Royal Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="2719" end="2732" title="choreographer" label="choreographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525849" start="2948" end="2963" title="Ignaz Schnitzer" label="Ignaz Schnitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q316920" start="3204" end="3221" title="Felix Weingartner" label="Felix Weingartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3467" end="3478" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022123" start="4730" end="4743" title="Demi-soloist" label="demicaractère"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="4965" end="4980" title="Léonide Massine" label="Léonide Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492239" start="5443" end="5455" title="pas de trois" label="pas de trois"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262167" wikidata="Q1728834" url="?curid=1262167" title="Catacombe dei Cappuccini">
<text>The Capuchin Catacombs of Palermo (also Catacombe dei Cappuccini or Catacombs of the Capuchins) are burial catacombs in Palermo, Sicily, southern Italy. Today they provide a somewhat macabre tourist attraction as well as an extraordinary historical record.

==Historical background==
Palermo&#x27;s Capuchin monastery outgrew its original cemetery in the 16th century and monks began to excavate crypts below it. In 1599 they mummified one of their number, the recently-deceased brother Silvestro of Gubbio, and placed him in the catacombs.

Bodies were dehydrated on racks of ceramic pipes in the catacombs and sometimes later washed with vinegar. Some bodies were embalmed and others were enclosed in sealed glass cabinets. Friars were preserved with their everyday clothing and sometimes with ropes they had worn in penance.

Initially the catacombs were intended only for deceased friars. However, in later centuries it became a status symbol to be entombed in the Capuchin catacombs. In their wills, local luminaries would ask to be preserved in certain clothes, or even have their clothes changed at regular intervals. Priests wore their clerical vestments, while others were clothed according to contemporary fashion. Relatives would visit to pray for the deceased and to maintain the body in presentable condition.

The catacombs were maintained through donations from the relatives of the deceased. Each new body was placed in a temporary niche and later placed into a more permanent location. So long as contributions continued, the body remained in its proper place but if relatives stopped sending money, the body was put aside on a shelf until they resumed payments.

== Interments ==

In 1871 Brother Riccardo was the last friar interred in the catacombs, but other famous people were interred after that. The catacombs were officially closed in 1880 but tourists continued to visit. The last burials are from the 1920s and 1930s. Among the final interments was Rosalia Lombardo, then nearly two years old, whose body remains remarkably intact, preserved with a procedure performed by Professor Alfredo Salafia. His process included formalin to kill bacteria, alcohol to dry the body, glycerin to keep it from over drying, salicylic acid to kill fungi, and the most important ingredients, zinc salts (zinc sulfate and zinc chloride) to give the body rigidity. The formula is one part glycerin, one part formalin saturated with both zinc salts, and one part of an alcohol solution saturated with salicylic acid. The final burial was that of Giovanni Licata di Baucina, the count of Isnello, in 1939.

The catacombs contain about 8,000 corpses and 1,252 mummies (as stated by last census made by EURAC in 2011) that line the walls. The halls are divided by category: men, women, virgins, children, priests, monks, and professionals. Some bodies are better preserved than others. Some are set in poses; for example, two children are sitting together in a rocking chair. The coffins were accessible to the families of the deceased so that on certain days the family, including the deceased, could join their hands in prayer.

Famous people buried in the catacombs include:
* Filippo d&#x27;Austria, formerly Ayala, prince of Tunis and convert to Catholicism (1620)
* Giuseppe Grimau, president of the kingdom (1755)
* Vincenzo Natoli, judge (1770)
* Lorenzo Marabitti, sculptor (early 19th c.)
* Filippo Pennino, sculptor (1801)
* Giuseppe Velasco, painter (1827)
* Salvatore Manzella, surgeon (1835)
* Alexandre Michaud de Beauretour, Piedmontese general and military advisor (1841, floor tomb)
* Giulio Ascanio Enea, colonel and war committee member (1848)
* Giovanni Corrao, partisan (1863)
* Paolo Ragona, colonel of artillery (1863)
* Bishop Agostino Franco (1877), titular Bishop of Hermopolis
* Giovanni Paterniti, vice-consul of the United States (1911)
* Ernesto Salafia, fencing master (1914)
* Salvatore Auteri, opera composer (1924, tomb)
Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa is sometimes said to be interred the catacombs, but he is buried in the cemetery next to them.

== Scientific research ==

The Sicily Mummy Project was created in 2007 to study the mummies and to create profiles on those who were mummified. The project is led by anthropologist Dario Piombino-Mascali of the Department of Cultural Heritage and Sicilian Identity in Palermo, and is backed by the European Academy of Bozen/Bolzano The mummies are X-Rayed and CT scanned to collect information about them, along with other anthropological and paleopathological techniques to confirm their age and gender. Piombino-Mascali credits the program with re-opening discussion about death in Sicily;

Forensic biologist Mark Benecke identified several insects that shed light on the mummification process. 

Recent scientific research has focused on the identities of the children in the Capuchin Catacombs.

== Tourism ==
The catacombs are open to the public. Photography inside is officially prohibited, which prominent signs make clear to visitors. However, some bodies have been shown on film in Francesco Rosi&#x27;s &quot;Cadaveri Eccellenti&quot; (&quot;Illustrious Corpses&quot;), and television programmes such as the Channel 4 series &quot;Coach Trip&quot;, BBC TV series &quot;The Human Body&quot; in 1998, &quot;Francesco&#x27;s Italy: Top to Toe&quot;, &quot;Ghosthunting With Paul O&#x27;Grady and Friends&quot; on ITV2 in 2008 and The Learning Channel in 2000. Iron grilles have been installed to prevent tourists tampering or posing with the corpses.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Capuchin Crypt, in Rome Italy
* Capela dos Ossos, in Évora, Portugal

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1728834" start="4" end="33" title="Catacombe dei Cappuccini" label="Capuchin Catacombs of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728834" start="40" end="64" title="Catacombe dei Cappuccini" label="Catacombe dei Cappuccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728834" start="68" end="94" title="Catacombe dei Cappuccini" label="Catacombs of the Capuchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q172896" start="107" end="115" title="catacomb" label="catacomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="120" end="127" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="129" end="135" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="146" end="151" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705215" start="183" end="190" title="macabre" label="macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="299" end="307" title="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin" label="Capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="308" end="317" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="339" end="347" title="cemetery" label="cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="396" end="401" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="487" end="506" title="Silvestro of Gubbio" label="Silvestro of Gubbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="640" end="647" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="666" end="674" title="embalming" label="embalmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="819" end="826" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q286587" start="1976" end="1992" title="Rosalia Lombardo" label="Rosalia Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q899441" start="2109" end="2124" title="Alfredo Salafia" label="Alfredo Salafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="2147" end="2155" title="Formaldehyde" label="formalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="2199" end="2207" title="Glycerol" label="glycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193572" start="2237" end="2251" title="salicylic acid" label="salicylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q204954" start="2315" end="2327" title="zinc sulfate" label="zinc sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q204714" start="2332" end="2345" title="zinc chloride" label="zinc chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q193572" start="2509" end="2523" title="salicylic acid" label="salicylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q496885" start="2595" end="2602" title="Isnello" label="Isnello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="3235" end="3240" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="3307" end="3318" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="the kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741624" start="3328" end="3343" title="Vincenzo Natoli" label="Vincenzo Natoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16853952" start="3406" end="3421" title="Filippo Pennino" label="Filippo Pennino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528704" start="3441" end="3457" title="Giuseppe Velasco" label="Giuseppe Velasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384819" start="3513" end="3544" title="Alexandre Michaud de Beauretour" label="Alexandre Michaud de Beauretour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="3546" end="3557" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q732908" start="3799" end="3809" title="Hermopolis" label="Hermopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16043777" start="3812" end="3830" title="Giovanni Paterniti" label="Giovanni Paterniti"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3851" end="3864" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="3891" end="3898" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945947" start="3915" end="3931" title="Salvatore Auteri-Manzocchi" label="Salvatore Auteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q213482" start="3961" end="3989" title="Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa" label="Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="4253" end="4267" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="4355" end="4362" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245390" start="4385" end="4418" title="Eurac Research" label="European Academy of Bozen/Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="4435" end="4442" title="X-ray" label="X-Rayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="4447" end="4454" title="CT scan" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q676092" start="4530" end="4547" title="Paleopathology" label="paleopathological"/>
<link wikidata="Q70307" start="4699" end="4711" title="Mark Benecke" label="Mark Benecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137590" start="5229" end="5239" title="Coach Trip" label="Coach Trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="5247" end="5253" title="BBC TV" label="BBC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954389" start="5267" end="5281" title="The Human Body (TV series)" label="The Human Body"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5303" end="5337" title="Francesco&amp;#x27;s Italy: Top to Toe" label="Francesco&amp;#x27;s Italy: Top to Toe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5351" end="5398" title="Ghosthunting With...#Paul O&amp;#x27;Grady and Friends" label="Ghosthunting With Paul O&amp;#x27;Grady and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715155" start="5408" end="5412" title="ITV2" label="ITV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q130866" start="5425" end="5445" title="The Learning Channel" label="The Learning Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037115" start="5578" end="5592" title="Capuchin Crypt" label="Capuchin Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561983" start="5610" end="5626" title="Capela dos Ossos" label="Capela dos Ossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q179948" start="5631" end="5636" title="Évora" label="Évora"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262168" wikidata="Q2502572" url="?curid=1262168" title="Practical shooting">
<text>Practical shooting, also known as dynamic shooting or action shooting, is a set of shooting sports in which the competitors try to unite the three principles of , power, and speed, by using a firearm of a certain minimum power factor to score as many points as possible during the shortest time (or sometimes within a set maximum time). While scoring systems vary between organizations, each measures the time in which the course is completed, with penalties for inaccurate shooting.

The courses are called &quot;stages&quot;, and are shot individually by the shooters. Usually the shooter must move and shoot from several positions, fire under or over obstacles and in other unfamiliar positions. There are no standard exercises or set arrangement of the targets, and the courses are often designed so that the shooter must be inventive, and therefore the solutions of exercises sometimes vary between shooters.

==International sanctioning bodies==
There are several international sanctioning bodies:
* The International Practical Shooting Confederation (IPSC) is the oldest and largest sanctioning body within practical shooting. IPSC Open Division is sometimes considered the &quot;Formula One&quot; of shooting sports, and is shot with handguns, rifles and shotguns. 
** The United States Practical Shooting Association (USPSA) is the U.S. regional affiliate of IPSC. Many of USPSA&#x27;s rules differ slightly from those used internationally.
** The Steel Challenge Shooting Association, founded as a separate discipline, was purchased and integrated by USPSA in 2007. In Steel Challenge matches, competitors shoot five strings of fire at a series of five steel plates of varying sizes at varied distances in an attempt to achieve the fastest time possible for knocking down the plates. The order of fire is dictated by a plate designated as the stop plate which must be shot last. The longest time is dropped and the remaining four times are averaged for a composite stage time.
* The International Defensive Pistol Association (IDPA) is a game based on the philosophy of using practical equipment to solve real world self-defense scenarios. Fundamental aspects include shooting from behind cover (when available) and a mandate on engaging targets immediately as they become visible. The sport was created to bring defensive tactics back as a component in addition to speed and accuracy.
* Cowboy Action Shooting is quite similar to IPSC-shooting, but with an Old West theme. There are multiple international sanctioning bodies, with Single Action Shooting Society being the oldest and largest. Firearms must be either original or reproduction designs correct for the 19th century, such as Colt single-action pistols and Winchester rifles. The competitors must also choose and go by a cowboy nickname, and are required to look the part by using cowboy and cowgirl garments in late 19th century period dress.
* Multigun, also called 2-Gun or 3-Gun depending on the weapons used, are shooting events with a combination of rifles, handguns and shotguns. While multi-gun has a lot in common with ordinary IPSC/USPSA matches, the biggest difference is that the shooter generally has to transition between the use of several different firearms in each stage. Among the largest annual multigun events in the USA are the USPSA Multigun Championship, the Rocky Mountain 3-Gun, the DPMS Tri-Gun Challenge, the Superstition Mountain Mystery 3-Gun, and the LaRue Tactical Multigun Championship.
* Glock Sport Shooting Foundation (GSSF) is a competition sponsored by Glock and limited to participants using Glock pistols.

==Origins==
Practical shooting evolved from experimentation with firearms for hunting and self-defense. The researchers of what were to become practical shooting were an international group of private individuals, law enforcement officers, and military people generally operating independently of each other, challenging the then-accepted standards of technique, training practices, and equipment. The work was, for the most part, conducted for their own purposes without official sanction. Even so, what they learned has had a great impact on police and military training forever.

Some consider the previous Olympic event 100 meter running deer as the first practical rifle shooting competition, which originated in Wimbledon, London in 1862. Other notable rifle speed shooting events are Stang shooting (&quot;stangskyting&quot;) which has been arranged since 1912, and Nordic field rapid shooting (called &quot;felthurtig&quot;, &quot;sekundfält&quot; and &quot;sekundskydning&quot; in Norway, Sweden and Denmark, respectively) which has been a part of the Nordic Fullbore Rifle Championship since 1953. Around 1900, efforts were done to develop more effective uses of handguns in combat shooting, mainly through experiments by two Britons, Captain William E. Fairbairn and Sergeant Eric A. Sykes. The first known attempts at developing practical shooting as a handgun sport were done in the U.S. before the Second World War, but the attempts resulted in little.

Shortly after the second world war a distinct combat shooting sport for handguns known as &quot;stridsskyting&quot; became popular in Norway. This form of shooting had few similarities with the practical pistol sport which would later emerge. During the 10 to 12 years of its existence, what today is known as field shooting gradually took over as the more popular form of pistol shooting in Norway, and the original &quot;stridsskyting&quot; was completely gone as a discipline in the beginning of the 1960s. &quot;Stridsskyting&quot; later also was used separately to describe the completely different sport of IPSC-style practical shooting during its infancy in Norway.

In the early 1950s, practical handgun competitions as we know them today emerged in the USA. Competitions begun with the &quot;leather slap&quot; quick draw events, which had grown out of America&#x27;s love affair with the TV westerns of that era. However, many wished for a forum that would more directly test the results of the experimentation in modern technique that had been going on at the Bear Valley Gunslingers at Big Bear Lake, California and other places. Competitions were set up to test what had been learned, and they soon grew into a distinct sport, requiring competitors to deal with constantly changing scenarios. The first public competition was at the Big Bear Lake in 1957. In 1969, the South-West-Pistol-League was formed by individual shooters and clubs from California, which to this day is one of the oldest clubs for practical shooting.

The first IPSC World Shoot was held in 1975 in Zurich, about two years before IPSC was formally founded. Ray Chapman from the U.S. became the first ever world class practical pistol champion. The next year, the 1976 IPSC Handgun World Shoot followed with Jan Foss from Norway taking gold. On 24 May 1976 the International Practical Shooting Confederation was formally founded at the Columbia conference in Columbia, Missouri, with representation in fourteen nations. Jeff Cooper was unanimously chosen as the first president. Between 1974 and 1979, &quot;stridsskytterligaen&quot; (literally the Combat Shooting League) had been the forerunner of IPSC shooting in Norway, until the Norwegian Association for Practical Shooting took over and was incorporated into IPSC in 1979.

Finland pioneered IPSC Rifle in Scandinavia in the beginning of the 1980s, and the discipline soon spread to Norway where the first competitions were held in Stavanger February 1984. In 1987 the first official Norwegian Rifle Championship was held, and the championship has been held annually since. South Africa has held IPSC Rifle and Shotgun matches since 1983, and IPSC multigun matches since 1984.

The United Kingdom Practical Shooting Association (UKPSA) was founded in 1977, and initially focused on practical handgun competitions. In the 1980s, practical shotgun competitions were held both by UKPSA as well as another organisation known as the Combat Shotgun Society. UKPSA also held IPSC practical rifle competitions, while the NRA UK has held a separate discipline known as NRA Practical Rifle competitions with courses usually including physical elements. Today, the NRA UK also holds Practical Shotgun competitions (PSG) alongside the IPSC Shotgun of UKPSA.

One of the first 3-Gun matches to be held in the United States was the Soldier of Fortune matches held in 1979 in Missouri, but these matches were neither associated with USPSA nor IPSC. The first USPSA Multigun Championship was held in 1990 at Pike-Adams Sportsmen&#x27;s Alliance (PASA) in Barry, Illinois, but USPSA did not take on multigun full-time until around 2000. In Finland multigun matches have been held since around 1992.

Australia held a Rifle and Shotgun Championship in September 1987, and the first IPSC European Shotgun Championship was held in October 1987 at the National Shooting Centre in Bisley, England, a couple of days before the seventh IPSC European Handgun Championship at the same shooting range.

In the beginning IPSC Shotgun and Rifle competitions were run using the IPSC Handgun Competition Rules with small adjustments. Adjustments were later formalized in supplementary rulebooks, e.g. UKPSA published a supplementary Rifle and Shotgun rulebook in 1989. Since 1996 IPSC Shotgun and Rifle rules have been published in standalone rulebooks separate from the IPSC Handgun rules.

===Organizations===
In 1976, an international group of enthusiasts, interested in what had become known as &quot;practical shooting&quot;, met in Columbia, Missouri. From that meeting came the International Practical Shooting Confederation (IPSC). In 1984, the United States Practical Shooting Association (USPSA) was incorporated as the US Region of IPSC. After many years of established IPSC competition, some shooters, including some of the original founders, became dissatisfied with IPSC, as more specialized equipment was allegedly required to remain competitive. The International Defensive Pistol Association (IDPA) was formed in 1996 with the aim of returning to the defensive pistol roots of practical shooting. Soon after this split, the USPSA devised a series of competition &quot;divisions&quot; with varying limits on type and modification of equipment, including a &quot;Production&quot; division with rules similar to the IDPA&#x27;s regulations. Today USPSA and IDPA matches are two of the most popular forums of practical handgun shooting in the United States, with more than 25,000 and 11,000 members respectively.

In 1977 the UKPSA was formed to promote and regulate practical pistol shooting in the UK, and became England&#x27;s regional affiliate of the IPSC. The association proved very popular, gaining international respect within the practical shooting community, and hosted many National, European and International competitions. Despite the 1997 Firearms Amendment Act in the UK, worldwide practical shooting is currently the second most popular international target shooting discipline and now the fastest growing. Most pistol shooting in the UK suffered severely after the handgun ban, which wiped out many shooting disciplines by removing the ability to participate. Practical shotgun has gained much popularity since the handgun ban, with numerous graded matches each year, and large entries to the European Practical Shotgun Championships.

== Scoring methods ==
Various scoring methods are used:
* Hit factor scoring
* Comstock scoring - Total available points on a given stage, minus penalties earned, divided by the time spent to score those points. Sometimes called &quot;points per second&quot; scoring, each competitor is graded against the shooter who, at the end of the competition, scores the highest &quot;hit factor&quot;. Courses of fire utilizing the Comstock scoring method are allowed to shoot as many shots as needed to neutralize the targets, but not scored more points than each target allows, allowing a shooter to correct or &quot;make up&quot; points, albeit at the cost of the time taken to score the points.

* Virginia Count Scoring - Total available points on a given stage, minus penalties earned, divided by the time spent to score those points. Virginia Count or &quot;Virginia&quot; scoring prescribes the exact order of and total number of shots that may be taken during a stage, with shots taken and hits scored outside of the specified order penalized. Virginia Count can also specify specific shooting positions, strong, weak, or freestyle (two handed) shooting styles, and may mandate reloading the pistol on the clock. 

* Time plus, similar to points down, scores a competitor&#x27;s raw time to finish a course of fire, plus any additional penalties accrued. One of the simplest scoring methods, Time plus oftentimes is found in outlaw (unsanctioned) matches. 
* Points down is the standard scoring method for IDPA. Shooters under points down score their time, plus their points down, plus any penalties incurred for their final score. Similar to time plus, Points Down progressively penalizes progressively worse marksmanship. 

* Fixed time (par time) sets a time limit for each course of fire, and mandates shooters to score as many available points within the specified limit. Shooters do not typically incur penalties for not engaging targets (as these points were not scored within the time limit) but may incur penalties for taking shots outside of the time limit. 

Two primary paper targets are recognized by IPSC and the USPSA and are named for each organization. 

The USPSA Target (or Headbox Target) is the classically recognizable target for practical shooting. The modern USPSA target includes two Alpha (A) zones, one Charlie (C) zone, and one Delta (D) zone. 

The IPSC Target (or &quot;Turtle&quot; Target) is a target designed specifically to not resemble a human being, and includes only one Alpha, Charlie, and Delta Zones. IPSC Targets are physically smaller than their USPSA counterparts and are subsequently considered harder targets to hit. 

USPSA uses both IPSC and USPSA targets on their courses of fire, while IPSC only utilizes the IPSC target.

Modifiers to the scoring are controlled by a shooter&#x27;s power factor, which is calculated based on projectile velocity times the projectile weight, divided by 1000. Each shooting organization controls the minimum floors for qualifying for &quot;major&quot; and &quot;minor&quot; power factors -- this prevents competitors from competing with lightly loaded ammunition, sometimes colloquially called &quot;powder puff&quot; ammunition. 

USPSA awards an extra point per scoring zone outside of Alpha for competitors shooting &quot;major&quot; power factor.

== See also ==
* Safety area
* Combat pistol shooting

== References ==
== External links ==
* Video: 1980 Norwegian Practical Handgun Championship in Sveio, Haugesund (NM i Stridsskyting)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2502572" start="0" end="18" title="Practical shooting" label="Practical shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502572" start="34" end="50" title="Practical shooting" label="dynamic shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502572" start="54" end="69" title="Practical shooting" label="action shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="83" end="98" title="shooting sports" label="shooting sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480685" start="221" end="233" title="Power factor (shooting sports)" label="power factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666824" start="1010" end="1056" title="International Practical Shooting Confederation" label="International Practical Shooting Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="1187" end="1198" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891194" start="1281" end="1325" title="United States Practical Shooting Association" label="United States Practical Shooting Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335760" start="1457" end="1493" title="Steel Challenge" label="Steel Challenge Shooting Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891194" start="1561" end="1566" title="United States Practical Shooting Association" label="USPSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997171" start="1993" end="2035" title="International Defensive Pistol Association" label="International Defensive Pistol Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334659" start="2398" end="2420" title="Cowboy Action Shooting" label="Cowboy Action Shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334659" start="2542" end="2572" title="Single Action Shooting Society" label="Single Action Shooting Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q20806407" start="2918" end="2926" title="Multigun" label="Multigun"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="3028" end="3033" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="3036" end="3043" title="handgun" label="handgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q486396" start="3049" end="3056" title="shotgun" label="shotgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q25221097" start="3321" end="3348" title="USPSA Multigun Championship" label="USPSA Multigun Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205939" start="3380" end="3384" title="DPMS Panther Arms" label="DPMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q702135" start="3562" end="3567" title="Glock Ges.m.b.H." label="Glock"/>
<link wikidata="Q739882" start="3602" end="3615" title="Glock" label="Glock pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="3696" end="3703" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="3708" end="3720" title="self-defense" label="self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546203" start="4242" end="4264" title="100 meter running deer" label="100 meter running deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="4336" end="4353" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q19390258" start="4409" end="4423" title="Stang shooting" label="Stang shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11968677" start="4491" end="4518" title="Nordic field rapid shooting" label="Nordic field rapid shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11968682" start="5396" end="5410" title="field shooting" label="field shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12655902" start="5906" end="5916" title="Fast Draw" label="quick draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988576" start="5984" end="5995" title="TV Western" label="TV westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069584" start="6110" end="6126" title="modern technique (shooting)" label="modern technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q14681604" start="6184" end="6197" title="Big Bear Lake" label="Big Bear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6199" end="6209" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884708" start="6660" end="6677" title="1975 IPSC Handgun World Shoot" label="in 1975 in Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q28421918" start="6729" end="6740" title="Ray Chapman (marksman)" label="Ray Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884710" start="6835" end="6864" title="1976 IPSC Handgun World Shoot" label="1976 IPSC Handgun World Shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666824" start="6932" end="6978" title="International Practical Shooting Confederation" label="International Practical Shooting Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q59670" start="7030" end="7048" title="Columbia, Missouri" label="Columbia, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686282" start="7091" end="7102" title="Jeff Cooper" label="Jeff Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14326296" start="7306" end="7350" title="Dynamic Sports Shooting Norway" label="Norwegian Association for Practical Shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416" start="7560" end="7569" title="Stavanger" label="Stavanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662484" start="7612" end="7640" title="IPSC Norwegian Rifle Championship" label="Norwegian Rifle Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978115" start="8141" end="8147" title="National Rifle Association of the United Kingdom" label="NRA UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q25221097" start="8572" end="8599" title="USPSA Multigun Championship" label="USPSA Multigun Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q575875" start="8667" end="8682" title="Barry, Illinois" label="Barry, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q25055098" start="8892" end="8926" title="IPSC European Shotgun Championship" label="IPSC European Shotgun Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q21474154" start="8959" end="8983" title="National Shooting Centre" label="National Shooting Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062021" start="8987" end="8993" title="Bisley, Surrey" label="Bisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="8995" end="9002" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25055094" start="9040" end="9074" title="IPSC European Handgun Championship" label="IPSC European Handgun Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q59670" start="9635" end="9653" title="Columbia, Missouri" label="Columbia, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10710" end="10712" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451692" start="10959" end="10986" title="Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997" label="1997 Firearms Amendment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q521839" start="14814" end="14825" title="Safety area (shooting)" label="Safety area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150717" start="14828" end="14850" title="Combat pistol shooting" label="Combat pistol shooting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262173" wikidata="Q4721414" url="?curid=1262173" title="Alexis Brimeyer">
<text>Alex Ceslaw Maurice Jean Brimeyer (4 May 1946 – 27 January 1995) was a pretender who claimed connection to various European thrones. He used fraudulent combined titles such as &quot;Prince d&#x27;Anjou Durazzo Durassow Romanoff Dolgorouki de Bourbon-Condé&quot;. He authored the highly controversial book, &quot;Moi Petit-Arriere-Fils du Tsar&quot;. He also sold false titles of nobility through &quot;orders&quot; that he and his associates had created.

==Early life==
Alex Brimeyer was born on 4 May 1946 in Costermansville (now Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo). His parents were the engineer Victor Brimeyer and his wife, Beatrice Dolgoruky, daughter of Ceclava Czapska.

==Noble pretender==
Brimeyer&#x27;s first attempt to ennoble himself came when he named himself, &quot;Brimeyer de la Calchuyére&quot;, in the 1950s when he was about ten years old. This came to nothing. In 1955, he took a name, &quot;His Serene Highness Prince Khevenhüller-Abensberg&quot;, but the real Princess Khevenhüller threatened to sue him. He backpedaled and apologized. Brimeyer also wrote to a number of aristocrats to convince them to adopt him. In 1969, he received a passport of the Principality of Sealand with the name &quot;His Highness Prince Alexis Romanov Dolgorouki&quot;. When he contacted a Brussels Orthodox priest, Jean Maljinowski, to be baptized, the priest was suspicious since the supposed prince did not speak a word of Russian.

He commissioned two death certificates to be published in &quot;Le Soir&quot;. Through them, he claimed that Nikolai Dolgorouki, his supposed father, had used a pseudonym of Nicholas di Fonzo to escape the October Revolution and lived under the name. In actuality, the Bolsheviks executed the real Nikolai Dolgorouki after the Revolution.

==Khevenhüller trial==

Princess von Khevenhüller-Metsch, Princess Maria Dolgoroukova and Prince Alexander Pavlovich Dolgorouki sued Brimeyer. They charged that Brimeyer was using their noble titles with malicious intent. The prosecutor presented a large number of fraudulent documents, including letters where Emperor Charles V supposedly ennobles Brimeyer. The court noted that his claim of marriage between his &quot;grandfather&quot;, Prince Dolgorouki, and his &quot;grandmother&quot;, Maria Nikolaevna (who was long mistakenly thought by some to have survived the execution of the Romanov family in July 1918), was false. On 24 November 1971, Brimeyer was sentenced to jail for 18 months but had fled to Greece from where he sent a letter to the prosecutor. In it he claimed descent from the Emperors of Byzantium.

In Greece Brimeyer presented himself in the police station, and said that his passport had been stolen. He requested temporary documents. He registered then himself as &quot;Alexis Romanov Dolgorouki&quot; and for the next ten years he used those documents to &quot;prove&quot; his status.

==&quot;I, Alexis, Great Grandson of the Tsar&quot;==
In 1979 Brimeyer was living in Spain and contacted the cadet line of the Anjou Durassos. He convinced some of them to give their support and recognize him as the head of the royal house of Anjou-Durazzo. In 1982 he published a book &quot;I, Alexis, Great Grandson of the Tsar&quot; by &quot;H.R.H. Prince Alexis d&#x27;Anjou Romanov-Dolgorouki, Duke of Durazzo&quot;. The book included a &quot;will&quot; where Vassili d&#x27;Anjou Durassow supposedly recognized him as his only son. Thus he claimed connection to the house of Anjou and the throne of Naples.

Alexis was certain that Victor Brimeyer was not his father. He claimed that after his mother divorced Brimeyer she married Vassili d&#x27;Anjou Durassow on 15 April 1947 and that he was born in 1948. This supposed marriage was then annulled and she married Prince Igor Dolgorouki on 6 September 1948, divorcing him shortly thereafter and marrying Joseph Fabry in 1950. 

==Ties to the House of Condé==
In August 1984, Alexis&#x27; mother, Beatrice, married Bruce Conde, an imposter to the Princes of Condé. After the wedding, he adopted Brimeyer. This gave Alexis an excuse to add the title &quot;Bourbon-Condé&quot;.

==Ties to Russia==
Next, Alexis claimed that as his father was the son of Prince Dolgorouki and that Prince Dolgorouki had married the supposedly escaped Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia, and that his mother was their only daughter. 

Alexis claimed that his grandfather had been elected Volodar of Ukraine and persuaded a few orthodox priests that he was the heir to a throne. Through the Grand Duchess, Alexis claimed a connection to the Romanovs and the Russian throne.

==Serbian throne==
He sent numerous letters to King Juan Carlos of Spain and demanded his recognition. He married and had a son. He also managed to convince the British College of Arms to include himself in documents. Lord Mountbatten of Burma wrote to him on 3 January 1977, addressing him as Prince Dolgorouky as a courtesy.

In 1992, two Greater Serbian nationalists, including Vojislav Šešelj, visited Brimeyer in Spain. Supposedly they offered him the throne of Serbia. He told journalists that he had been in touch with Slobodan Milošević, who was supposedly in favor of restoring the Serbian monarchy. Then he used the title, &quot;Prince Alexis II Nemanitch Romanov Dolgorouki&quot;, Grand Master of the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem. He had convinced his Serbian nationalist supporters that he was descended, in a very convoluted manner, from Hrebeljanović-Nemanjić dynasty.

Alexis claimed to have accepted the throne of Serbia. There appeared to be at least some support for him. The European Monarchist Association published a communiqué, where it stated Brimeyer&#x27;s real identity. The scheme then appears to have collapsed.

==Death==
Alexis Brimeyer died of HIV/AIDS in Madrid, aged 48, on 27 January 1995.

==See also==
*Romanov impostors
*Bruce Conde

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4721414" start="0" end="33" title="Alexis Brimeyer" label="Alex Ceslaw Maurice Jean Brimeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q845929" start="71" end="80" title="pretender" label="pretender"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="115" end="121" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="141" end="146" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q222279" start="532" end="538" title="Bukavu" label="Bukavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="540" end="572" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q775738" start="635" end="653" title="House of Dolgorukov" label="Beatrice Dolgoruky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352313" start="667" end="682" title="Ceclava Czapska" label="Ceclava Czapska"/>
<link wikidata="Q13706" start="1183" end="1206" title="Principality of Sealand" label="Principality of Sealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1300" end="1308" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1436" end="1442" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q708653" start="1466" end="1483" title="death certificate" label="death certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q690672" start="1510" end="1517" title="Le Soir" label="Le Soir"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="1607" end="1616" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="1652" end="1670" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="1715" end="1724" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740638" start="1823" end="1842" title="Khevenhüller family" label="Khevenhüller-Metsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q775738" start="1859" end="1871" title="Dolgoroukov" label="Dolgoroukova"/>
<link wikidata="Q775738" start="1903" end="1913" title="Dolgorukov" label="Dolgorouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="2097" end="2114" title="Emperor Charles V" label="Emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975665" start="2126" end="2134" title="Ennoblement" label="ennobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q155422" start="2277" end="2293" title="Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia (1899–1918)" label="Maria Nikolaevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356047" start="2356" end="2387" title="execution of the Romanov family" label="execution of the Romanov family"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2496" end="2502" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="2584" end="2605" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="Emperors of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43812" start="2686" end="2694" title="passport" label="passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2984" end="2989" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057658" start="3008" end="3018" title="cadet branch" label="cadet line"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="3142" end="3155" title="Anjou-Durazzo" label="Anjou-Durazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="3504" end="3510" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="3745" end="3753" title="annulment" label="annulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977288" start="3970" end="3981" title="Bruce Conde" label="Bruce Conde"/>
<link wikidata="Q895184" start="4002" end="4018" title="Princes of Condé" label="Princes of Condé"/>
<link wikidata="Q155422" start="4286" end="4326" title="Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia (1899–1918)" label="Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="4439" end="4446" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="4580" end="4587" title="Romanov" label="Romanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4597" end="4603" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="4666" end="4686" title="Juan Carlos of Spain" label="Juan Carlos of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4775" end="4782" title="England" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="4783" end="4798" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="4832" end="4857" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Lord Mountbatten of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="4955" end="4969" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298063" start="4995" end="5010" title="Vojislav Šešelj" label="Vojislav Šešelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5032" end="5037" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="5140" end="5158" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="5349" end="5358" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176309" start="5469" end="5482" title="Lazarević dynasty" label="Hrebeljanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q746782" start="5483" end="5499" title="Nemanjić dynasty" label="Nemanjić dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="5793" end="5801" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="5805" end="5811" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397387" start="5857" end="5874" title="Romanov impostors" label="Romanov impostors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977288" start="5876" end="5887" title="Bruce Conde" label="Bruce Conde"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262175" wikidata="Q1353584" url="?curid=1262175" title="Nadi (yoga)">
<text> () is a term for the channels through which, in traditional Indian medicine and spiritual theory, the energies such as prana of the physical body, the subtle body and the causal body are said to flow. Within this philosophical framework, the nadis are said to connect at special points of intensity, the chakras. All nadis are said to originate from one of two centres; the heart and the &quot;kanda&quot;, the latter being an egg-shaped bulb in the pelvic area, just below the navel. The three principal nadis run from the base of the spine to the head, and are the ida on the left, the sushumna in the centre, and the pingala on the right. Ultimately the goal is to unblock these nadis to bring liberation.

== Overview ==
Nadi is an important concept in Hindu philosophy, mentioned and described in the sources, some as much as 3,000 years old. The number of nadis of the human body is claimed to be up to hundreds-of-thousands and even millions. The &quot;Shiva Samhita&quot; treatise on yoga states, for example, that out of 350,000 nadis 14 are particularly important, and among them, the three just mentioned are the three most vital. The three principal nadis are &quot;ida&quot;, &quot;pingala&quot;, and &quot;sushumna&quot;. &quot;Ida&quot; (इडा, iḍā &quot;comfort&quot;) lies to the left of the spine, whereas &quot;pingala&quot; (पिङ्गल, piṅgala &quot;orange&quot;, &quot;tawny&quot;, &quot;golden&quot;, &quot;solar&quot;) is to the right side of the spine, mirroring the ida. &quot;Sushumna&quot; (Suṣumṇa &quot;very gracious&quot;, &quot;kind&quot;) runs along the spinal cord in the center, through the seven chakras. When the channels are unblocked by the action of yoga, the energy of kundalini uncoils and rises up the &quot;sushumna&quot; from the base of the spine. While the sushumna came to be envisioned as a vertical channel extending upwards from the heart, navel region, or base of the torso, there is an old precedent for the idea that it extends, like the śaktitantu, to the feet: the Mataṅgapārameśvara, a comparatively early Siddhāntatantra, envisions the sushumna running from the tips of the big toes to the crown of the head via the navel and heart. This archaic model of a central channel extending to the feet, linking together the principal series of nine lotuses [i.e., Kapālīśabhairava, the four Devīs and the four Dūtīs] spanning the body’s axis from crest (śikhā) to feet (pāda), may underlie the Brahmayāmala’s conception of the śaktitantu.

The nadis play a role in yoga, as many yogic practices, including shatkarmas, mudras and pranayama, are intended to open and unblock the nadis. The ultimate aim of some yogic practices are to direct prana into the sushumna nadi specifically, enabling kundalini to rise, and thus bring about moksha, or liberation.

== Early references ==

Several of the ancient Upanishads use the concept of nadis (channels). The nadi system is mentioned in the &quot;Chandogya Upanishad&quot; (8~6 cc. BCE), verse 8.6.6. and in verses 3.6–3.7 of the &quot;Prasna Upanishad&quot; (second half of the 1 millennium BCE). As stated in the last,

The medieval &quot;Sat-Cakra-Nirupana&quot; (1520s), one of the later and more fully developed classical texts on nadis and chakras, refers to these three main nadis by the names Sasi, Mihira, and Susumna.
==Functions and activities==
In hatha yoga theory, nadis carry prana, life force energy. In the physical body, the nadis are channels carrying air, water, nutrients, blood and other bodily fluids around and are similar to the arteries, veins, capillaries, bronchioles, nerves, lymph canals and so on. In the subtle and the causal body, the nadis are channels for so-called cosmic, vital, seminal, mental, intellectual, etc. energies (collectively described as &quot;prana&quot;) and are important for sensations, consciousness and the spiritual aura.

Yoga texts disagree on the number of nadis in the human body. The &quot;Hatha Yoga Pradipika&quot; and &quot;Goraksha Samhita&quot; quote 72,000 nadis, each branching off into another 72,000 nadis, whereas the &quot;Shiva Samhita&quot; states 350,000 nadis arise from the navel center, and the &quot;Katha Upanishad&quot; (6.16) says that 101 channels radiate from the heart.

The Ida and Pingala nadis are sometimes in modern readings interpreted as the two hemispheres of the brain. Pingala is the extroverted (Active), solar nadi, and corresponds to the right side of the body and the left side of the brain. Ida is the introverted, lunar nadi, and corresponds to the left side of the body and the right side of the brain.

== Three channels (&quot;nadis&quot;) ==

===Central channel (&quot;Sushumna&quot;) ===

&quot;Sushumna&quot; is the central and most important channel. It connects the base chakra to the crown chakra. It is important in Yoga and Tantra. It corresponds to the river Saraswati.

===Side channels===

==== Left channel (&quot;Ida&quot;) ====

Ida is associated with lunar energy. The word &quot;ida&quot; means &quot;comfort&quot; in Sanskrit. Idā has a moonlike nature and feminine energy with a cooling effect. It courses from the left testicle to the left nostril and corresponds to the Ganges river.

==== Right channel (&quot;Pingala&quot;) ====
Pingala is associated with solar energy. The word &quot;pingala&quot; means &quot;orange&quot; or &quot;tawny&quot; in Sanskrit. Pingala has a sunlike nature and masculine energy. Its temperature is heating and courses from the right testicle to the right nostril. It corresponds to the river Yamuna.

==Unblocking the channels==

The purpose of yoga is moksha, liberation and hence immortality in the state of samadhi, union, which is the meaning of &quot;yoga&quot; as described in the Patanjalayayogasastra. This is obstructed by blockages in the nadis, which allow the vital air, prana, to languish in the Ida and Pingala channels. The unblocking of the channels is therefore a vital function of yoga. The various practices of yoga, including the preliminary purifications or satkarmas, the yogic seals or mudras, visualisation, breath restraint or pranayama, and the repetition of mantras work together to force the prana to move from the Ida and Pingala into the central Sushumna channel. The mudras in particular close off various openings, thus trapping prana and directing it towards the Sushumna. This allows kundalini to rise up the Sushumna channel, leading to liberation.

== Other traditions and interpretations ==

Other cultures work with concepts similar to nadis and prana.

=== Chinese ===
Systems based on Traditional Chinese Medicine work with an energy concept called &quot;qi&quot;, analogous to &quot;prana&quot;. Qi travels through meridians analogous to the nadis. The microcosmic orbit practice has many similarities to certain Indian nadi shuddha (channel clearing) exercises and the practice of Kriya Yoga.

=== Tibetan ===
Tibetan medicine borrows many concepts from Yoga through the influence of Tantric Buddhism. One of the Six Yogas of Naropa is a cleansing of the central channel called phowa, enabling the transfer of consciousness to a pure land through the sagittal suture.

The Vajrayana practice of Trul Khor is another practice used to direct and control the flow of energy within the body&#x27;s energetic meridians through breath control and physical postures.

=== European ===
Sometimes the three main nadis are related to the Caduceus of Hermes: &quot;the two snakes of which symbolize the kundalini or serpent-fire which is presently to be set in motion along those channels, while the wings typify the power of conscious flight through higher planes which the development of that fire confers&quot;.

== See also ==
* Aura
* Mudra
* Interstitium

== Notes and references ==
== Sources ==
*Sandra, Anderson (2018). &quot;The Nadis: Tantric Anatomy of the Subtle Body&quot;. &quot;Himalayan Institute&quot;. Retrieved April 2, 2021.
*&quot;The Three Main Nadis: Ida, Pingala and Sushumna&quot;. &quot;Hridaya Yoga France&quot;. Retrieved 2021-04-03.
*&quot;The Ida and Pingala&quot;. &quot;Yin Yoga&quot;. Retrieved 2021-04-03.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1353584" start="0" end="0" title="Nadi (yoga)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q506229" start="120" end="125" title="prana" label="prana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="133" end="146" title="human body" label="physical body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341349" start="152" end="163" title="subtle body" label="subtle body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997714" start="172" end="183" title="causal body" label="causal body"/>
<link wikidata="Q180720" start="305" end="311" title="chakra" label="chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="451" end="462" title="pelvis" label="pelvic area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="758" end="774" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450557" start="961" end="974" title="Shiva Samhita" label="Shiva Samhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="993" end="997" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q180720" start="1627" end="1634" title="chakras" label="chakras"/>
<link wikidata="Q625498" start="1705" end="1714" title="kundalini" label="kundalini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072735" start="2552" end="2562" title="Satkarma" label="shatkarmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208030" start="2564" end="2569" title="mudra" label="mudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q839496" start="2575" end="2584" title="pranayama" label="pranayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q625498" start="2737" end="2746" title="kundalini" label="kundalini"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="2777" end="2783" title="moksha" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="2848" end="2857" title="Upanishad" label="Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q773328" start="2938" end="2957" title="Chandogya Upanishad" label="Chandogya Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q979502" start="3027" end="3043" title="Prasna Upanishad" label="Prasna Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3132" end="3150" title="Sat-Cakra-Nirupana" label="Sat-Cakra-Nirupana"/>
<link wikidata="Q734231" start="3351" end="3361" title="hatha yoga" label="hatha yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q506229" start="3382" end="3387" title="prana" label="prana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3415" end="3428" title="Three Bodies Doctrine (Vedanta)#Sthula sarira" label="physical body"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="3545" end="3553" title="arteries" label="arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="3555" end="3560" title="veins" label="veins"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="3562" end="3573" title="capillaries" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q502704" start="3575" end="3586" title="bronchioles" label="bronchioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="3588" end="3594" title="nervous system" label="nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q712604" start="3596" end="3608" title="lymph system" label="lymph canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154226" start="3864" end="3868" title="Aura (paranormal)" label="aura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144373" start="3943" end="3963" title="Hatha Yoga Pradipika" label="Hatha Yoga Pradipika"/>
<link wikidata="Q983584" start="3980" end="3996" title="Goraksha Samhita" label="Goraksha Samhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450557" start="4087" end="4100" title="Shiva Samhita" label="Shiva Samhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109014" start="4171" end="4186" title="Katha Upanishad" label="Katha Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="4349" end="4354" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="4393" end="4398" title="sun" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="4476" end="4481" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="4507" end="4512" title="moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="4590" end="4595" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729077" start="4767" end="4778" title="Muladhara" label="base chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574521" start="4786" end="4798" title="Sahasrara" label="crown chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="4819" end="4823" title="Yoga" label="Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="4828" end="4834" title="Tantra" label="Tantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="5030" end="5038" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="5540" end="5546" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="5593" end="5597" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="5601" end="5607" title="moksha" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217023" start="5658" end="5665" title="samadhi" label="samadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068646" start="5735" end="5756" title="Patanjalayayogasastra" label="Patanjalayayogasastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q506229" start="5831" end="5836" title="prana" label="prana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072735" start="6027" end="6035" title="satkarma" label="satkarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q208030" start="6057" end="6062" title="mudra" label="mudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q839496" start="6100" end="6109" title="pranayama" label="pranayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q625498" start="6366" end="6375" title="Kundalini energy" label="kundalini"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="6573" end="6601" title="Traditional Chinese Medicine" label="Traditional Chinese Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="6643" end="6645" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413962" start="6704" end="6713" title="Meridian (Chinese medicine)" label="meridians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260917" start="6742" end="6759" title="microcosmic orbit" label="microcosmic orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q180678" start="6871" end="6881" title="Kriya Yoga school" label="Kriya Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="6974" end="6990" title="Vajrayana" label="Tantric Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810176" start="7003" end="7022" title="Six Yogas of Naropa" label="Six Yogas of Naropa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088999" start="7068" end="7073" title="phowa" label="phowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q732344" start="7119" end="7128" title="pure land" label="pure land"/>
<link wikidata="Q775482" start="7141" end="7156" title="sagittal suture" label="sagittal suture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847650" start="7185" end="7194" title="Trul Khor" label="Trul Khor"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="7418" end="7426" title="Caduceus" label="Caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154226" start="7712" end="7716" title="Aura (paranormal)" label="Aura"/>
<link wikidata="Q208030" start="7719" end="7724" title="Mudra" label="Mudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q51090914" start="7727" end="7739" title="Interstitium" label="Interstitium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262179" wikidata="Q7959954" url="?curid=1262179" title="Waihi miners' strike">
<text>The Waihi miners&#x27; strike was a major strike action in 1912 by gold miners in the New Zealand town of Waihi. It is widely regarded as the most significant industrial action in the history of New Zealand&#x27;s labour movement. It resulted in one striker being killed, one of only two deaths in industrial actions in New Zealand.

==Origins==
At the time of the strike, the labour movement in New Zealand was expanding rapidly. The New Zealand Federation of Labour (known as the &quot;Red Fed&quot;), which was linked to the Socialist Party, was gaining considerable support from the working class, and the Waihi Trade Union of Workers, to which many miners belonged, was part of the Federation. Disputes between the union and the large Waihi Goldmining Company were frequent. Miners had many grievances regarding their working conditions and often downed tools and walked off the site in response to accidents in the mine (falls, broken limbs, crushing, brusings and even the occasional fatality). A more insidious killer than the accidents was miners&#x27; phthisis, dust on the lungs. Because of &#x27;miners complaint&#x27; as it was known, men who started mining at 16 would be lucky to reach 40. The company offered no compensation for miners and long before the strike (1906) there was a feeling among them that


In May 1912, a number of stationary engine drivers who rejected the Federation of Labour&#x27;s strong positions established a breakaway union. Although the Waihi Goldmining Company claimed to have no involvement in the breakaway union, saying that it was a matter of union politics, many workers believed that the Company was attempting to split the union, and called a strike. The local police chief reacted cautiously to the action, but Police Commissioner John Cullen ordered a strong response, dispatching additional police.

Two months later, the conservative Reform Party came to power — the new Prime Minister, William Massey, declared that he would strongly oppose the &quot;enemies of order&quot;.

==Support from other miners==
Several other mines around the country were affected by the action at Waihi, with miners downing tools in support of the Waihi miners or with their own claims against the harsh working conditions. At Reefton, in the South Island, this led to a lock-out of workers in June and July 1912.

==Confrontation==
The police buildup in Waihi continued until an estimated 10 percent of New Zealand&#x27;s police force was present. Around 60 strikers were arrested and jailed. Anger among the strikers grew, and the Federation of Labour gradually began to lose control to even more radical groups, such as the Industrial Workers of the World organisation.

In October, the Company was able to re-open the mine with non-union workers (&quot;scabs&quot;). The union workers reacted angrily, and the new workers were attacked with stones. Tensions between the union and non-union workers were very high — the union workers saw the newcomers as threatening their livelihoods and as being traitors to the working class, while many of the newcomers felt they had little choice but to take what work they could find, and resented the attacks and condemnation.

===Black Tuesday===
The violence gradually escalated, with union workers on one side and non-union workers and police on the other. The greatest level of violence came on 12 November, known as &quot;Black Tuesday&quot;. A group of armed non-union workers and police attacked the union hall, which was defended by a small group of union workers (also armed). Thomas Johnston, a non-union worker who had come to the mines after his market garden in Auckland was bankrupted, was shot in the knee, and a police constable (Gerald Wade) was shot in the stomach. The shots were fired by Fred Evans, a radical unionist. Evans himself was struck by Constable Gerald Wade and later died of his injuries. Soon afterwards, the strikers broke ranks, with many fleeing Waihi altogether.

==Aftermath==
Evans was later held by the hardliners up as a hero and a martyr, with Bob Semple saying that Evans had been &quot;doing his duty and should have shot more of them&quot;. Despite this, however, many people in the union movement actually moderated their positions after the strike — it had, after all, failed to achieve its goals. The strike also contributed to unity in the New Zealand labour movement — the Socialist Party, which had backed the strike, moved towards merger with the more moderate United Labour Party, which had not. The resultant Social Democratic Party later formed the basis of the modern Labour Party.

A pamphlet &quot;The Tragic Story of the Waihi Strike&quot; was co-written by Harry Holland, Robert Samuel Ross and Francis Edward O&#x27;Flynn (O&#x27;Flynn wrote under pseudonym Ballot Box).

The imprisoned strike leaders including Bill Parry were released in November against security of £1600; the bond was later found to have been put up by brewer Ernest Davis, who was a major source of funds for the Labour Party for half a century.

==Legacy==
In late 2016, the play &#x27;Scarlet and Gold&#x27; told the story of the Waihi strike.

==See also==
*Mining in New Zealand

==References==
==External links==

*NZHistory.net.nz feature
*Waihi Museum </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7959954" start="4" end="29" title="Waihi miners&amp;#x27; strike" label="Waihi miners&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="42" end="55" title="strike action" label="strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="67" end="71" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="72" end="78" title="mining" label="miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="86" end="97" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q498833" start="106" end="111" title="Waihi" label="Waihi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="214" end="229" title="labor movement" label="labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058462" start="246" end="257" title="Fred Evans (Union Worker)" label="one striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495358" start="435" end="467" title="New Zealand Federation of Labour (1909)" label="New Zealand Federation of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015654" start="528" end="543" title="New Zealand Socialist Party" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="587" end="600" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="740" end="764" title="Waihi Goldmining Company" label="Waihi Goldmining Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="1062" end="1070" title="Tuberculosis" label="phthisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961308" start="1349" end="1366" title="stationary engine" label="stationary engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132236" start="1890" end="1902" title="New Zealand Reform Party" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="1927" end="1941" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q923806" start="1943" end="1957" title="William Massey" label="William Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136549" start="2263" end="2270" title="Reefton" label="Reefton"/>
<link wikidata="Q159377" start="2307" end="2315" title="lock-out" label="lock-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046722" start="2663" end="2694" title="Industrial Workers of the World" label="Industrial Workers of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="2793" end="2797" title="Strikebreaker" label="scab"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="3637" end="3650" title="market garden" label="market garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="3654" end="3662" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058462" start="3787" end="3797" title="Fred Evans (union worker)" label="Fred Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q888246" start="4066" end="4076" title="Bob Semple" label="Bob Semple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015654" start="4403" end="4418" title="New Zealand Socialist Party" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888207" start="4493" end="4512" title="United Labour Party (New Zealand)" label="United Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550558" start="4543" end="4566" title="Social Democratic Party (New Zealand)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="4604" end="4616" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669763" start="4697" end="4710" title="Harry Holland" label="Harry Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349551" start="4712" end="4730" title="Robert Samuel Ross" label="Robert Samuel Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996320" start="4735" end="4762" title="Francis Edward O&amp;#x27;Flynn" label="Francis Edward O&amp;#x27;Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998290" start="4853" end="4863" title="Bill Parry (politician)" label="Bill Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393304" start="4972" end="4984" title="Ernest Davis (brewer)" label="Ernest Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="5026" end="5038" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099133" start="5174" end="5195" title="Mining in New Zealand" label="Mining in New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262180" wikidata="Q810811" url="?curid=1262180" title="Bathybius haeckelii">
<text>Bathybius haeckelii was a substance that British biologist Thomas Henry Huxley discovered and initially believed to be a form of primordial matter, a source of all organic life. He later admitted his mistake when it proved to be just the product of an inorganic chemical process (precipitation).

In 1868 Huxley studied an old sample of mud from the Atlantic seafloor taken in 1857. When he first examined it, he had found only protozoan cells and placed the sample into a jar of alcohol to preserve it. Now he noticed that the sample contained an albuminous slime that appeared to be criss-crossed with veins.

Huxley thought he had discovered a new organic substance and named it &quot;Bathybius haeckelii&quot;, in honor of German biologist Ernst Haeckel. Haeckel had theorized about &quot;Urschleim&quot; (&quot;primordial slime&quot;), a protoplasm from which all life had originated. Huxley thought &quot;Bathybius&quot; could be that protoplasm, a missing link (in modern terms) between inorganic matter and organic life.

Huxley published a description of &quot;Bathybius&quot; that year and also wrote to Haeckel to tell him about it. Haeckel was impressed and flattered and procured a sample for himself. In the next edition of his textbook &quot;The History of Creation&quot; Haeckel suggested that the substance was constantly coming into being at the bottom of the sea, &quot;monera&quot; arising from nonliving matter due to &quot;physicochemical causes.&quot; Huxley asserted in a speech given to the Royal Geographical Society in 1870 that &quot;Bathybius&quot; undoubtedly formed a continuous mat of living protoplasm that covered the whole ocean floor for thousands of square miles, probably a continuous sheet around the Earth.

Sir Charles Wyville Thomson examined some samples in 1869 and regarded them as analogous to mycelium; &quot;no trace of differentiation of organs&quot;, &quot;an amorphous sheet of a protein compound, irritable to a low degree and capable of assimilating food... a diffused formless protoplasm.&quot;

Other scientists were less enthusiastic. George Charles Wallich claimed that &quot;Bathybius&quot; was a product of chemical disintegration.

In 1872 the Challenger expedition began; it spent three years studying the oceans. The expedition also took soundings at 361 ocean stations. They did not find any sign of &quot;Bathybius&quot;, despite the claim that it was a nearly universal substance. In 1875 ship&#x27;s chemist John Young Buchanan analyzed a substance that looked like &quot;Bathybius&quot; from an earlier collected sample. He noticed that it was a precipitate of calcium sulfate from the seawater that had reacted with the preservative liquid (alcohol), forming a gelatinous ooze which clung to particles as if ingesting them. Buchanan suspected that all the &quot;Bathybius&quot; samples had been prepared the same way and notified Sir Charles Thomson, now the leader of the expedition. Thomson sent a polite letter to Huxley and told about the discovery.

Huxley realized that he had been too eager and made a mistake. He published part of the letter in &quot;Nature&quot; and recanted his previous views. Later, during the 1879 meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, he stated that he was ultimately responsible for spreading the theory and convincing others. 

Most biologists accepted this acknowledgement of error. Haeckel, however, did not want to abandon the idea of &quot;Bathybius&quot; because it was so close to proof of his own theories about &quot;Urschleim&quot;. He claimed without foundation that &quot;Bathybius&quot; &quot;had been observed&quot; in the Atlantic. Haeckel drew a series of pictures of the evolution of his &quot;Urschleim&quot;, supposedly based on observations. He continued to support this position until 1883.

Huxley&#x27;s rival George Charles Wallich claimed that Huxley had committed deliberate fraud and also accused Haeckel of falsifying data. Other opponents of evolution, including George Campbell, 8th Duke of Argyll, tried to use the case as an argument against evolution. The entire affair was a blow to the evolutionary cause, who had posited it as their long-sought evolutionary origin of life from nonliving chemistry by natural processes, without the necessity of divine intervention. In retrospect, their error was in dismissing the necessary role of photosynthesis in supporting the entire food chain of life; and the corresponding requirement for sunlight, abundant at the surface, but absent on the ocean floor.

==References==

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="41" end="48" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="49" end="58" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="59" end="78" title="Thomas Henry Huxley" label="Thomas Henry Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129" end="139" title=":wikt:primordial" label="primordial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="164" end="171" title="organism" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="172" end="176" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="252" end="270" title="inorganic chemical" label="inorganic chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="280" end="293" title="precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="350" end="358" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="428" end="436" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q169219" start="548" end="555" title="albumin" label="albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="604" end="608" title="vein" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="651" end="668" title="organic substance" label="organic substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="727" end="733" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="734" end="743" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48246" start="744" end="757" title="Ernst Haeckel" label="Ernst Haeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q111180" start="843" end="853" title="protoplasm" label="protoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="955" end="967" title="Transitional fossil#Missing_links" label="missing link"/>
<link wikidata="Q97263158" start="1389" end="1395" title="monera" label="monera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="1445" end="1460" title="physicochemical" label="physicochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="1516" end="1542" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q945539" start="1752" end="1775" title="Charles Wyville Thomson" label="Charles Wyville Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q326228" start="1840" end="1848" title="mycelium" label="mycelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375826" start="2091" end="2113" title="George Charles Wallich" label="George Charles Wallich"/>
<link wikidata="Q644521" start="2204" end="2225" title="Challenger expedition" label="Challenger expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="2466" end="2473" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912236" start="2474" end="2493" title="John Young Buchanan" label="John Young Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="2613" end="2624" title="precipitate" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="2628" end="2643" title="calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="2653" end="2661" title="seawater" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="3127" end="3133" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q918782" start="3211" end="3261" title="British Association for the Advancement of Science" label="British Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375826" start="3862" end="3884" title="George Charles Wallich" label="George Charles Wallich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="4000" end="4009" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q335300" start="4021" end="4056" title="George Campbell, 8th Duke of Argyll" label="George Campbell, 8th Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="4398" end="4412" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="4438" end="4448" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="4496" end="4504" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262184" wikidata="Q504287" url="?curid=1262184" title="Andrew Crosse">
<text>Andrew Crosse (17 June 1784 – 6 July 1855) was a British scientist who was born and died at Fyne Court, Broomfield, Somerset. Crosse was an early pioneer and experimenter in the use of electricity. He became known after press reports of an electrocrystallization experiment he conducted in 1836, during which insects &quot;appeared&quot;.

==Early life==
Crosse was the first son of Richard Crosse and Susannah Porter. In 1788 he accompanied them on a trip to France, where he went to school for a time in Orléans. From the age of six until he was eight he stayed with a tutor, the Reverend Mr White, in Dorchester, where he learned Greek. On 1 February 1792 he was sent to boarding school in Bristol.

Around the age of 12, Crosse persuaded one of his teachers to let him attend a series of lectures on the natural sciences, the second of which was on the subject of electricity. This was the cause of his lifelong interest in the subject. Crosse first began experimenting with electricity during his time in the sixth form, when he built a Leyden jar. After leaving school, he studied at Brasenose College, Oxford.

==Scientific research==
Having lost his parents, his father in 1800 and his mother in 1805, Crosse took over the management of the family estates at the age of 21. After abandoning his studies for the Bar, he increasingly devoted his spare time to studying electricity at Fyne Court, where he built his own laboratory. He also studied mineralogy and became interested in the formation of crystalline deposits in caves. Around 1807, he began to experiment with electrocrystallization, forming crystalline lime carbonate from water taken from Holwell Cavern. He returned to the subject again from around 1817 and in subsequent years produced a total of 24 electrocrystallised minerals.

Among his experiments Crosse erected &quot;an extensive apparatus for examining the electricity of the atmosphere,&quot; incorporating at one point an insulated wire some long, later shortened to , suspended from poles and trees. Using this wire he was able to determine the polarity of the atmosphere under various weather conditions. His results were published by his friend George Singer in 1814, as part of Singer&#x27;s &quot;Elements of Electricity and Electro-Chemistry&quot;.

Along with Sir Humphry Davy (who visited Fyne Court in 1827), Crosse was one of the first to develop large voltaic piles. Although it was not the largest he built, Henry Minchin Noad&#x27;s &quot;Manual of Electricity&quot; describes a battery consisting of 50 jars containing of coated surface. Using his wires Crosse was able to charge and discharge it some 20 times a minute, &quot;accompanied by reports almost as loud as those of a cannon&quot;. He became known locally as &quot;the thunder and lightning man&quot;. In 1836, Sir Richard Phillips described seeing a wide variety of voltaic piles at Fyne Court, totalling 2,500, of which 1,500 were in use when he visited.

In 1836, Crosse was persuaded to attend a meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Bristol. After describing his discoveries over dinner at the house of a friend in Bristol, he was further persuaded to recount them to both the chemical and the geological sections of the meeting. They included his electrocrystallization and atmospheric experiments, and his improvements to the voltaic battery.

Crosse went on to separate copper from its ores using electrolysis, experimented with the electrolysis of sea water, wine and brandy to purify them, and examined the effects of electricity on vegetation. He was also interested in the practical uses of electricity and magnetism, including the development of loudspeakers and telegraphy although he did not do research in these areas himself.

===Controversy===

A few months after the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science Crosse was conducting another electrocrystallization experiment when, on the 26th day of the experiment, he saw what he described as &quot;the perfect insect, standing erect on a few bristles which formed its tail&quot;. More creatures appeared and two days later they began moving their legs. Over the next few weeks hundreds more appeared. They crawled around the table and hid themselves wherever they could find shelter. Crosse identified them as being members of the genus &quot;Acarus&quot;.

Puzzled, Crosse mentioned the incident to a couple of friends. A local newspaper learned of the incident and published an article about the &quot;extraordinary experiment,&quot; naming the insects &quot;Acarus crossii&quot;. The article was subsequently picked up by other newspapers across the country and elsewhere in Europe. Some readers apparently gained the impression that Crosse had somehow &quot;created&quot; the insects, or at least claimed to have done so. He received angry letters in which he was accused of blasphemy and trying to take God&#x27;s place as a creator. Some of them included death threats.

Other scientists tried to repeat the experiment. W. H. Weeks took extensive measures to assure a sealed environment by placing his experiment inside a bell jar. He obtained the same results as Crosse, but due to the controversy that Crosse&#x27;s experiment had sparked his work was never published. In February 1837 many newspapers reported that Michael Faraday had also replicated Crosse&#x27;s results. However, this was not true. Faraday had not even attempted the experiment. Later researchers, such as fellow members of the London Electrical Society Henry Noad and Alfred Smee, were unable to replicate Crosse&#x27;s results.

Crosse did not claim that he had created the insects. He assumed that there were insect eggs embedded in his samples. Later commentators agreed that the insects were probably cheese mites or dust mites that had contaminated Crosse&#x27;s instruments.

It has been suggested that this episode was a source of inspiration for Mary Shelley&#x27;s novel &quot;Frankenstein&quot;, but this cannot have been the case, since Crosse&#x27;s experiments took place almost 20 years after the novel was first published. The idea appears to have originated in the book &quot;The Man Who Was Frankenstein&quot; (1979) by Peter Haining. Mary Shelley did, however, know Crosse through a mutual friend, the poet Robert Southey. Percy Bysshe Shelley and Mary Shelley reportedly attended a lecture by Crosse in London in December 1814, in which he allegedly explained his experiments with atmospheric electricity. However, Mary Shelley&#x27;s diary speaks only of &quot;Garnerin&quot; as the lecturer. Similarly dubious is a claim that Edward W. Cox wrote a report of their visits to Fyne Court to see Crosse&#x27;s work in the &quot;Taunton Courier&quot; in Autumn 1836. Percy had been dead for over a dozen years by then.

==Other interests==
Crosse also wrote a great many poems and enjoyed walking on the Quantock Hills, in which Fyne Court is set, &quot;at all hours of day and night, in all seasons&quot;.

Crosse advocated the benefits of education for the lower classes, argued against emigration, and supported a campaign by local farmers against falling food prices and high taxes during the 1820s. He was also active in party politics, speaking in support of friends at election meetings. Following the Battle of Waterloo Crosse boarded a ship at Exeter to see the captured Napoleon Bonaparte on the deck of near Plymouth. Crosse also served as a magistrate.

==Personal life==
Crosse married Mary Anne Hamilton in 1809. They had seven children, although three died in childhood. Mary died in 1846 following several years of ill health.

On 22 July 1850 Crosse married again, aged 66. His second wife was the 23-year-old Cornelia Augusta Hewett Berkeley. They went on to have three children.

Crosse suffered a stroke while dressing on the morning on 26 May 1855. He died on 6 July 1855, in the same room in which he had been born.

The Italian writer Dacia Maraini is his great-great-granddaughter, the socialite Cornelia Edith &quot;Yoï&quot; Crosse being his granddaughter and her grandmother.

==Memorial==
The laboratory table on which Crosse carried out experiments stands in the aisle of the Church of St Mary &amp; All Saints, Broomfield, and an obelisk in his memory is in the churchyard.

Crosse&#x27;s home, Fyne Court, was largely destroyed by fire in 1894. The garden and the estate are now owned by the National Trust, and are open to visitors.

==Documents==
A number of documents related to Andrew Crosse and his work are held in the Somerset Record Office. In December 2008 Somerset County Council acquired a further two letters for the sum of 400 pounds to add to the collection.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504287" start="0" end="13" title="Andrew Crosse" label="Andrew Crosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511241" start="92" end="102" title="Fyne Court" label="Fyne Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750337" start="104" end="124" title="Broomfield, Somerset" label="Broomfield, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="240" end="262" title="Electrolysis#Electrocrystallization" label="electrocrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="506" end="513" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="604" end="614" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="693" end="700" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="808" end="823" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q895809" start="1014" end="1024" title="sixth form" label="sixth form"/>
<link wikidata="Q23645" start="1042" end="1052" title="Leyden jar" label="Leyden jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q899030" start="1090" end="1115" title="Brasenose College, Oxford" label="Brasenose College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="1319" end="1322" title="barrister" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="1453" end="1463" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544572" start="2180" end="2193" title="George Singer" label="George Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="2299" end="2315" title="Humphry Davy" label="Sir Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663273" start="2395" end="2407" title="voltaic pile" label="voltaic pile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725902" start="2452" end="2470" title="Henry Minchin Noad" label="Henry Minchin Noad"/>
<link wikidata="Q918782" start="3022" end="3072" title="British Association for the Advancement of Science" label="British Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="3443" end="3455" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="3515" end="3521" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="3657" end="3666" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="3697" end="3708" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="3714" end="3724" title="telegraphy" label="telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672155" start="4374" end="4380" title="Acarus" label="Acarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="4910" end="4919" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="5355" end="5370" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q30074608" start="5538" end="5563" title="London Electrical Society" label="London Electrical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725902" start="5564" end="5574" title="Henry Noad" label="Henry Noad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18572183" start="5579" end="5590" title="Alfred Smee" label="Alfred Smee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405197" start="5816" end="5827" title="cheese mite" label="cheese mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q29938" start="5832" end="5841" title="dust mite" label="dust mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="5965" end="5977" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="5997" end="6009" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376632" start="6248" end="6261" title="Peter Haining (author)" label="Peter Haining"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="6336" end="6350" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="6352" end="6372" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Percy Bysshe Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471502" start="6931" end="6945" title="Quantock Hills" label="Quantock Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886253" start="7186" end="7197" title="food prices" label="food prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="7336" end="7354" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="7380" end="7386" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7407" end="7425" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="7446" end="7454" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="7480" end="7490" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q286600" start="7985" end="7998" title="Dacia Maraini" label="Dacia Maraini"/>
<link wikidata="Q151571" start="8232" end="8278" title="Church of St Mary &amp;amp; All Saints, Broomfield" label="Church of St Mary &amp;amp; All Saints, Broomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="8287" end="8294" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="8450" end="8464" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8583" end="8605" title="Somerset Record Office" label="Somerset Record Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386270" start="8624" end="8647" title="Somerset County Council" label="Somerset County Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262185" wikidata="Q361455" url="?curid=1262185" title="Nadi (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Nadi]], is a region in Fiji.

Nadi or NADI may refer to:
==People==
*Aldo Nadi, Italian fencer
*Alireza Nadi, Iranian volleyball player
*Jules Nadi, French politician 
*Nedo Nadi, Italian fencer
*Yunus Nadi Abalıoğlu, Turkish journalist

==Acronyms==
*Normenausschuß der deutschen Industrie (NADI), Standardisation Committee of German Industry, predecessor of Deutsches Institut für Normung (DIN)

==Other uses==
*Nadi Bhd, Malaysian public company
*Nadi (yoga), subtle energy channels described in yoga and Tantra
*Nadi astrology, an Indian form of astrology
*Ñadi a soil type or phytogeographic zone in Chile

==See also==
*Naddi, a village in India
*&quot;Nadhi&quot;, a 1969 Indian Malayalam-language film
*Nady (disambiguation)
*Nari (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q361455" start="0" end="8" title="Nadi (disambiguation)" label="[[Nadi]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q361455" start="32" end="36" title="Nadi (disambiguation)" label="Nadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q361455" start="40" end="44" title="Nadi (disambiguation)" label="NADI"/>
<link wikidata="Q447810" start="71" end="80" title="Aldo Nadi" label="Aldo Nadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726892" start="98" end="110" title="Alireza Nadi" label="Alireza Nadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188821" start="139" end="149" title="Jules Nadi" label="Jules Nadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33783" start="171" end="180" title="Nedo Nadi" label="Nedo Nadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014759" start="198" end="218" title="Yunus Nadi Abalıoğlu" label="Yunus Nadi Abalıoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152746" start="254" end="292" title="Normenausschuß der deutschen Industrie" label="Normenausschuß der deutschen Industrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429837" start="416" end="424" title="Nadi Bhd" label="Nadi Bhd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353584" start="452" end="463" title="Nadi (yoga)" label="Nadi (yoga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523430" start="518" end="532" title="Nadi astrology" label="Nadi astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978954" start="563" end="567" title="Ñadi" label="Ñadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19678085" start="628" end="633" title="Naddi" label="Naddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113450312" start="661" end="666" title="Nadhi" label="Nadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55550975" start="713" end="734" title="Nady (disambiguation)" label="Nady (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965272" start="736" end="757" title="Nari (disambiguation)" label="Nari (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262186" wikidata="Q1858576" url="?curid=1262186" title="Mazda Verisa">
<text>The Mazda Verisa is a subcompact car based on the jointly engineered Mazda DY platform. It was launched by Mazda in 2004 and was only available in Japan, although used Verisas were exported to international markets. The Verisa can be considered either a &#x27;tall hatchback&#x27; or a &#x27;low mini MPV&#x27;. Its height of is similar to other Japanese boxy subcompact cars and lower than European mini MPVs like the Fiat Idea and Opel Meriva. The Verisa was previewed at the 2004 North American International Auto Show in Detroit as the Mazda MX Micro-Sport, although it was never sold there.

According to Mazda the name Verisa was created by combining the Italian word &#x27;verità&#x27; (truth) with the English word &#x27;satisfaction&#x27;, and the intended result of the term Verisa is to signify &#x27;true fulfillment&#x27;. The car is built with the watchwords &quot;simple, quality and compact&quot; and is targeted towards couples in their 30s with individual style and values. The Verisa was available with a variety of factory and dealer-fitted options.

The Verisa comes in front-wheel drive (2WD) and electronic four-wheel drive (e4WD) configurations. There is one engine option that delivers the following power and efficiency figures:
* Power = at 6,000 rpm
* Torque = at 4,000 rpm
* Fuel consumption (2WD) = 5.5 L/100 km combined
* (2WD) = 126.2 g/km
* Fuel consumption (e4WD) = 5.8 L/100 km combined
* (e4WD) = 135 g/km
In financial year 2004 Mazda produced 19,473 and sold 18,526 units. In financial year 2005 Mazda produced 14,336 and sold 14,416 units. The summary information for financial year 2006 and onwards was not published on the Mazda website. However, month by month breakdowns for domestic sales of individual car models are available. 

The Verisa received updates in 2006 and 2009. Two special editions of the car have been released, the &#x27;Brown Collection&#x27; in 2005 and the &#x27;Stylish V&#x27; in 2007. The car has gained international admirers who question why it has not been made more widely available. 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1858576" start="4" end="16" title="Mazda Verisa" label="Mazda Verisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704381" start="22" end="36" title="subcompact car" label="subcompact car"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69" end="86" title="Mazda D platform#DY" label="Mazda DY platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="107" end="112" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q216762" start="265" end="274" title="hatchback" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762136" start="296" end="304" title="mini MPV" label="mini MPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q673533" start="419" end="428" title="Fiat Idea" label="Fiat Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130093" start="433" end="444" title="Opel Meriva" label="Opel Meriva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="478" end="521" title="North American International Auto Show#2004" label="2004 North American International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858576" start="540" end="560" title="Mazda Verisa" label="Mazda MX Micro-Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197348" start="1119" end="1153" title="Nissan E-4WD" label="electronic four-wheel drive (e4WD)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262189" wikidata="Q3161504" url="?curid=1262189" title="James de la Cloche">
<text>James de la Cloche (1644–1669; unattested dates) is an alleged would-be-illegitimate son of Charles II of England who would have first joined a Jesuit seminary and then gave up his habit to marry a Neapolitan woman. His existence has not been proven, and the parentage with Charles II is unlikely if 1644 is his correct birth date, since the king was only 14 years old then.
James de la Cloche is mainly known through studies of British historian Lord Acton.

Arthur Barnes in 1908, and Marcel Pagnol in 1973, developed an identification of the famous Man in the Iron Mask with James de La Cloche.
In his historical essay &quot;Le Secret du Masque de fer&quot; (The secret of the Iron Mask) released in 1973, Marcel Pagnol summarizes and comments various theories of historians. Besides Lord Acton and Mgr Barnes, M. Pagnol also refers to the historian John Lingard, Andrew Lang, Edith Carey, and also the French historian Laloy.

== Lord Acton&#x27;s Research ==
In 1862 Lord Acton received copies of the so-called Gesu manuscript from Giuseppe Boero of the Jesuit archives in Rome. Lord Acton later wrote an article &quot;The Secret History of Charles II&quot;.

Based on the documents, Charles II would have had an illegitimate son with lady Marguerite de Carteret when he had been in Jersey in 1646. The official father was Marguerite&#x27;s husband, Jean de la Cloche. The son would have received Protestant education in France and the Netherlands and used the name James de la Cloche du Bourg. Charles II would have recognized him in secret in 1665 and granted him an annuity of £500 as long as he would stay in London and as an Anglican. Apparently de la Cloche spoke mainly French.

Jacobus de la Cloche entered a Jesuit seminary in Rome 2 April 1668. He was wearing common clothes and claimed that he was 24 years old. De la Cloche had converted to Catholicism in Hamburg in 1667. He had received a written proof of his ancestry from Queen Christina of Sweden and now wanted to join the seminary. He was accepted and entered St. Andrea al Quirinale as a novice on 11 April.

Apparently King Charles was not angry that de la Cloche had switched faiths. In 1668 Oliva, the general of the Jesuits, received a letter in which the king told that he planned to convert to Catholicism. He could not contact any of the local Catholic priests without arousing suspicions but his son, one de la Cloche, would be a perfect choice. He could arrange a cardinal&#x27;s position for him, if he would not be suitable for the throne. In August the next letter invited de la Cloche to come home, without speaking to queen Christina, who was coming to Rome. The king had arranged him to travel under the name Henri de Rohan. By October de la Cloche was on his way.

The next royal letter, dated 18 November 1668, says that Charles II had sent his son back to Rome to act as his unofficial ambassador to the Holy See and he would later return to London when he had received answers to questions the king was willing to deliver only orally. He had asked Oliva to give de la Cloche 800 doppies for expenses. After that, there is no mention of de la Cloche.

=== Prince &quot;Stuardo&quot; ===
However, in 1669, a James Stuart, or Don Giacopo Stuardo, appears in Naples and on 19 February, marries a Donna Theresa Corona, daughter of, Signor Francesco Corona, and Lady Anuccia de Anicis of the Orisini branch, in the chapel of S. Aspremo in the cathedral of Naples. She receives a dowry of 200 doppies. However, when Jacopo is heard to talking of his high birth and seen to live extravagantly, the suspicions of the viceroy of Naples are raised. He orders Stuart&#x27;s arrest and imprisonment in San Elmo castle, before he eventually he is transferred to the castle of Gaetà. Theresa is shut up in a monastery. The English consul Browne, is summonsed and reports that this Jacopo can &#x27;give no account of the birth he pretends to,&#x27; despite his claim to be a natural son of Charles II (although it is unclear when this was said).

The English offered no substantiation of the claims, and he had no documents to verify them, so he was removed from the relative comfort of the castle of Gaeta to the lowly prison of Vicaria. He was sentenced to flogging but his in-laws managed to stop that.

Stuart was eventually released, left supposedly for England and returned with more money. By 31 August he was dead. In his confusing will he had asked Charles II to give his unborn child an &quot;ordinary principality&quot; or something equally appropriate. He also named Henrietta Maria Stuart (Charles II&#x27;s sister) as his mother. The matter was mentioned in contemporary newsletters and English consul&#x27;s messages to England.

Stuart&#x27;s widow gave birth to a son, Giacomo Stuardo. The son married Lucia Minelli di Riccia in 1711 and later regained some of his father&#x27;s inheritance. The last record of him is from 1752.

Various historians have had conflicting opinions about the matter. James de la Cloche might have forged the royal letters himself. The confusing will may have been the handiwork of the Corona family. There might have been two separate men claiming the same ancestry - the change would have been rather drastic. Lord Acton and Father Boero assumed that the second man was an impostor. Boero assumed that de la Cloche had returned to London using yet another name and James Stuart had adopted his claim. Lord Acton suggests that Stuart might have been a servant who had robbed de la Cloche to get his money and papers.

== John Lingard ==
The historian John Lingard, who procured the letters of Charles II to James and Father Oliva, affirmed that they all are fakes, making James an imposter prince.
The letters addressed to King Charles II evoke Queen Henrietta Maria as being in London in 1668, when she went to settle in France three years before, where she remained until her death in 1669.
M. Pagnol then cited other evidence put forward by John Lingard identifying one of the letters as a fake: &quot;On the other hand, one of the King’s certificates is dated from White Hall while the King, because of the plague in London, had taken refuge in Oxford with all his court&quot;.

Whitehall does not appear in what M. Pagnol transcribed of the certificate. The letter of 18 November 1668, by which Charles II sent a debt of gratitude to Father Oliva, is dated from Whitehall.
However, according to the article Charles II of England referring to the book Charles II (London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1991) by John Miller, the royal family left London in July 1665 for Salisbury, while Parliament met in Oxford. The King returned to London in February 1666, he could therefore have drafted a letter to White Hall in late 1668.

== Edith Carey ==

Carey was convinced that James is really the son of Charles II and Marguerite Carteret. He would have been ordained a priest in Rome before returning to London in order to catechize (convert) in father. He vanished after the letter from Charles II to Oliva, dated 18 November 1668. 
According to her, Charles II had Louis XIV arrange the arrest of this embarrassing bastard son in France (in July 1669) and then his incarceration in Pinerolo, which gives the identification with the Man in the Iron Mask, being then cousin of Louis XIV as the son of his first cousin. The Prince Stuardo would then have been made up by Charles II in order to explain James’ disappearance.

Charles II would then have got rid of his bastard son, a few month only after requesting his return to London, in order to appeal to his new priest status to be catechized. 
Marcel Pagnol disagrees with this theory, arguing that Charles II, who made other bastard sons dukes, would certainly not have had James life-imprisoned after having recognised him.

== Andrew Lang ==

According to Lang, if James de la Cloche had been of royal blood and had acquired deep religious creeds, he would not have married a commoner or displayed his money. Lang made up his mind to demonize James, considering him as a &quot;bold crook&quot; who screwed Father Oliva for the sole purpose of getting money out of him.
This is what Marcel Pagnol retrieves in the Jersey&#x27;s dictionary: James was not the king&#x27;s bastard son, but a megalomaniac crook, who died in Naples in on 10 September 1669.

== Arthur S. Barnes ==
In his book &quot;The Man of the Mask&quot; (1908), Mgr Barnes claims James was really the illegitimate son of Charles II. According to him he returned to London under the name of Father Pregnani to catechise his father before returning to France. Because he held the secret of the Treaty of Dover, he was arrested and taken to Pinerolo under the name &quot;Eustache Dauger.&quot; This theory was examined again by the French historian Mr Laloy. 
Father Pregnani returned from London to Paris in early July 1669, but according to the Memoirs of Primi Visconti, he died in Rome in 1679.

== Marcel Pagnol ==
In the historical essay &quot;Le Masque de fer&quot; (The Iron Mask) released in 1965, Marcel Pagnol develops a theory identifying the famous prisoner in the Iron Mask as the elder twin brother of Louis XIV, who was born after him (meaning the older brother, born before Louis, was the legitimate heir to the throne). 
Marcel Pagnol completed his essay in 1973, re-titling it &quot;Le Secret du Masque de fer&quot; (The Secret of the Iron Mask), adding in particular the result of his research on James de la Cloche, whom he identified as the twin brother of Louis XIV, bearing that name in his youth.

=== Growing up on the Island of Jersey ===

M. Pagnol could not find any birth certificate, baptismal death certificate in the Jersey archives. He therefore concluded that James was not born on the island, and that he did not belong to the Carteret family.

In 1644 Louis XIV was 6 years old. Cardinal Mazarin sent the midwife Lady Perronette to England where Queen Henrietta of France, sister of Louis XIII and wife of the English king Charles I, gave birth to Henrietta of England. According to M. Pagnol, the midwife brought the twin with her to hide him abroad, which was the actual purpose of her journey.
After giving birth, Henrietta of France sent Lady Perronette to the Carterets, the noblest family on the island of Jersey, so their daughter Marguerite could raise the child. Perronette paid them a large dowry for the adoption but did not reveal his true identity, presenting him as the son of a young noblewoman. It was to the same Carteret family that Henrietta of England sent her son (the future Charles II) at the age of 15 years in 1646 during the English Civil War of 1642–1651.

In 1657 Marguerite married Jean de la Cloche, who gave his name to James. 
In Jersey, a rumour spread that James was born of a liaison between Marguerite Carteret and the future King Charles II, who came to the island in his youth. James questioned Marguerite, who denied the rumour. Later, finding a striking resemblance between himself and Charles II when seeing his portrait, he was convinced of being the King&#x27;s son and wished to be legally recognised, like two other illegitimate sons. Marguerite (or probably her father) approached the King on his behalf, but the latter did not acknowledge him.

=== Jesuit in Rome ===
Considering himself unjustly repudiated by the person he believed to be his father, James did not give up just yet. Knowing via the Carteret family that Charles II was secretly preparing to convert to Catholicism (and would thus subject the English Church to the authority of the Pope), he decided to become a Catholic priest in order to be able to convert Charles II.
Besides the certificate from the Queen of Sweden James applied for his candidacy at the Institute of Jesuit novices with a first certificate from Charles II himself, 
recognising him as his son the &quot;Prince Stuart&quot;. In other letters, Charles II promised the throne to James and a generous reward to the Jesuits.

In a letter dated 18 November 1668 (presumably the one cited by Lord Acton), Father Oliva received a debt of gratitude, promising him the sum of 20,000 pounds sterling, and then asked for a payment to James of 800 pounds that he undertook to reimburse to him. 
According to M. Pagnol, Oliva certainly paid that sum to James, believing the authenticity of the letters and royal guarantees. M. Pagnol therefore placed the departure from Rome at the beginning of December 1668, a few weeks later than the date given by Lord Acton.

Comparing the letters from Charles II to Father Oliva with other letters addressed to his sister Henrietta of England, two expert graphologists consulted by M. Pagnol are positive: the letters sent to Father Oliva are fake, making James a fraud. 
M. Pagnol&#x27;s believed in James&#x27;s good faith though, admitting that he sincerely believed he was the bastard son of Charles II.

=== The meeting with Charles II ===
In his last letter, Charles II recommended that James call in to visit his sister Henrietta of England in Paris who could have him ordained as a priest. Knowing this letter was a fake, it was then James who, by the same process of a false supporting letter from Charles II, would have requested an audience with Henrietta of England.
Moreover, M. Pagnol also cited a letter of 20 January 1669 by Charles II to Henrietta of England, which referred to a previous letter from Henrietta to Charles delivered by a certain &quot;Italian&quot;&quot; identified as James coming from Rome.

M. Pagnol concluded that Henrietta received James, in whom she immediately recognised a resemblance to her cousin Louis XIV (she was living in France) and handed him a letter for the attention of Charles II, judiciously leaving to him the responsibility of ordaining James. When James gave the letter to Charles II in London in early 1669, the king recognised him and revealed to him the secret of his birth - information which he certainly inherited from his mother Henrietta of France. 
Learning that he should reigning instead of his twin brother, James is sent by Charles II to Roux de Marcilly who organised a conspiracy against Louis XIV of which all the English Ministers were aware.

In his essay, Marcel Pagnol demonstrates that the famous prisoner in the Iron Mask was not Italian. Identifying James de la Cloche as the prisoner, James would therefore not be the Abbot Pregnani, as Mgr Barnes claims.
As for Prince &quot;Stuardo&quot; M. Pagnol believes that he cannot be the Prince Stuart (in this case James de la Cloche), who would certainly not have returned to Italy to spend the fortune defrauded from the Jesuits in Rome. So it would therefore have been James&#x27;s butler who, on learning of the arrest of his master, took his money and usurped his identity before fleeing to Naples.

==Sources and further reading==
*Giovanni Tarantino, &quot;Jacques de la Cloche: A Stuart Pretender in the Seventeenth Century&quot;, in Archivum Historicum Societatis Iesu, LXXIII (June-Dec., 2004).
*Steuart, A. Francis, &quot;The Neapolitan Stuarts&quot;, in &quot;The English Historical Review&quot;, Vol. 18, no. 71 (July 1903).

==References==
==External links==
*Andrew Lang about James de le Cloche</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3161504" start="0" end="18" title="James de la Cloche" label="James de la Cloche"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="92" end="113" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="144" end="150" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="198" end="208" title="Naples" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311778" start="447" end="457" title="Lord Acton" label="Lord Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q236630" start="487" end="500" title="Marcel Pagnol" label="Marcel Pagnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q72296" start="552" end="572" title="Man in the Iron Mask" label="Man in the Iron Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959147" start="853" end="865" title="John Lingard" label="John Lingard"/>
<link wikidata="Q505827" start="867" end="878" title="Andrew Lang" label="Andrew Lang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="880" end="891" title="Edith Carey" label="Edith Carey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1037" end="1051" title="Giuseppe Boero" label="Giuseppe Boero"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="1288" end="1294" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="1635" end="1643" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1858" end="1869" title="Catholic church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="1873" end="1880" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="1949" end="1968" title="Christina of Sweden" label="Christina of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="2448" end="2456" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="2897" end="2905" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3073" end="3080" title="doppy" label="doppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="3467" end="3472" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q878972" start="3602" end="3619" title="viceroy of Naples" label="viceroy of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q128089" start="3756" end="3761" title="Gaeta" label="Gaetà"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521872" start="4209" end="4216" title="Vicaria" label="Vicaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="4238" end="4246" title="flogging" label="flogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q236930" start="4558" end="4580" title="Mary, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange" label="Henrietta Maria Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19647010" start="5300" end="5308" title="impostor" label="impostor"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="6438" end="6459" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9573" start="7206" end="7214" title="Pinerolo" label="Pinerolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191077" start="8637" end="8652" title="Treaty of Dover" label="Treaty of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="9159" end="9168" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q166056" start="9858" end="9874" title="Cardinal Mazarin" label="Cardinal Mazarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q848615" start="9931" end="9950" title="Henrietta Maria of France" label="Henrietta of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="9962" end="9972" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q230921" start="10027" end="10047" title="Henrietta of England" label="Henrietta of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="10291" end="10297" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="10630" end="10647" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="11696" end="11711" title="Christina, Queen of Sweden" label="Queen of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371640" start="14098" end="14114" title="Roux de Marcilly" label="Roux de Marcilly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262201" wikidata="Q3509379" url="?curid=1262201" title="Shehu Musa Yar'Adua">
<text>Shehu Musa Yar&#x27;Adua (; 5 March 1943 – 8 December 1997) was a Nigerian general and politician who was the &quot;de facto&quot; vice president of Nigeria as Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters when Nigeria was under military rule from 1976 to 1979. He was a prominent politician during the later transition from military to civilian rule in the late 1980s and into the 1990s.

==Early life==
Yar&#x27;Adua was born in Katsina into a titled family. His father, Musa Yar&#x27;Adua, was a teacher who later became the Minister for Lagos Affairs from 1957 to 1966
during Nigeria&#x27;s First Republic and held the chieftaincy title of Tafidan Katsina before he was appointed to the title of Mutawallin Katsina (&quot;keeper of the treasury&quot;). Yar&#x27;Adua&#x27;s grandfather, Malam Umaru, was also the Mutawalli, and his younger brother Umaru Yar&#x27;Adua, who later became the president of Nigeria from 2007 to 2010, held the title as well. His paternal grandmother, Malama Binta, a Fulani from the Sullubawa clan, was a princess of the Katsina Emirate and a sister of Emir Muhammadu Dikko.

Yar&#x27;Adua attended Katsina Middle School and then Katsina Provincial School (now Government College, Katsina) for his secondary education; at the provincial school, where he was classmates with former Nigerian president Muhammadu Buhari. At the urging of his father and his father&#x27;s friend, defence minister Muhammadu Ribadu, Yar&#x27;Adua took the entrance exam of the Nigerian Military Training College. He passed and was enlisted into the Nigerian Army in 1962 as part of the course 5 intake of the Nigerian military training school. Yar&#x27;Adua was selected for further training at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. He was turbaned as the Tafidan Katsina by the Emir of Katsina Muhammadu Kabir Usman.

==Military career==
 In 1964, after he returned from Sandhurst, Yar&#x27;Adua was posted to the first infantry battalion of the Nigerian Army in Enugu under the command of Col. Adekunle Fajuyi as second lieutenant. From 1964 to the end of the Nigerian Civil War, he held various positions including platoon commander in 1964, and from 1965 to 1966 adjutant of the First Infantry Battalion in Enugu. He was a battalion commander in 1967, and in 1968 became a Brigade Commander. During the civil war, Yar&#x27;Adua commanded the 6th infantry brigade under the leadership of Murtala Muhammed, commander of the second division. In October 1967, Yar&#x27;Adua was given the responsibility for the capture of Onitsha after two unsuccessful attempts by the Nigerian troops.

In 1975, he was an active participant in the military coup d&#x27;état that deposed General Yakubu Gowon as Nigeria&#x27;s Head of State. After the success of the coup, he served as Transport Minister in General Murtala Muhammed&#x27;s regime. As Transport Minister his major task was to decongest the Lagos port. Prior to the coup, officials of the previous regime had ordered 16 million tonnes of cement to build military barracks around the country. However, the berthing facilities of the port were inadequate. The financial implications became more striking because the Nigerian government was liable to pay demurrage fees by the shippers. The Muhammed regime decided to transfer some of the cargoes to neighboring ports and introduce cement management firms to clear and sell the cement and build the new Tin Can Island Port.

==Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters==
Following the 1976 Nigerian coup d&#x27;état attempt, which resulted in the assassination of Murtala Muhammed, Yar&#x27;Adua became the Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters. The new regime was a triumvirate of power consisting of General Olusegun Obasanjo as Head of State, Shehu Yar&#x27;Adua as Chief of Staff SMHQ, and General Theophilus Danjuma as Chief of Army Staff. As head of the SMHQ, Yar&#x27;Adua was the de facto second-in-command. Yar&#x27;Adua who was from the northern aristocracy was relied on heavily by the triumvirate to consolidate power in the north.

His office was assigned the task of managing operations of Operation Feed the Nation, a self-reliant agricultural policy of the new Obasanjo regime. Operation Feed the Nation, known as OFN, was an initiative to boost local production of agricultural produce, especially staple crops such as rice and wheat, so as to improve self-sufficiency of food crops and reduce growing food deficits. Mechanisms used to promote the objective included the distribution of heavily subsidized fertilizers and seeds to farmers, loans to small scale farmers to enable them to purchase equipment, and an educational outreach programme manned by Corpers to teach peasant farmers how to use modern agricultural equipment.

However, by 1979 the policy had not achieved its primary goal of self-reliance and self-sufficiency. Yar&#x27;Adua also guided the Supreme Military Council&#x27;s initiatives on local government reforms which led to the conduct of local government elections in 1976. The local government reforms excluded traditional rulers from certain governance issues and limited their control over property rights. The reforms also granted recognition to local government as a third tier arm of government.

In 1979, the regime transferred power to the civilian elected government of Shehu Shagari ushering in the Second Nigerian Republic which lasted from 1979 to 1983. The triumvirate later retired from the military.

==Political career==
General Ibrahim Babangida started his political transition program in 1987 with the establishment of a Political Bureau, and a Constituent Assembly was later inaugurated to deliberate on a proposed draft constitution. Though Yar&#x27;Adua was not a member of the assembly and a law had proscribed certain old breed politicians from political activities, his associates represented his political leanings at the forum and was active in the formation of political associations during the transitional period.

Yar&#x27;Adua and his group formed the People&#x27;s Front of Nigeria; Members included Babagana Kingibe, Atiku Abubakar, Bola Tinubu, Magaji Abdullahi, Ango Abdullahi, Ahmadu Rufa&#x27;i, Yahaya Kwande, Abdullahi Aliyu Sumaila, Wada Abubakar, Babalola Borishade, Timothy Oguntuase Akinbode, Sabo Bakin Zuwo, Sunday Afolabi, Rabiu Musa Kwankwaso, Tony Anenih, Chuba Okadigbo and Abubakar Koko.

The People&#x27;s Front later merged with other groups to form the Social Democratic Party (SDP). The People&#x27;s Front and PSP, became the two dominant factions within SDP. However, Yar&#x27;Adua&#x27;s group was very organized and able to win the majority of the elective posts within SDP. During the Governorship and House of Assembly elections, SDP had a slight numerical edge over the opposition National Republican Convention (NRC).

In January 1992, Yar&#x27;Adua spent a short stint in detention, jailed for contravening a law banning certain persons from active politics. However, the law was repealed and Yar&#x27;Adua subsequently announced his presidential election. His campaign political structure covered the country; he had a national campaign directorate, and each state had its own campaign coordinator and ward mobilizers. Members of his campaign group included former PDP chairman Anthony Anenih, former Vice President Atiku Abubakar, former minister Dapo Sarumi, Bola Tinubu, Abdullahi Aliyu Sumaila and Sunday Afolabi. Yar&#x27;Adua was leading the SDP presidential field before results were annulled. A new election was later conducted on 12 June 1993 which was won by M.K.O. Abiola. After the 12 June elections were annulled, the Yar&#x27;Adua faction negotiated an arrangement for the inauguration of an interim government. In November 1993, the interim government of Ernest Shonekan was booted out and Sani Abacha became the new military Head of State, disbanding the political parties.

In 1994, Yar&#x27;Adua won a seat representing Katsina to a new National Constitutional Conference. He was an outspoken delegate and in early 1994 organized a political conference at the Nigerian Union of Journalist office in Lagos that earned the attention of the military leadership who detained him for four days.

== Arrest and death ==
 In March 1995, General Yar&#x27;Adua alongside Olusegun Obasanjo, Lawan Gwadabe and others were arrested on allegations of plotting a coup to overthrow the General Sani Abacha regime. He was sentenced to death by a military tribunal in 1995, after calling on the Nigerian military government of General Sani Abacha and his Provisional Ruling Council to re-establish civilian rule. The sentence was commuted to life in prison but he died in captivity on 8 December 1997.

== Personal life ==
In 1965, Shehu Yar&#x27;adua married Hajia Binta and they have five children, including Murtala Yar&#x27;Adua, former Nigerian deputy minister for defence.

=== Wealth ===
After retiring from the military, Yar&#x27;Adua established a holding company called Hamada Holdings with several business interests in shipping, banking, publishing allowing him to amass a vast private fortune.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;Shehu Musa Yar&#x27;Adua: A Life of Service&quot; (Lynne Rienner Pub., 2004). 
* &quot;Nigeria at Fifty: Contributions to Peace, Democracy &amp; Development&quot; (Edited by Attahiru M. Jega &amp; Jacqueline W. Farris, 2010). 
* &quot;Neither North nor South, East nor West: One Nigeria&quot; (Jacqueline W. Farris illustrated by Mustapha Bulama, 2011). 

== External links ==

* Shehu Musa Yar&#x27;Adua Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3509379" start="0" end="24" title="Shehu Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Shehu Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625960" start="131" end="156" title="Vice President of Nigeria" label="vice president of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645061" start="160" end="196" title="Supreme Military Council of Nigeria (1966–1979)" label="Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q937487" start="422" end="429" title="Katsina (city)" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789094" start="437" end="443" title="Nigerian nobility" label="titled"/>
<link wikidata="Q75863533" start="464" end="482" title="Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="532" end="537" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="614" end="625" title="chieftaincy" label="chieftaincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122810797" start="702" end="709" title="Katsina Emirate" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705" start="843" end="862" title="Umaru Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Umaru Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="991" end="997" title="Fulani" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109335" start="1007" end="1016" title="Sullubawa" label="Sullubawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q122810797" start="1045" end="1060" title="Katsina Emirate" label="Katsina Emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932920" start="1082" end="1097" title="Muhammadu Dikko" label="Muhammadu Dikko"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="1324" end="1340" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251230" start="1400" end="1416" title="Defence Minister of Nigeria" label="defence minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932928" start="1417" end="1433" title="Muhammadu Ribadu" label="Muhammadu Ribadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032895" start="1479" end="1513" title="Nigerian Defense Academy" label="Nigerian Military Training College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="1551" end="1564" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="1701" end="1733" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932926" start="1797" end="1818" title="Muhammadu Kabir Usman" label="Muhammadu Kabir Usman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="1949" end="1962" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q465022" start="1966" end="1971" title="Enugu (city)" label="Enugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681528" start="1998" end="2013" title="Adekunle Fajuyi" label="Adekunle Fajuyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="2064" end="2082" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="2393" end="2409" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452527" start="2513" end="2531" title="First Invasion of Onitsha" label="capture of Onitsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q66741952" start="2634" end="2659" title="1975 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q354695" start="2681" end="2693" title="Yakubu Gowon" label="Yakubu Gowon"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="2801" end="2817" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q617618" start="2891" end="2901" title="Apapa" label="Lagos port"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585317" start="3400" end="3419" title="Tin Can Island Port" label="Tin Can Island Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724676" start="3477" end="3515" title="1976 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1976 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83204" start="3658" end="3669" title="triumvirate" label="triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="3701" end="3718" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033039" start="3722" end="3735" title="Nigerian military juntas of 1966–79 and 1983–99" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645061" start="3775" end="3779" title="Supreme Military Council of Nigeria (1966–1979)" label="SMHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782290" start="3793" end="3811" title="Theophilus Danjuma" label="Theophilus Danjuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351737" start="3815" end="3834" title="Chief of Army Staff (Nigeria)" label="Chief of Army Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q65070375" start="4095" end="4120" title="Operation Feed the Nation" label="Operation Feed the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="4168" end="4176" title="Obasanjo" label="Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979523" start="4663" end="4670" title="National Youth Service Corps" label="Corpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="5311" end="5324" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509510" start="5341" end="5365" title="Second Nigerian Republic" label="Second Nigerian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q333415" start="5477" end="5494" title="Ibrahim Babangida" label="Ibrahim Babangida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033004" start="5572" end="5588" title="Nigerian Political Bureau of 1986" label="Political Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837296" start="6065" end="6081" title="Babagana Kingibe" label="Babagana Kingibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q755878" start="6083" end="6097" title="Atiku Abubakar" label="Atiku Abubakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="6099" end="6110" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Bola Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55418212" start="6112" end="6128" title="Magaji Abdullahi" label="Magaji Abdullahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22002963" start="6181" end="6204" title="Abdullahi Aliyu Sumaila" label="Abdullahi Aliyu Sumaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837483" start="6221" end="6239" title="Babalola Borishade" label="Babalola Borishade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396272" start="6269" end="6284" title="Sabo Bakin Zuwo" label="Sabo Bakin Zuwo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639324" start="6286" end="6300" title="Sunday Afolabi (politician)" label="Sunday Afolabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509922" start="6302" end="6322" title="Rabiu Musa Kwankwaso" label="Rabiu Musa Kwankwaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772005" start="6324" end="6335" title="Tony Anenih" label="Tony Anenih"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967578" start="6337" end="6351" title="Chuba Okadigbo" label="Chuba Okadigbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q99537429" start="6356" end="6369" title="Abubakar Koko" label="Abubakar Koko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550561" start="6439" end="6462" title="Social Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978037" start="6775" end="6805" title="National Republican Convention" label="National Republican Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551163" start="7262" end="7265" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="PDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772005" start="7275" end="7289" title="Anthony Anenih" label="Anthony Anenih"/>
<link wikidata="Q755878" start="7313" end="7327" title="Atiku Abubakar" label="Atiku Abubakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221785" start="7345" end="7356" title="Dapo Sarumi" label="Dapo Sarumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="7358" end="7369" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Bola Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22002963" start="7371" end="7394" title="Abdullahi Aliyu Sumaila" label="Abdullahi Aliyu Sumaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639324" start="7399" end="7413" title="Sunday Afolabi (politician)" label="Sunday Afolabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033051" start="7536" end="7548" title="1993 Nigerian presidential election" label="12 June 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528125" start="7566" end="7579" title="M.K.O. Abiola" label="M.K.O. Abiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q471351" start="7767" end="7782" title="Ernest Shonekan" label="Ernest Shonekan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="7802" end="7813" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="7829" end="7837" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q937487" start="7935" end="7942" title="Katsina (city)" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="8075" end="8083" title="Nigerian" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="8093" end="8103" title="Journalist" label="Journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="8114" end="8119" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="8277" end="8294" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503563" start="8296" end="8309" title="Lawan Gwadabe" label="Lawan Gwadabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="8434" end="8439" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975904" start="8502" end="8521" title="Stratocracy" label="military government"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="8533" end="8544" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="8596" end="8604" title="civilian" label="civilian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262202" wikidata="Q4567188" url="?curid=1262202" title="1951 New Zealand waterfront dispute">
<text>The 1951 New Zealand waterfront dispute was the largest and most widespread industrial dispute in New Zealand history. Over the period, up to 20,000 workers went on strike in support of waterfront workers protesting against financial hardships and poor working conditions. Thousands more refused to handle &quot;scab&quot; goods. The dispute was sometimes referred to as the waterfront [[lockout (industry)|lockout]] or waterfront strike. It lasted 151 days, from 13 February to 15 July 1951. During the lockout, the Watersiders&#x27; Union was deregistered and its funds and records were seized, and 26 local watersiders&#x27; unions were set up in its place.

In reviewing the biography of Jock Barnes, then-president of the Waterside Workers&#x27; Union, reviewer Tony Simpson described the lockout as &quot;a key element in the mythologies of the industrial left in this country&quot;.

==Background==
The distance of New Zealand and Australia from their traditional markets meant that ports played a pivotal role in the economies of the countries. The waterfront inevitably became a point of conflict between workers and their unions on one side, and the employers and the state on the other.

During the Second World War due to labour shortages, watersiders and other workers worked long hours, often as much as 15-hour days. However, in working American ships, the waterside workers had also been exposed to new work methods and technologies that were commonplace on American wharves. British shipowners were reluctant to invest in these new methods, and expected watersiders to go back to the traditional methods in use before the war. The union instead resolved to make work practices on wharves change.

Following the war, working hours on the wharves continued to be high, with shipowners expecting up to 59 hours a week be worked. In the immediate post-war period, one of main the goals of the Waterside Workers&#x27; Union was to have a guaranteed weekly wage and a 40-hour, five day, work week between the hours of 8am and 5pm, without night or weekend overtime. Dissatisfaction with the Waterfront Industry Commission&#x27;s refusal to accept the watersiders&#x27; proposal led to ongoing waterfront disputes over several years. The Waterside Workers&#x27; Union struggle led to criticism from the Federation of Labour (FOL) that the union&#x27;s actions might not be in the best interests of its members and posed a risk to the whole labour movement.

At the November 1949 general elections, a conservative National party government came to power. While the new government&#x27;s opposition to militant unionism probably made an industrial confrontation inevitable, the outgoing Labour government&#x27;s earlier decision to hold a referendum on compulsory military service in August 1949 had been seen by many trade unionists, who opposed conscription as a betrayal of their socialist beliefs.

In April 1950 the Waterside Workers&#x27; Union led a walk out of the FOL and set up their own Trade Union Congress, isolating themselves from the wider union movement. Shortly afterwards severe stoppages on the wharves occurred, infuriating most of the general population. In early September, Wellington watersiders refused to work a cargo of lamp-black, with this dispute eventually leading to watersiders at all ports stopping work. On 19 September, the government warned it would declare a state of emergency the following day if watersiders did not return to work the next morning. Late that evening, Labour Party leader Peter Fraser intervened and a deputation of union leaders met with Prime Minister Holland. Although a state of emergency existed between 20 September and 4 October while negotiations took place, this meeting opened the way to a settlement.

On 31 January 1951, the Arbitration Court issued a general wage order to increase wages by 15% for workers covered by the industrial arbitration system. The order took effect on 15 February 1951 but was backdated to awards as they stood at 7 May 1950, and cancelled a 5% interim wage order the court had previously issued in June 1950 that had taken effect from 8 May 1950. Awards for freezing workers and two other unions that had recently received &quot;substantial increases&quot; were excluded. In reaching its decision the Arbitration Court said it had to consider equity for workers, the stability of the New Zealand economy, terms of trade with Britain, as well as inflationary pressure. The compromise decision was recognised as inadequate by the unions&#x27; representative, while the employers&#x27; representative dissented, considering it inflationary.

== The dispute ==

The wage increase ordered by the Arbitration Court did not apply to waterside workers, whose employment was controlled by the Waterfront Industry Commission. The shipping companies that employed the watersiders instead offered 9%, the difference between the 6% wage increase that had previously been awarded to the watersiders after the interim wage order and the general wage order. The watersiders then refused to work overtime in protest, and the employers placed the men on a two-day penalty. The workers called it a lockout, the employers called it a strike. When the Waterside Workers&#x27; Union refused to accept arbitration, the government could make a stand on the principle of defending industrial law and order.

On 8 February 1951, in protest to the employers wage offer, the Wellington and New Plymouth branches of the Waterside Workers Union unilaterally decided to impose overtime bans at their ports and asked other branches to do the same. The union executive met on 13 February to consider the responses from branches about the wage increase, and at 2 PM sent telegrams to all branches advising to impose an overtime ban from 5 PM. Upon being advised of this, the employers advised that if the overtime ban continued the next day then the workers would be stood down for two days as a penalty, and could only be eligible for work again on Saturday morning. 

While workers at Auckland and Wellington were not asked to work overtime on 14 February due to Harbour Board employees at those ports holding meetings, workers at other ports were penalised for refusing overtime. On 15 February, workers at Auckland and Wellington ports also refused overtime and were penalised. The union claimed that the employers actions were a lockout because while union members were willing to work 40 hours a week, the employers were only allowing them to work 16 hours a week. The Minister of Labour Bill Sullivan then invited representatives of both the union and employers to meet with him and the then Acting-Prime Minister Keith Holyoake on the morning of the 16th in an attempt to resolve the dispute.

=== Political response ===
The lockout was a major political issue of the time. The National government, led by Sidney Holland and the Minister of Labour Bill Sullivan, introduced heavy handed emergency regulations, and brought in the navy and army to work the wharves and also deregistered the Waterside Workers&#x27; Union under the Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act. Under the emergency regulations Holland&#x27;s government censored the press, made striking illegal, and even made it illegal to give money or food to either strikers or their families. The proclamations have been described as &quot;the most illiberal legislation ever enacted in New Zealand&quot;.

In a surprise move, the FOL, which was supported by the majority of unions, backed the government. FOL President Fintan Patrick Walsh was of the opinion that the manner of the strike threatened the existing arbitration system necessitating their defeat. The watersiders held out for 22 weeks, supported by many other unions and sympathy strikers, but ultimately conceded defeat. The miners and seamen who held sympathy strikes were likewise beaten.

As a result, the Waterside Workers&#x27; Union was split up into twenty-six separate &quot;port unions&quot; to deliberately diminish its influence. Many watersiders and other unionists involved were blacklisted (e.g. Jock Barnes and Toby Hill) and prevented from working on the wharves for years afterwards.

=== Snap election ===
Holland condemned the action as &quot;industrial anarchy&quot;, and explicitly sought a mandate to deal with the lockout by calling a snap election. The opposition Labour Party, now led by Walter Nash, attempted to take a moderate position in the dispute, with Nash saying that &quot;we are not for the waterside workers, and we are not against them&quot;. Labour&#x27;s neutral position merely ended up displeasing both sides, however, and Nash was widely accused of indecision and lack of courage. The government was re-elected with an increased majority in the ensuing 1951 election. Holland was seen as opportunistically using the strike to distract voters from the other issue of rapidly rising inflation which could have made the scheduled election in 1952 harder for him to win.

== Aftermath ==
Militant unionism in New Zealand was crushed in the wake of the strike, and the union movement remained fractured for years between the FOL and the defeated militants. The Labour Party was likewise split between the ardent anti-Communists, led by Bob Semple and Angus McLagan, and the moderates, such as Walter Nash and Arnold Nordmeyer. There was a concurrent tension between the FOL and the Labour Party for many years following the strike.

Much later it emerged that the families of both Keith Locke and Mark Blumsky were under surveillance by the Police Special Branch (now the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service). 
=== Loyalty cards ===
After the dispute was over, the deregistered Waterside Workers&#x27; Union issued loyalty cards to those who had remained loyal to the union during the dispute. Many retained their cards, and at an anniversary dinner in 1976 admission was by &quot;card only&quot;.

=== Official history ===
In the wake of the dispute, Dick Scott, editor of the union&#x27;s magazine &quot;Transport Worker&quot;, wrote a book about the strike on behalf of the deregistered union titled &quot;151 Days - Official History of The Great Waterfront Lockout and Supporting Strikes, February 15 - July 15, 1951&quot;. The New Zealand Federation of Labour annual conference in 1954 condemned the book for its derogatory statements and factual omissions. Scott&#x27;s credentials to attend the conference as a union delegate were also challenged, and he was called upon to withdraw and apologise, which he refused to do, and was censured as a result. The book was reprinted in 1978.

== See also ==

* Jock Barnes 
* Toby Hill
* Fintan Patrick Walsh
* Huntly rail bridge bombing
* 1913 Great Strike

== References ==
== Further reading ==
*
*

== External links ==
* The 1951 waterfront dispute at NZHistory.net.nz
* Derby, Mark (11 March 2010, Updated 1 March 2016) Strikes and labour disputes - The 1951 waterfront dispute at Te Ara - the Encyclopedia of New Zealand</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4567188" start="4" end="39" title="1951 New Zealand waterfront dispute" label="1951 New Zealand waterfront dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="76" end="94" title="industrial dispute" label="industrial dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="98" end="109" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="165" end="171" title="Strike action" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="312" end="316" title="strikebreaker" label="scab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567188" start="375" end="416" title="1951 New Zealand waterfront dispute" label="waterfront [[lockout (industry)|lockout]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567188" start="420" end="437" title="1951 New Zealand waterfront dispute" label="waterfront strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207277" start="692" end="703" title="Jock Barnes" label="Jock Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="938" end="947" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1210" end="1226" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403922" start="2313" end="2333" title="Federation of Labour (New Zealand)" label="Federation of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055204" start="2475" end="2506" title="1949 New Zealand general election" label="November 1949 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="2523" end="2537" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2747" end="2803" title="Compulsory military training in New Zealand#1949 referendum" label="referendum on compulsory military service in August 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q764245" start="3255" end="3265" title="Carbon black" label="lamp-black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400226" start="3537" end="3549" title="Peter Fraser" label="Peter Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178335" start="3802" end="3819" title="Court of Arbitration (New Zealand)" label="Arbitration Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974075" start="4789" end="4819" title="Waterfront Control Commission" label="Waterfront Industry Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767784" start="6546" end="6564" title="Minister of Labour (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911057" start="6565" end="6578" title="Bill Sullivan (politician)" label="Bill Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q637012" start="6692" end="6706" title="Keith Holyoake" label="Keith Holyoake"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="6857" end="6865" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453423" start="6866" end="6876" title="First National Government of New Zealand" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390488" start="6885" end="6899" title="Sidney Holland" label="Sidney Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767784" start="6908" end="6926" title="Minister of Labour (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911057" start="6927" end="6940" title="Bill Sullivan (politician)" label="Bill Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847463" start="7108" end="7151" title="Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1894" label="Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450979" start="7566" end="7586" title="Fintan Patrick Walsh" label="Fintan Patrick Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q125107" start="7863" end="7879" title="Solidarity action" label="sympathy strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207277" start="8121" end="8132" title="Jock Barnes" label="Jock Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811811" start="8137" end="8146" title="Toby Hill" label="Toby Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="8369" end="8382" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="8399" end="8411" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q721770" start="8424" end="8435" title="Walter Nash" label="Walter Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055217" start="8807" end="8820" title="1951 New Zealand general election" label="1951 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q888246" start="9285" end="9295" title="Bob Semple" label="Bob Semple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764201" start="9300" end="9313" title="Angus McLagan" label="Angus McLagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q721770" start="9342" end="9353" title="Walter Nash" label="Walter Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q695855" start="9358" end="9374" title="Arnold Nordmeyer" label="Arnold Nordmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384659" start="9530" end="9541" title="Keith Locke" label="Keith Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766765" start="9546" end="9558" title="Mark Blumsky" label="Mark Blumsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9590" end="9611" title="Special Branch#New Zealand" label="Police Special Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195581" start="9621" end="9662" title="New Zealand Security Intelligence Service" label="New Zealand Security Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207277" start="10665" end="10676" title="Jock Barnes" label="Jock Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811811" start="10680" end="10689" title="Toby Hill" label="Toby Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450979" start="10692" end="10712" title="Fintan Patrick Walsh" label="Fintan Patrick Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025530" start="10715" end="10741" title="Huntly rail bridge bombing" label="Huntly rail bridge bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559666" start="10744" end="10761" title="1913 Great Strike" label="1913 Great Strike"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262205" wikidata="Q16096978" url="?curid=1262205" title="Llew Edwards (politician)">
<text>Sir Llewellyn Roy Edwards (2 August 1935 – 26 May 2021), known as Llew Edwards, was an Australian politician. He was the Liberal Party leader for Queensland. He was Chair and CEO of Brisbane&#x27;s World Expo &#x27;88.

==Early life and education==
Llew Edwards started his working life as an electrician in his family&#x27;s electrical business. He graduated from the University of Queensland with a medical degree (MB BS) in 1965.

== Political career ==
Edwards entered the Queensland Legislative Assembly as the Liberal member for Ipswich in 1972. He was the Minister for Health between 1974–1978 and then held the position of Liberal Party leader, Deputy Premier and Treasurer until 1983 when he retired from the Queensland Parliament to take on the role of chairman and chief executive of World Expo &#x27;88, held in Brisbane in 1988.

==Later activities==
Edwards was Chair and CEO of the 1988 World Exposition, Brisbane&#x27;s World Expo &#x27;88.

In 1993, he was elected the twelfth Chancellor of the University of Queensland, holding the office until 9 February 2009. He received an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree from the university in 1988.

In 1984, he was made a Knight Bachelor and, in 1989, a Companion of the Order of Australia. 

Edwards has sat on the boards of a number of publicly listed companies. He was a director of James Hardie Industries for a decade, and was appointed chairman of the Medical Research and Compensation Foundation, set up by James Hardie to provide financial compensation for victims of asbestos-related diseases caused by the company&#x27;s products. He criticised the company for providing insufficient funds for the foundation, stating that it had underestimated the amount of liability for claims.

In 2009, the Sir Llew Edwards Building at the University of Queensland&#x27;s St Lucia campus is named after him.

In 2010, Edwards was named by premier Anna Bligh as one of six &quot;Queensland Greats&quot;. The citation stated that he was &quot;an outstanding Queenslander who has made exceptional contributions to many fields&quot;.

On 28 April 2013, a plaque commemorating the 25th anniversary of World Expo 88 and Llew Edward&#x27;s leadership of the event was unveiled at the South Bank Parklands (the site of Expo 88) by Brisbane Lord Mayor Graham Quirk and Queensland Premier Campbell Newman.

== Later life ==
Edwards died on 26 May 2021 in Brisbane. He was 85 years old and had been suffering from dementia. A state funeral was held at 2pm on Thursday 3 June 2021 at the St John&#x27;s Cathedral in Brisbane with the Australian flag being flown at half-mast throughout Queensland.

==References==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==

* Sir Llew Edwards digital story and oral history - State Library of Queensland
* Principal Officers of the University of Queensland
* University of Queensland re-elects Chancellor and Deputy-Chancellor – UQ News Online, 08/02/2002</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16096978" start="0" end="25" title="Llew Edwards (politician)" label="Sir Llewellyn Roy Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16096978" start="66" end="78" title="Llew Edwards (politician)" label="Llew Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616815" start="121" end="134" title="Liberal Party of Australia (Queensland Division)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714516" start="198" end="217" title="World Expo 88" label="World Expo &amp;#x27;88"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="369" end="393" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806503" start="401" end="415" title="medical degree" label="medical degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q13948235" start="417" end="422" title="M.B.B.S." label="MB BS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518214" start="477" end="508" title="Legislative Assembly of Queensland" label="Queensland Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355530" start="535" end="542" title="Electoral district of Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797087" start="653" end="667" title="Deputy Premier of Queensland" label="Deputy Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836757" start="672" end="681" title="Treasurer of Queensland" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714516" start="801" end="814" title="Expo &amp;#x27;88" label="Expo &amp;#x27;88"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="824" end="832" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714516" start="936" end="955" title="World Expo 88" label="World Expo &amp;#x27;88"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="994" end="1004" title="Chancellor (education)" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="1012" end="1036" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="1179" end="1194" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="1228" end="1246" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135535" start="1343" end="1366" title="James Hardie" label="James Hardie Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="1533" end="1541" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802491" start="1827" end="1835" title="St Lucia, Queensland" label="St Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466482" start="1902" end="1912" title="Anna Bligh" label="Anna Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325381" start="1933" end="1950" title="Queensland Greats" label="Queensland Greats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492231" start="2232" end="2252" title="South Bank Parklands" label="South Bank Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593164" start="2298" end="2310" title="Graham Quirk" label="Graham Quirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446607" start="2334" end="2349" title="Campbell Newman" label="Campbell Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="2458" end="2466" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="2470" end="2483" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566208" start="2531" end="2555" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Brisbane)" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="2559" end="2567" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q81676" start="2577" end="2592" title="Australian flag" label="Australian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053885" start="2608" end="2617" title="half-mast" label="half-mast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262207" wikidata="Q3802508" url="?curid=1262207" title="BMW New Class">
<text>The BMW New Class () was a line of sedans and coupes produced by West German automaker BMW between 1962 and 1972. These models ensured BMW&#x27;s solvency after the company&#x27;s financial crisis of the 1950s and established the identity of BMW automobiles as sports sedans.

The first New Class vehicle was the 1500, a 4-door compact executive car with the new M10 (at the time called M115) OHC 4-cylinder engine. In 1965, the 2000 C and 2000 CS luxury coupés were added to the range.

Replacement of the New Class models began with the 6-cylinder E9 2800 CS in 1969 replacing the 2000 C and 2000 CS coupés. In 1972 the 4-door sedans were replaced by the larger E12 5 Series.

The New Class coupes introduced the Hofmeister kink, which has been used on most BMW cars since. Another legacy of the New Class is the iconic 02 Series, which are a shortened version of the New Class sedans.

==Overview==

===Background===
During the 1950s, the BMW line-up consisted of luxury cars with displacements of two litres or greater, economy cars powered by motorcycle engines, and motorcycles. With their luxury cars becoming increasingly outdated and unprofitable and their motorcycles and economy cars becoming less attractive to an increasingly affluent society, BMW needed a car in the 1.5 to 2 litre class to become competitive. Prototypes powered by a 1.6 L engine based on one bank of the BMW OHV V8 engine were built and evaluated without a convincing result.

In 1960, Herbert and Harald Quandt invested heavily in BMW, and gained a controlling interest in the company. That year, the &quot;Neue Klasse&quot; project was begun. Led overall by Fritz Fiedler, the project had Eberhard Wolff in charge of chassis design, Wilhelm Hofmeister in charge of styling and body engineering, and Alex von Falkenhausen in charge of engine design. The team was to produce a new car with a new engine, which BMW had not done since the 303 in 1933.

The prototype was introduced in September 1961 at the Frankfurt Motor Show as the BMW 1500 four-door saloon, alongside the BMW 3200 CS, the last BMW with the OHV V8.

The term &quot;New Class&quot; referred to the 1.5–2–liter class of automobiles from which BMW had been absent since World War II.

The car benefitted from meeting demand for the Borgward Isabella as Borgward had gone bust the year before.

===Chassis and body===
The three-box four-door saloon was in many ways conventional, using a unitary structure and MacPherson strut front suspension which were becoming mainstream by the time of the 1500s introduction. Less conventional was the independent rear suspension, which featured coil springs and semi-trailing wishbones pivoted from a stout cross beam that also supported the differential housing. While BMW was using MacPherson struts for their first time on the New Class, they had used unit body construction on the 700 and semi-trailing arm rear suspension on the 600 and the 700. All New Class cars had front disc brakes.

===Engines===

The M10 overhead camshaft engine used in the New Class was required to displace 1.5 L initially, with the possibility to be expanded to 1.8 L. Von Falkenhausen had earlier designed an engine prototype for possible use in the BMW 700 and used this as a starting point for the M10. The engine was canted over at 30 degrees to the right of vertical in order to allow for the low bonnet line, which also contributed to the styling of the car.

=== Financial results ===

In the years preceding the New Class&#x27;s 1962 release, BMW had recorded many operating losses. In 1962, the company broke even, with a turnover of DM 294 million. In 1963, sales increased by 47% to DM 433 million, and BMW was able to pay dividends to its shareholders for the first time in 20 years.

===Production figures===

==New Class Sedans==
===1500===

Introduced in September 1961 at the Frankfurt Motor Show, the BMW 1500 entered regular production in October 1962 and was manufactured until December 1964.

The M10 4-cylinder engine used oversquare dimensions of bore and stroke produced in the BMW 1500.

Contemporary reports praised the all-round visibility and the commanding driving position while recording that it was necessary to lean forward a little to engage first and third gears due to the long travel distance of the gear lever. The large 40 cm tall luggage compartment was also commended.

The 1500 could accelerate to in approximately 15 seconds. The performance was at the time considered lively in light of the engine size, and although the engine needed to be worked hard in order to achieve rapid progress, it ran smoothly even at speeds above 6,000 rpm. The firm suspension and correspondingly harsh ride surprised those conditioned by the BMW 501 to anticipate a more comfort-oriented suspension setup.

Notable problems that developed with the 1500 included separation of the semi-trailing arm mounts from the body, rear axle failure, and gearbox problems. These were resolved in later versions of the New Class sedan.

The 1500 was replaced in 1964 by the 1600, but it was still made available in markets where capacities greater than 1500 cc incurred higher tax rates.

===1800===

Introduced in September 1963, the BMW 1800 was the second member of the New Class family. This model had an M10 engine with an bore and stroke, giving a displacement of 1,773 cc. It produced at 5,250 rpm and at 3,000 rpm.

The 1800 TI (Turismo Internazionale) model featured components developed for the 1800 by the tuning company Alpina. The upgrades included dual Solex PHH two-barrel side-draft carburetors and higher-compression pistons for at 5,800 rpm and at 4,000 rpm; an anti-roll bar was also added to the front suspension.

A homologation special, the 1800 TI/SA, was introduced in 1964. (The SA stood for &quot;Sonderausführung&quot;, or &quot;special version&quot;.) The TI/SA&#x27;s engine had dual Weber DCOE-45 two-barrel carburetors and a 10.5:1 compression ratio. This engine produced at 6,100 rpm and at 5,250 rpm. The TI/SA also had a Getrag five-speed gearbox, a stronger front anti-roll bar as well as a new anti-roll bar at the rear, and larger-diameter brake discs than the TI. 200 examples of the TI/SA were built and were only sold to licensed racing and sports drivers.

For the 1966 model year, a three-speed automatic transmission option was introduced. In the 1969 model year, the 1800 was generally updated along with the 2000. The 1800&#x27;s former engine was replaced by an engine with the bore of the 2000&#x27;s 2.0 L engine and the original stroke of the 1500&#x27;s and 1600&#x27;s engines, which resulted in a displacement of and a stroke/bore ratio of 0.798:1 (compared with the previous 1800 engine&#x27;s ratio of 0.952:1).. Other updates included a dual-circuit brake system for greater braking reliability, an improved cabin heating/ventilation system, a modernized dashboard design, and styling changes to the front grilles. In its last year of production (1971), the 1800 got the same rectangular headlights and wide taillights as the 2000.

===1600===

The 1600 New Class sedan, introduced as the replacement to the 1500 in 1964, used the bore of the 1800 with the 1500s stroke, resulting in a displacement of 1,573 cc, a power output of at 5,500 rpm and at 3,000 rpm. The 1600 New Class sedan was produced until early 1966.

(Around the time BMW discontinued the 1600 New Class sedan, it introduced a shorter two-door model under the same &quot;1600&quot; name; this model, also known as the 1600-2, was the first in what would later be called the 02 Series.)

===2000===


The engines from the 2000 C and 2000 CS coupes were used in the 4-door sedan body for the 2000 and 2000 TI models. The 2000 sedan, released in 1965, used the engine from the 2000 C, and like the 2000 C, it had an option for a three-speed automatic transmission. The 2000 TI sedan, released in 1966, used the engine from the 2000 CS with twin Solex PHH two-barrel side-draft carburetors and a higher compression ratio. In addition to its more powerful engine, the 2000 TI also had front and rear anti-roll bars and somewhat wider wheel rims and tires than the 2000.

Intended as an upscale version of the 1800, the 2000 featured unique rectangular headlights, distinctive wide taillights, and more exterior trim. (U.S. government regulations of the period put severe restrictions on headlight shape, so 2000 sedans for the U.S. market replaced the rectangular headlights with two pairs of individual round headlights, similar to the arrangement used a few years later in the BMW 2500 sedan.) The 2000 TI retained the round headlights and vertically-arranged taillights of the 1800 and other earlier New Class sedans, and it was otherwise less well-equipped than its 2000 sibling. Introduced soon after the 2000 and 2000 TI, the more luxurious 2000 tilux combined the 2000 TI&#x27;s sportier engine and chassis with the 2000&#x27;s exterior styling and higher-grade interior and accessories, including a wood dashboard and optional leather seats.

In a 1967 test, &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot; felt that the 2000 sedan was &quot;the best performing 2-liter sedan in today&#x27;s market and the best handling and best riding as well.&quot;

For the 1969 model year, the 2000 got the same general updates mentioned above for the 1800: dual-circuit brakes for reliable braking even in the event of partial failure, better heating and ventilation for the interior, an updated dashboard layout, and a restyled front grille.

In 1969, BMW introduced the final model in the New Class sedan series, the 2000 tii (&#x27;touring international, injected&#x27;). This was BMW&#x27;s first fuel-injected model, featuring Kugelfischer mechanical fuel injection. The 2000 tii produced at 5,800 rpm and at 4,500 rpm. Apart from its improved, fuel-injected engine, the 2000 tii had features similar to the 2000 tilux; a total of 1,952 examples of it were built.

===Production volumes===
Note that not all models are included.
==New Class Coupés==
The BMW New Class coupé range, which comprised the BMW 2000 C and BMW 2000 CS, was a coupé body style built by Karmann for BMW from the summer of 1965 to 1969. In 1965, BMW ended production of their Bertone-bodied 3200 CS coupé, the last of their line of V8 powered luxury cars from the 1950s. BMW decided to continue with a coachbuilt coupé. Based on the New Class platform, the 2000 C and 2000 CS introduced the 2.0 L version of the M10 4-cylinder engine and replaced the 3200 CS as BMW&#x27;s flagship model in 1965.. The New Class coupes were replaced by the E9 coupés, which were based on a stretched 2000 CS chassis and use a 6-cylinder engine.

===Technical===
The New Class coupé was developed from the New Class sedans to showcase the 2.0 L version of the M10 engine used in the sedans. The new displacement of was achieved with the stroke of the 1.8 L version combined with an bore. The coupé was built for BMW by Karmann in Rheine and available as the 2000 C, with a single-carburettor engine delivering at 5500 rpm, or as the 2000 CS with a higher-compression engine equipped with dual twin-barrel carburettors and delivering at 5500 rpm. The 2000 CS had a four-speed manual transmission, while the 2000 C (first introduced in 1965 as the 2000 C Automatic) originally came with a three-speed automatic transmission. Starting in 1967 the 2000 C was also offered with the four-speed manual.

===Styling===

The New Class coupé was introduced just after the 3200 CS coupé was discontinued. The styling was based on the New Class sedan, with an all-new front end. The headlights were behind a glass fairing, and the grill consisted solely of a chromed BMW &quot;double-kidney&quot; at the centre of the front. Apart from chrome accents around the headlights and along the top of the front end, the rest of the front was painted metal, with a row of vertical slots behind the bumper on each side to admit air for cooling and engine induction. Reactions to the front end styling have been mixed; Norbye describes it as &quot;a blunt, unattractive front end&quot;, Severson agrees, calling the front clip &quot;odd-looking&quot; and stating that the details of the front end &quot;do no favors for the looks&quot;, while Noakes disagrees, referring to its &quot;imposing front end&quot; being &quot;tidier than the Bertone body&#x27;s fussy nose&quot; in comparison to the 3200 CS.
===Production===
Of the 13,691 New Class coupés built between 1965 and the end of production in mid-1969, 9,999 were twin carburettor 2000 CS coupés, 3,249 were single carburettor 2000 C coupés with automatic transmission, and 443 were 2000 C coupés with manual transmission.

===Replacement===
In 1968, the New Class coupés were replaced by the six-cylinder New Six CS (E9) models, which have a longer wheelbase and longer front clip to accommodate the M30 engine. The front end styling was also modified to resemble that of the New Six (E3) sedans.

At the Paris Motor Show in 1968, BMW displayed a concept vehicle called the 2000ti Coupe, a coupe designed by Pietro Frua of the Glas car company (which BMW had taken over two years earlier). The 2000ti did not reach production.
== 02 Series ==

The &quot;02 Series&quot; range of two-door sedans, coupes and convertibles began production in 1966, and was based on a shortened version of the New Class Sedan platform.

==Motorsport==
* A BMW 1800 TI/SA won the 1965 Spa 24 Hours touring car race.
* A BMW 2000 TI won the 1966 Spa 24 Hours touring car race.
* Hubert Hahne won the 1966 European Touring Car Challenge (Division 3) driving a BMW 2000 TI.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3802508" start="4" end="17" title="BMW New Class" label="BMW New Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="87" end="90" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802508" start="313" end="317" title="BMW New Class" label="1500"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155305" start="328" end="349" title="compact executive car" label="compact executive car"/>
<link wikidata="Q796553" start="363" end="366" title="BMW M10" label="M10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="393" end="396" title="OHC" label="OHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802508" start="429" end="433" title="BMW New Class" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q796481" start="550" end="552" title="BMW E9" label="E9"/>
<link wikidata="Q796444" start="664" end="676" title="BMW E12" label="E12 5 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q371022" start="715" end="730" title="Hofmeister kink" label="Hofmeister kink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596771" start="822" end="831" title="BMW 02 Series" label="02 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836074" start="1387" end="1404" title="BMW OHV V8 engine" label="BMW OHV V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q72524" start="1469" end="1476" title="Herbert Quandt" label="Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q62496" start="1481" end="1494" title="Harald Quandt" label="Harald Quandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q95722" start="1643" end="1656" title="Fritz Fiedler" label="Fritz Fiedler"/>
<link wikidata="Q78416" start="1718" end="1736" title="Wilhelm Hofmeister (automobile designer)" label="Wilhelm Hofmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q796380" start="1920" end="1923" title="BMW 303" label="303"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1988" end="2008" title="Frankfurt Motor Show#1961" label="Frankfurt Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q268336" start="2057" end="2068" title="BMW 3200 CS" label="BMW 3200 CS"/>
<link wikidata="Q893584" start="2280" end="2297" title="Borgward Isabella" label="Borgward Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q27377" start="2301" end="2309" title="Borgward" label="Borgward"/>
<link wikidata="Q283193" start="2369" end="2378" title="Three-box styling" label="three-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="2435" end="2442" title="unibody" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068191" start="2457" end="2473" title="MacPherson strut" label="MacPherson strut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068191" start="2770" end="2786" title="MacPherson strut" label="MacPherson strut"/>
<link wikidata="Q720382" start="2920" end="2923" title="BMW 600" label="600"/>
<link wikidata="Q796553" start="2999" end="3002" title="BMW M10" label="M10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="3003" end="3020" title="overhead camshaft" label="overhead camshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q796417" start="3220" end="3227" title="BMW 700" label="BMW 700"/>
<link wikidata="Q27206" start="3371" end="3377" title="Hood (vehicle)" label="bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="3703" end="3711" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3861" end="3881" title="Frankfurt Motor Show#1961" label="Frankfurt Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q796553" start="3986" end="3989" title="BMW M10" label="M10"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4013" end="4023" title="Stroke ratio#Oversquare or short-stroke engine" label="oversquare"/>
<link wikidata="Q796404" start="4735" end="4742" title="BMW 501" label="BMW 501"/>
<link wikidata="Q203550" start="5512" end="5518" title="Alpina" label="Alpina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758322" start="5547" end="5552" title="Solex Carburetor" label="Solex"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="5579" end="5589" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500099" start="5660" end="5673" title="Sway bar" label="anti-roll bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10747721" start="5717" end="5737" title="Homologation (motorsport)" label="homologation special"/>
<link wikidata="Q772430" start="5893" end="5898" title="Weber carburetor" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="6157" end="6168" title="Disc brake" label="brake discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="6317" end="6339" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6651" end="6668" title="Stroke ratio#Stroke/bore ratio" label="stroke/bore ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596771" start="7576" end="7585" title="BMW 02 Series" label="02 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758322" start="7944" end="7949" title="Solex Carburetor" label="Solex"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="7976" end="7986" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131928089" start="8576" end="8584" title="BMW New Six" label="BMW 2500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781030" start="9070" end="9086" title="Road &amp;amp; Track" label="Road &amp;amp; Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737498" start="9707" end="9719" title="Kugelfischer" label="Kugelfischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="10115" end="10120" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q698588" start="10141" end="10148" title="Karmann" label="Karmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q27325" start="10229" end="10236" title="Gruppo Bertone" label="Bertone"/>
<link wikidata="Q268336" start="10244" end="10251" title="BMW 3200 CS" label="3200 CS"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="10252" end="10257" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836074" start="10285" end="10295" title="BMW OHV V8 engine" label="V8 powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="10355" end="10365" title="Coachbuilder" label="coachbuilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q796553" start="10465" end="10468" title="BMW M10" label="M10"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170207" start="10526" end="10540" title="flagship product" label="flagship model"/>
<link wikidata="Q796481" start="10593" end="10595" title="BMW E9" label="E9"/>
<link wikidata="Q796553" start="10795" end="10798" title="BMW M10" label="M10"/>
<link wikidata="Q698588" start="10954" end="10961" title="Karmann" label="Karmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890" start="10965" end="10971" title="Rheine" label="Rheine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="11210" end="11229" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="11334" end="11356" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q268336" start="11497" end="11504" title="BMW 3200 CS" label="3200 CS"/>
<link wikidata="Q796481" start="12788" end="12790" title="BMW E9" label="E9"/>
<link wikidata="Q796559" start="12871" end="12874" title="BMW M30" label="M30"/>
<link wikidata="Q131928089" start="12956" end="12958" title="BMW New Six" label="E3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048801" start="12976" end="12992" title="Paris Motor Show" label="Paris Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q664324" start="13098" end="13102" title="Hans Glas GmbH" label="Glas"/>
<link wikidata="Q216585" start="13435" end="13447" title="Spa 24 Hours" label="Spa 24 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q216585" start="13495" end="13507" title="Spa 24 Hours" label="Spa 24 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q61858" start="13528" end="13540" title="Hubert Hahne" label="Hubert Hahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q570724" start="13554" end="13584" title="European Touring Car Challenge" label="European Touring Car Challenge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262212" wikidata="Q3102408" url="?curid=1262212" title="Georges Bégué">
<text>Georges Pierre André Bégué (22 November 1911 – 18 December 1993), code named Bombproof, was a French engineer and agent of the United Kingdom&#x27;s clandestine organization, the Special Operations Executive (SOE). The purpose of SOE in France, occupied by Nazi Germany in World War II, was to conduct espionage, sabotage, and reconnaissance. SOE agents allied themselves with French Resistance groups and supplied them with weapons and equipment parachuted in from England.

Bégué was the first of 470 SOE F (France) Section agents infiltrated into France. He was a wireless operator. He proposed the use of BBC to transmit coded messages to resistance groups in Europe, a practice which became ubiquitous. He also arranged for the first of many thousands of airdrops of supplies and arms to resistance groups in France. He was captured by the French police in October 1941. He escaped from prison in 1942 and returned to the United Kingdom.

==Early life==
Georges Bégué was born 22 November 1911 in Périgueux, France. His father was a railway engineer and the family moved to Egypt when Bégué was a child. Bégué also trained as an engineer at University of Hull where he learned English and met his wife. He went through his military service as a signaller.

==World War II==
At the outbreak of World War II, Bégué was recalled to the French army. Because of his knowledge of English he was assigned to liaison with the British troops. He eventually escaped to Britain during the Dunkirk evacuation. After the surrender of France, he joined the Royal Signals as a sergeant, meeting Thomas Cadett, the Paris correspondent of the BBC, who was working in SOE&#x27;s F section who recruited him.

===The first SOE agent===
In 1940 SOE Bégué joined the new F (French) section. He was given the alias &quot;George Noble&quot; and trained as a wireless operator. After training, he parachuted &quot;blind&quot; (nobody met him on arrival) into Indre Department on the night of 5/6 May 1941 with a heavy wireless transmitter in a suitcase. He was the first SOE agent in France. He was lucky to have arrived at all, as the night before his flight the house he was staying in had been destroyed by a bomb while he was out. He contacted socialist Max Hymans near Châteauroux and persuaded him that he was a legitimate English agent. Hymans introduced him to other socialists in the area. On 9 May, he sent his first wireless message back to SOE headquarters in London. On 10/11 May, he was joined by SOE agent Pierre de Vomécourt and on 12/13 May by Roger Cottin, both also parachuted blind.

The Germans quickly detected Bégué&#x27;s wireless transmissions and jammed them and began to hunt for him around Châteauroux. Nevertheless, he was able to arrange the first airdrop of supplies into France by SOE on 13 June 1941. Two containers were dropped at Bas Soleil, the estate of Pierre de Vomécourt&#x27;s brother, Philippe, near Limoges. The containers were dropped by an Armstrong Whitworth Whitley bomber and contained sub-machine guns, explosives, and other material. They were the first of nearly 60,000 containers of supplies and arms air-dropped to SOE operatives and resistance groups during World War II.

Bégué and Pierre de Vomécourt created the first of about 90 SOE networks (also called circuits and &quot;reseau&quot;) in France. Their network was called Autogiro. Georges Bégué is sometimes called &quot;Georges One&quot; as he was the first SOE wireless operator in France. Subsequent wireless operators were called Georges Two, Georges Three, etc. The SOE&#x27;s slang term for a wireless operator was a &quot;pianist.&quot;

===Engaging the BBC===
Bégué had an exhausting schedule, often transmitting and receiving messages to and from SOE three times a day. In addition he often had to serve as a courier traveling by train to deliver or receive messages to other SOE agents. As the Germans and French police were attempting to locate him and his wireless through direction-finding equipment, Bégué proposed sending seemingly obscure personal messages to agents in the field in order to reduce risky radio traffic. In accordance with his proposal, the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Radio Londres&quot; broadcasts began with &quot;Please listen to some personal messages,&quot; followed by spoken messages, often amusing, and without context. Representative messages include &quot;Jean has a long mustache&quot; and &quot;There is a fire at the insurance agency,&quot; each one having some meaning to a certain resistance group. They were used primarily to provide messages to the resistance, but also to thank SOE agents and sometimes to mislead the enemy. Because these messages were in code, not cipher, the German occupiers could not hope to decipher them unless they had infiltrated a resistance group, so they focused their efforts on jamming the messages instead. The transmission of coded messages by Radio Londres became ubiquitous in World War II.

===Arrest===
The SOE parachuted in a number of additional agents in September 1941. One agent, Gerry Morel, went his own way to recruit resistance members. The Milice, the Vichy France police, arrested him at Limoges on 3 October 1941. His arrest led to more arrests and eventually to Bégué, who was arrested 24 October in a Marseilles safe house. He was sent to join a dozen SOE agents in the Beleyme prison in Périgueux. They were later transferred to a prison camp in Mauzac-et-Grand-Castang, Dordogne in March 1942, thanks to intervention of the American Consul-General Hugh Fullerton. Bégué smuggled out a message to London, bribed a guard, and created a duplicate key and the group escaped 16 July 1942. SOE agent Michael Trotobas was one of the escapees as was Jean-Pierre Bloch, whose wife, Gabrielle Sadourny, assisted in the escape.

Bégué and the other escapees hid in a forest while the French police searched for them and then continued to Lyon in separate groups. Bégué arrived on 23 July. SOE agent, American Virginia Hall, was in Lyon and in contact with the Vic escape network and eventually the escapees were led over the Pyrenees to neutral Spain where Bégué was interned at Figueres and sent to Miranda de Ebro prison camp but was later released to continue to England. He arrived in London in October 1942.

The SOE in London had changed leadership in his absence and Bégué had little confidence in the new SOE leader, Maurice Buckmaster. He was named signals officer, but believed his talents were under-utilized.

==After the war==
After the war Bégué emigrated to the United States. He worked in a number of lower-level jobs until he could officially become an electronics engineer. He also became an American citizen. He died 18 December 1993 in Falls Church, Virginia. He was 82 years old. Begues was survived by his wife Rosemary and two daughters, Brigitte and Suzanne.

==See also==
* SOE F Section timeline
* SOE F Section networks

==References==
==External links==
* Memorial
* Warning of an invasion (French language television programme) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3102408" start="0" end="26" title="Georges Bégué" label="Georges Pierre André Bégué"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102408" start="77" end="87" title="Georges Bégué" label="Bombproof,"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="101" end="109" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="127" end="141" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="179" end="207" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="257" end="269" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="273" end="285" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="377" end="394" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="466" end="473" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="609" end="612" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040277" start="760" end="768" title="airdrops" label="airdrops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588" start="1002" end="1011" title="Périgueux" label="Périgueux"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1013" end="1019" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1079" end="1084" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474019" start="1146" end="1164" title="University College of Hull" label="University of Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187287" start="1250" end="1259" title="signaller" label="signaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1298" end="1310" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="1483" end="1501" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Dunkirk evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="1548" end="1561" title="Royal Signals" label="Royal Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788185" start="1585" end="1598" title="Thomas Cadett" label="Thomas Cadett"/>
<link wikidata="Q12553" start="1940" end="1945" title="Indre" label="Indre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302161" start="2239" end="2249" title="Max Hymans" label="Max Hymans"/>
<link wikidata="Q174251" start="2255" end="2266" title="Châteauroux" label="Châteauroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387748" start="2502" end="2521" title="Pierre de Vomécourt" label="Pierre de Vomécourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381014" start="2908" end="2916" title="Philippe de Vomécourt" label="Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q45656" start="2923" end="2930" title="Limoges" label="Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q689463" start="2966" end="2993" title="Armstrong Whitworth Whitley" label="Armstrong Whitworth Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254256" start="3363" end="3371" title="SOE F Section networks" label="Autogiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4165" end="4168" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q826265" start="4182" end="4195" title="Radio Londres" label="Radio Londres"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="4688" end="4692" title="code" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="4698" end="4704" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128361" start="4840" end="4847" title="Radio jamming" label="jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q579564" start="5118" end="5124" title="Milice" label="Milice"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="5130" end="5142" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q45656" start="5167" end="5174" title="Limoges" label="Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="5283" end="5293" title="Marseilles" label="Marseilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q531349" start="5294" end="5304" title="safe house" label="safe house"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588" start="5370" end="5379" title="Périgueux" label="Périgueux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077096" start="5429" end="5452" title="Mauzac-et-Grand-Castang" label="Mauzac-et-Grand-Castang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="5454" end="5462" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308562" start="5678" end="5694" title="Michael Trotobas" label="Michael Trotobas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173983" start="5726" end="5743" title="Jean-Pierre Bloch" label="Jean-Pierre Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198070" start="5982" end="5995" title="Virginia Hall" label="Virginia Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="6098" end="6106" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6118" end="6123" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839" start="6152" end="6160" title="Figueres" label="Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q11994" start="6173" end="6188" title="Miranda de Ebro" label="Miranda de Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="6189" end="6200" title="internment" label="prison camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763603" start="6398" end="6416" title="Maurice Buckmaster" label="Maurice Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6550" end="6563" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q408744" start="6729" end="6751" title="Falls Church, Virginia" label="Falls Church, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392033" start="6872" end="6894" title="SOE F Section timeline" label="SOE F Section timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254256" start="6897" end="6919" title="SOE F Section networks" label="SOE F Section networks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262213" wikidata="Q7231758" url="?curid=1262213" title="Porthclais">
<text>Porthclais (also known as Porth Clais) is a small sheltered inlet harbour near St Davids, Pembrokeshire, Wales, in the community of St Davids and the Cathedral Close.

==History==
Porthclais harbour was built in the 12th century, importing coal and timber. The entire harbour is within the St David&#x27;s Peninsula Site of Special Scientific Interest. Porthclais is still used as a small port by local fishermen and recreational sailors. The largely intact old harbour wall may have been built by the Romans, and the harbour was mentioned in the mediaeval Mabinogion. The earliest recorded date of trade through the port is 1385.

The harbour dries out at low tide and is a good launching spot for small boats, dive craft and kayaks who are setting out to explore St Bride&#x27;s Bay.
Porthclais harbour has some of the best preserved remains of stone Lime kilns in Pembrokeshire.

==Harbour authority==
Porthclais Harbour Authority Limited provides harbour services; the harbour can accommodate around 50 small boats and is very busy at peak times.

==Facilities==
There is a car park on the site of what used to be the now defunct St. Davids gasworks, which in turn was built on the site of a spring where it is said St. David himself was baptised.

==References==
== External links ==

*Video of walk up Porthclais cliff
*Photos of Porthclais and surrounding area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7231758" start="0" end="10" title="Porthclais" label="Porthclais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172599" start="60" end="65" title="inlet" label="inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="66" end="73" title="harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q648732" start="79" end="88" title="St Davids" label="St Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="90" end="103" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="105" end="110" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630741" start="119" end="128" title="Community (Wales)" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q24341876" start="132" end="165" title="St Davids and the Cathedral Close" label="St Davids and the Cathedral Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="316" end="351" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q815523" start="557" end="567" title="Mabinogion" label="Mabinogion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179246" start="727" end="733" title="Kayak" label="kayaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426232" start="765" end="784" title="St Bride&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="St Bride&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772" start="853" end="862" title="Lime kiln" label="Lime kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="867" end="880" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495738" start="1145" end="1153" title="gasworks" label="gasworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q331697" start="1220" end="1229" title="St. David" label="St. David"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="1242" end="1250" title="baptised" label="baptised"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262218" wikidata="Q600892" url="?curid=1262218" title="Kilinux">
<text>Kilinux (klnX), the Open Swahili Localization Project, is a project by the Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA), the University of Dar es Salaam (UDSM), and IT+46 for localizing major applications to the Swahili language.

It is based in Tanzania and run on Linux, and aims to create an operating system in Swahili, which is spoken by an estimated 100 million people. The project was started as a joint effort between the University of Dar es Salaam and Swedish company IT +46.

== Background ==
Swahili is a Bantu language spoken by about 100 million people in Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Malawi, Mozambique and other areas in or near the African Great Lakes region. Most users are using Microsoft Windows and Microsoft Office, but since that is not available in Swahili, they have to use English or French. Kilinux tried to reduce the threshold by localizing Open Office. In June 2004 Microsoft announced a Swahili version of Windows.

== History ==

The Kilinux project began in 2003 with the development of a glossary and a spell checker for OpenOffice.org.

The Kilinux Project received an award in May 2006 as the best ICT project in the category education of the 2006 Stockholm challenge.

== Swahili IT Glossary ==
In October 2004 Kilinux released a &quot;Swahili IT Glossary&quot; under the Creative Commons ShareAlike license containing over 1500 &quot;computer related terms in English and their Swahili equivalents&quot;, because the Swahili language did not contain any computer terminology.

== Jambo OpenOffice ==
The first major release by the project — Jambo OpenOffice (&quot;Hello OpenOffice&quot;) — was a localised version of OpenOffice.org, an open source office suite, and was aimed primarily at schools and colleges.

== Jambo Firefox ==
On 15 June 2006 the project announced they had localised the web browser Mozilla Firefox.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q600892" start="0" end="7" title="Kilinux" label="Kilinux"/>
<link wikidata="Q600892" start="9" end="13" title="Kilinux" label="klnX"/>
<link wikidata="Q600892" start="20" end="53" title="Kilinux" label="Open Swahili Localization Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670860" start="75" end="115" title="Swedish International Development Agency" label="Swedish International Development Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q557597" start="128" end="155" title="University of Dar es Salaam" label="University of Dar es Salaam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="168" end="173" title="IT+46" label="IT+46"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543" start="178" end="188" title="Language localisation" label="localizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="215" end="231" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili language"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="249" end="257" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="269" end="274" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="298" end="314" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="318" end="325" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q557597" start="433" end="460" title="University of Dar es Salaam" label="University of Dar es Salaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="520" end="525" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="573" end="578" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="580" end="588" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="590" end="596" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="598" end="604" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="606" end="616" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="648" end="667" title="African Great Lakes" label="African Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="697" end="714" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="719" end="735" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q164274" start="1036" end="1049" title="spell checker" label="spell checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="1133" end="1136" title="Information and communication technologies" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068473" start="1161" end="1170" title="Information and communication technologies in education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1183" end="1202" title="Stockholm challenge" label="Stockholm challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="1308" end="1324" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q511977" start="1655" end="1669" title="OpenOffice.org" label="OpenOffice.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="1674" end="1685" title="Open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="1831" end="1842" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="1843" end="1858" title="Mozilla Firefox" label="Mozilla Firefox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262220" wikidata="Q171816" url="?curid=1262220" title="1976 United States Grand Prix West">
<text>The 1976 United States Grand Prix West was a Formula One motor race held on March 28, 1976, in Long Beach, California. The race was the third round of the 1976 Formula One season and the first new race to be added to the calendar since the Brazilian and Swedish Grand Prix were added in 1973. It was the second Formula One race held in California, the first being the 1960 United States Grand Prix at Riverside, only 50 miles away. The race was held over 80 laps of the 3.251-kilometre street circuit for a total race distance of 260 kilometres.

The race was won by Swiss driver Clay Regazzoni in a Ferrari 312T by 42 seconds over team mate and championship points leader, Austrian driver Niki Lauda. French driver Patrick Depailler finished third driving a Tyrrell 007.

==Summary==


Italy was the first country to host two Championship Formula One races in the same year in 1957. The United States would become the second as the first USGP West at Long Beach, California, appeared on the 1976 F1 calendar, along with the long-standing autumn race at Watkins Glen, New York. The new race&#x27;s organizers, headed by British businessman and Long Beach resident Chris Pook, could not have done a better job in their attempt to create an &#x27;American Monaco.&#x27; An unending list of former Champions was present for the weekend&#x27;s vintage race, including Denny Hulme, Jack Brabham, and Juan Manuel Fangio himself. Dan Gurney and American Champion Phil Hill were also in attendance after helping to conceive and promote the event.

When the cars took to the track, the drivers differed in their opinions of the concrete-lined street circuit which featured two hairpins and a long, curving waterfront &quot;straight.&quot; Ferrari&#x27;s reigning World Champion Niki Lauda said the course was much bumpier than Monaco and harder on the car, but easier on the driver. Emerson Fittipaldi said he liked it very much, but Frenchmen Jacques Laffite and Patrick Depailler would not agree. In qualifying, Lauda led first, then James Hunt&#x27;s McLaren, and finally Clay Regazzoni in the second Ferrari. After spending much of the session with ignition trouble, Depailler made a last-minute bid and slotted his Tyrrell onto the front row in second, less than two-tenths off the Ferrari&#x27;s pace. The Formula One Constructors&#x27; Association had decided to limit the field to twenty starters for safety reasons, because of the narrow concrete canyons necessitated by the street layout, and seven cars failed to qualify.

At the start, Regazzoni rocketed away and settled into the lead, ahead of Hunt, Depailler, and teammate Lauda. Exiting the first turn, Vittorio Brambilla squeezed Carlos Reutemann into the wall, putting both cars out. Then, on the curving back &quot;straight&quot; by the harbor, Gunnar Nilsson&#x27;s Lotus broke its rear suspension and jerked hard into the wall at 160 miles per hour. He emerged with only a stiff neck.
&quot;On lap four, Hunt was bearing down on Depailler for second place. He tried to slip inside the Tyrrell entering the right-hand hairpin just before the back straight, but Depailler closed the door, forcing Hunt to go around on the left. As they exited the corner side-by-side, Depailler moved across and pushed the McLaren into the barrier. Hunt yanked himself from his car, certain that it was undrivable, and shook his fist at Depailler each time the Frenchman came around. After the race, the McLaren mechanics came to retrieve the car and were able to drive it back to the pits!&quot;
On the same lap, John Watson bumped Laffite&#x27;s Ligier from behind, breaking the nose on his Penske. Laffite was spun around by the contact and dropped from eighth to fourteenth place. Meanwhile, Lauda made his way by Depailler on lap five and took second place, seven seconds behind Regazzoni, who was beginning to seem untouchable. Mario Andretti had moved from fifteenth on the grid to ninth in the Parnelli VPJ 4B-Ford, including the fastest lap to that point, but was finished when he lost the water in his engine (although he didn&#x27;t actually stop until lap 15 when the engine had completely cooked).
&quot;This would be the last race for the American Vel&#x27;s-Parnelli car. Over three seasons, it competed in 16 races, with Mario the car&#x27;s only driver. Upon retiring from the race in Long Beach, Andretti was approached by a television reporter in the pits, asking, &quot;How about this being your last race in Formula One?&quot; Andretti replied, &quot;What are you talking about?&quot; The reporter said, &quot;That&#x27;s what Vel (Miletich) told me.&quot; Andretti said, &quot;It may have been his last Grand Prix, but it won&#x27;t be mine.&quot;&quot;

&quot;Andretti terminated his relationship with Miletich and Parnelli Jones that day, but the next morning, by accident, joined Lotus team manager Colin Chapman for breakfast in a Long Beach coffee shop, where the two forged an agreement. By the next season, with Andretti driving Chapman&#x27;s revolutionary Lotus 78, the two were winning races together and, of course, in 1978, captured the World Championship.&quot;
At about the same time as Andretti&#x27;s retirement from the race, Depailler spun and dropped from third to seventh, and after 20 laps, Regazzoni led by 13 seconds over Lauda, Jody Scheckter and Tom Pryce in the Shadow. Depailler, furious over his mistake, was storming back up the line as he got by Jean-Pierre Jarier and Ronnie Peterson within six laps. When Pryce broke a driveshaft on lap 33 and Scheckter had a front wishbone snap on lap 34, Depailler was back in third place, behind the two Ferraris.

After his incident with Watson, Laffite had driven brilliantly in just the third race for the new Matra-powered Ligier. He passed Jochen Mass on lap 45, and Jarier on lap 46 to take over fourth place. With 20 laps to go, Lauda was having trouble selecting gears and decided to try to nurse the car home rather than make a run at Regazzoni. Jarier had dropped to sixth behind Mass, also with gearbox trouble. Then, on the next to last lap, with only first and fifth gears left, he was also overtaken by Fittipaldi, who scored the first Championship point for his own Copersucar team.

Regazzoni took an easy win, the fourth of his career, completing the grand chelem of pole position, fastest lap, victory, and leading every lap. Lauda successfully brought his ailing car home second, 42 seconds back, and Depailler completed a fine recovery from his spin by taking third. The first USGP West was a success. Indeed, former team manager Rob Walker said, &quot;I think the creation of the Long Beach GP was the greatest achievement in motor racing this decade&quot;.

==Classification==
===Qualifying===

*Drivers in red failed to qualify

===Race===
==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Doug Nye (1978). &quot;The United States Grand Prix and Grand Prize Races, 1908-1977.&quot; B. T. Batsford. 
* Rob Walker (July, 1976). &quot;1st United States Grand Prix West: Regga Runs Away&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 78-82.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171816" start="4" end="38" title="1976 United States Grand Prix West" label="1976 United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="45" end="56" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="57" end="67" title="auto racing" label="motor race"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="95" end="117" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q69387" start="155" end="178" title="1976 Formula One season" label="1976 Formula One season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961" start="240" end="249" title="Brazilian Grand Prix" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9223" start="254" end="272" title="Swedish Grand Prix" label="Swedish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q62608" start="287" end="291" title="1973 Formula One season" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q595339" start="368" end="397" title="1960 United States Grand Prix" label="1960 United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172871" start="401" end="410" title="Riverside International Raceway" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q173284" start="580" end="594" title="Clay Regazzoni" label="Clay Regazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q173480" start="600" end="612" title="Ferrari 312T" label="Ferrari 312T"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="690" end="700" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q171611" start="716" end="733" title="Patrick Depailler" label="Patrick Depailler"/>
<link wikidata="Q69047" start="878" end="882" title="1957 Formula One season" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="952" end="974" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q172081" start="1054" end="1076" title="1976 United States Grand Prix" label="Watkins Glen, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1164" end="1174" title="Chris Pook" label="Chris Pook"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="1254" end="1260" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166" start="1364" end="1375" title="Denny Hulme" label="Denny Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125" start="1377" end="1389" title="Jack Brabham" label="Jack Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="1395" end="1413" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="1423" end="1433" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112" start="1456" end="1465" title="Phil Hill" label="Phil Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1730" end="1737" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="1769" end="1779" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="1818" end="1824" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172849" start="1874" end="1892" title="Emerson Fittipaldi" label="Emerson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171434" start="1935" end="1950" title="Jacques Laffite" label="Jacques Laffite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171611" start="1955" end="1972" title="Patrick Depailler" label="Patrick Depailler"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="2027" end="2037" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="2045" end="2052" title="McLaren (racing)" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q173284" start="2066" end="2080" title="Clay Regazzoni" label="Clay Regazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="2211" end="2218" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173495" start="2303" end="2345" title="Formula One Constructors&amp;#x27; Association" label="Formula One Constructors&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q171533" start="2660" end="2678" title="Vittorio Brambilla" label="Vittorio Brambilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q173238" start="2688" end="2704" title="Carlos Reutemann" label="Carlos Reutemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q171445" start="2805" end="2819" title="Gunnar Nilsson" label="Gunnar Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="2827" end="2832" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171422" start="3557" end="3568" title="John Watson (racing driver)" label="John Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220251" start="3591" end="3597" title="Equipe Ligier" label="Ligier"/>
<link wikidata="Q174144" start="3636" end="3642" title="Penske Racing" label="Penske"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="3877" end="3891" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q172483" start="3945" end="3953" title="Parnelli" label="Parnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q445817" start="4781" end="4795" title="Parnelli Jones" label="Parnelli Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q173007" start="4867" end="4880" title="Colin Chapman" label="Colin Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q173269" start="5030" end="5038" title="Lotus 78" label="Lotus 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="5317" end="5331" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q172835" start="5336" end="5345" title="Tom Pryce" label="Tom Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q173879" start="5353" end="5359" title="Shadow Racing Cars" label="Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q171683" start="5441" end="5459" title="Jean-Pierre Jarier" label="Jean-Pierre Jarier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173280" start="5464" end="5479" title="Ronnie Peterson" label="Ronnie Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q844092" start="5747" end="5752" title="Equipe Matra Sports" label="Matra"/>
<link wikidata="Q57459" start="5779" end="5790" title="Jochen Mass" label="Jochen Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q171665" start="6215" end="6225" title="Fittipaldi Automotive" label="Copersucar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328813" start="6302" end="6314" title="grand slam (Formula One)" label="grand chelem"/>
<link wikidata="Q780447" start="6584" end="6594" title="Rob Walker Racing Team" label="Rob Walker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262222" wikidata="Q30966" url="?curid=1262222" title="Alofi">
<text>Alofi is the capital of the island nation of Niue. With a population of 610 in 2022, Alofi is the second-smallest national capital by population (after Ngerulmud, capital of Palau). It consists of two villages: Alofi North and Alofi South. They collectively serve as the capital, but of the two, Alofi South hosts more government buildings, as many were moved to the southern part after Cyclone Heta.

==History==
In 1922 the first hospital in Niue opened in Alofi.

In January 2004, Niue was hit by the fierce tropical storm Cyclone Heta, which killed two people and did extensive damage to the entire island. Many of Alofi&#x27;s buildings were destroyed, including the hospital. Government buildings were shifted to a less exposed site 3 km (≈ 2 mi) inland from the west coast, named Fonuakula, after the storm. This site is within the village boundaries of Alofi South.

==Geography==
===Overview===
It is located at the centre of Alofi Bay on the west coast of the island, close to the only break in the coral reef that surrounds Niue. The bay stretches for 30% of the island&#x27;s length (about seven kilometres) from Halagigie Point in the south to Makapu Point in the north.

The council&#x27;s territory borders with Avatele, Hakupu, Lakepa, Liku, Makefu, Mutalau, Tamakautoga and Tuapa.

===Climate===

Alofi features a tropical rainforest climate under the Köppen climate classification, with no discernible dry season. The city has a noticeably drier stretch from June through September. However, all of these months average more than of rain, the limit for a dry season month. Average temperatures vary slightly throughout the course of the year in Alofi hovering at around , during the warmest month (February) and at around during the coolest months (July and August).


==Transport==
The town is serviced by Niue International Airport, and there are numerous roads, both paved and dirt, that crisscross the town.

The island&#x27;s main seaport is Sir Roberts Wharf. It is close to the centre of Alofi, within 200 metres of the capital&#x27;s post office and just to the north of the Chamber of Commerce building. It is a small wharf, capable—due to the island&#x27;s topography—of only handling smaller flat-bottomed boats. Larger cargo vessels and fishing boats moor near the reef, and barges are used to offload cargo. Major strengthening, extension work, and renovations to the wharf were commissioned in 2020, after cyclone damage earlier in the year.

==Personalities==
*Dalton Tagelagi (b. 1968), politician
*Sam Pata Emani Tagelagi (1935–2011), politician

==See also==
*Niue High School
*List of villages in Niue
*Huanaki Cultural Centre &amp; Museum
*List of national capitals

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===
*
*

==External links==

* History of Niue
* Cyclone aftermath pictures</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30966" start="0" end="5" title="Alofi" label="Alofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="13" end="20" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="45" end="49" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057759" start="98" end="144" title="List of national capitals by population" label="second-smallest national capital by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q515229" start="152" end="161" title="Ngerulmud" label="Ngerulmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="174" end="179" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008516" start="387" end="399" title="Cyclone Heta" label="Cyclone Heta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008516" start="526" end="538" title="Cyclone Heta" label="Cyclone Heta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017224" start="935" end="944" title="Alofi Bay" label="Alofi Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="1009" end="1019" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641018" start="1125" end="1140" title="Halagigie Point" label="Halagigie Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552943" start="1227" end="1234" title="Avatele" label="Avatele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635174" start="1236" end="1242" title="Hakupu" label="Hakupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600860" start="1244" end="1250" title="Lakepa" label="Lakepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570188" start="1252" end="1256" title="Liku, Niue" label="Liku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354077" start="1258" end="1264" title="Makefu" label="Makefu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552363" start="1266" end="1273" title="Mutalau" label="Mutalau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045565" start="1275" end="1286" title="Tamakautoga" label="Tamakautoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350297" start="1291" end="1296" title="Tuapa" label="Tuapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="1331" end="1358" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1369" end="1398" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="1420" end="1430" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150665" start="1825" end="1851" title="Niue International Airport" label="Niue International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="1888" end="1893" title="Road surface" label="paved"/>
<link wikidata="Q700143" start="1898" end="1902" title="Dirt road" label="dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q30966" start="1965" end="1982" title="Sir Roberts Wharf" label="Sir Roberts Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876617" start="2494" end="2509" title="Dalton Tagelagi" label="Dalton Tagelagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408006" start="2533" end="2556" title="Sam Pata Emani Tagelagi" label="Sam Pata Emani Tagelagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183071" start="2596" end="2612" title="Niue High School" label="Niue High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283963" start="2614" end="2638" title="List of villages in Niue" label="List of villages in Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q108254635" start="2640" end="2676" title="Huanaki Cultural Centre &amp;amp; Museum" label="Huanaki Cultural Centre &amp;amp; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35094" start="2678" end="2703" title="List of national capitals" label="List of national capitals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262223" wikidata="Q5027644" url="?curid=1262223" title="Camp Trans">
<text>Camp Trans was the name of an annual demonstration and event held outside the Michigan Womyn&#x27;s Music Festival (MWMF or Michfest) in Oceana County, Michigan. This demonstration was held by transgender women and their allies to protest against the Festival&#x27;s policy of excluding trans women from attending, until the Music Festival&#x27;s end in 2015.

==History==
Camp Trans was sparked by a 1991 incident, in which Nancy Burkholder was ejected from the festival, after refusing to answer when a woman asked her whether or not she was transgender. The MWMF maintained a womyn-born womyn policy since its inception, as evidenced by posters from the first festival in 1975. Each year afterwards a group of women, both transgender and cisgender, protested the exclusion of trans women from the event. Initially, these protests were small and sometimes carried on inside of the camp.

A more organized group of transgender women and their allies began camping and holding demonstrations outside the gate. After a five-year hiatus, Camp Trans returned in 1999, led by transgender activists Riki Ann Wilchins and Leslie Feinberg, as well as many members of the Boston and Chicago Lesbian Avengers. The events of this year drew attention and controversy, culminating in tensions as a small group of transgender activists were admitted into the festival to exchange dialogue with organizers and to negotiate a short-lived compromise allowing only transgender women who had sex reassignment surgery on the festival land.

In the early 1980s and in 1999, a transgender musician who had transitioned 10 years earlier did perform in MWMF. During the 1999&#x27;s Camp Trans event, a number of transgender women purchased tickets and were admitted to the MWMF. A similar claim of victory was published by Camp Trans that year.

==Events of 2006==
By 2005, activists at Camp Trans and MWMF had become frustrated with the boycott effort and felt that a combined effort of external and internal activism on the grounds of MWMF might be more effective in securing inclusion.

In 2006, a transgender woman organizer of Camp Trans named Lorrraine Donaldson was sold a ticket to the 31st annual Michigan Womyn&#x27;s Music Festival. On Tuesday, August 8, 2006, Donaldson approached the workers at the front gate of the festival and asked if she could purchase a ticket. She was instructed to read an outdated handout that was printed by the festival office in 2000 following the controversial events surrounding the &quot;Michigan Eight&quot; protest. This paper indicated that the festival was still enforcing a policy of exclusion for transsexual women. When Donaldson pointed out that the document was outdated and asked for a current version from the workers, they told her that none was available. Donaldson requested that the workers seek up-to-date policy information in writing from the office and informed them that she would return the next morning. That same day, the newly organized Yellow Armbands pro-inclusion support group held their first meeting at the Watermelon Tree in the common dining area of the festival. 

On the morning of Wednesday, August 9, Donaldson again approached the box office workers near the front gate and asked to purchase a ticket. She was met at the gate by three members of the Yellow Armbands and one organizer of Camp Trans, all of whom witnessed Donaldson disclosing her trans status to the box office manager, before being sold a ticket and given an orange wristband that designated her as a &quot;festie&quot;. Donaldson attended the festival for the remainder of the week and participated at a trans inclusion workshop that was presented by trans woman Emilia Lombardi, who was also an organizer with Camp Trans and who was sold a ticket to the festival on Friday, August 11, as well. The workshop was listed as part of the official festival program and both Donaldson and Lombardi were open about being trans women at the workshop that was attended by over 50 people. Donaldson and Lombardi also continued to join the Yellow Armbands mealtime gatherings, where they were met with support from festies and workers. The conclusion of the 2006 festivals in Hart, Michigan was marked with noted optimism and collaborative spirit between Camp Trans constituents and their pro-inclusion supporters at MWMF, as was noted immediately by members of the community and media. A camper also captured the good news as it was presented onstage by a Camp Trans committee member and later posted it on YouTube.

==2006 press release controversy and resulting organizational changes==
Following the 2006 festival, a small group of Camp Trans organizers issued a press release that stated that the MWMF had &quot;ended its policy of exclusion.&quot; A disagreement ensued within the Camp Trans and Yellow Armbands organizations over whether or not this press release was ethical due to issues of transparency and consent.

Camp Trans argued that the press release was a deliberate and necessary tactic designed to bait WMWF founder Lisa Vogel into responding with a transphobic press release which would make the parameters of the &quot;wbw-policy&quot; officially known. Supporters of this tactic felt that because Vogel hadn&#x27;t given the Camp Trans organization permission to republish the letter, nor was the policy (or what Vogel referred to as an &quot;intention&quot;) available in writing on the MichFest website or elsewhere, that this was the only way that Camp Trans could ostensibly prove that the policy actually existed. Others felt that the motivation behind the press release was nebulous and not supportive or inclusive of Donaldson or others who were involved in the positive developments that occurred in the summer of 2006. They also believed that the press release caused unnecessary conflict between inclusion activists and the festival office and they preferred to focus on the larger community who were clearly supportive of trans women attending in 2006. Regardless, Vogel did in fact issue a response where she stated again that the festival is intended for women-born-women, and that they hope and expect trans women to respect that intention. Following the press release fallout, Donaldson resigned from Camp Trans and joined the Yellow Armbands as an organizer.

In 2007, the Yellow Armbands blog was frozen by an organizer who resigned from the activism due to lingering issues regarding lack of transparency in the inclusion movement. Other activists also resigned over concerns that Camp Trans was privileging the voices of trans men over trans women in their organization. The remaining inclusion activists at Yellow Armbands created a new online community and blog and renamed their organization Fest For All Womyn.

Donaldson returned to MWMF in 2007 with the newly renamed Fest For All Womyn/Yellow Armbands and camped in The Twilight Zone area of the festival along with other trans women and female inclusion supporters.

2007 was also a landmark year for Camp Trans, because for the first time in their 16-year history, they held elections for their organizational positions. Camp Trans organizers celebrated this as a positive step in the right direction when the majority of elected positions were filled by trans women.

==2010 festivals==

There were tensions during the 2010 festivals. A piece published in both &quot;Anarchist News&quot; and the queer zine &quot;Pink and Black&quot; described a confrontation with a tow truck driver. The driver allegedly threatened to kill Camp Trans members with a tow cable after he was asked to turn off his engine during a Camp Trans speech.

&quot;Pink and Black&quot; wrote that there was vandalism during the festival, saying that, in one incident, someone painted the words &quot;Real Womyn Have Cocks&quot; in a MichFest kitchen. The zine also said a flyer was distributed that read: &quot;Second-Wave &#x27;Feminists&#x27;, / A hot load from my monstrous tranny-cock embodies womanhood more than the pieces of menstral (sic) art your transphobic cunts could ever hope to create. / Love, Womyn-born-Monsters&quot;.

==Since 2010==
There have been groups created &quot;on the land&quot; like Trans Women Belong Here, for support, care, and acquiring a &quot;safe space&quot; within MichFest. MichFest itself, however, ceased as an ongoing concern after its 40th season in 2015.

==UK Festival==

In 2022 a trans art and community camping festival of the same name was held in Leighton Buzzard. The event was a success and is planned to take place again, on a larger scale, in the summer of 2023. 

==See also==
*Transphobia
*Michigan Womyn&#x27;s Music Festival
*List of transgender-related topics
*Lesbian Avengers
*Sexism

==References==
==External links==
*Official Camp Trans site
*Detailed History of Camp Trans from 1991 to 2000
*Trans Inclusion Archive of MWMF, Camp Trans and The Yellow Armbands (1991-2011)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5027644" start="0" end="10" title="Camp Trans" label="Camp Trans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837810" start="78" end="114" title="Michigan Womyn&amp;#x27;s Music Festival" label="Michigan Womyn&amp;#x27;s Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="193" end="210" title="transgender women" label="transgender women"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031651" start="579" end="595" title="womyn born womyn" label="womyn-born womyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093205" start="741" end="750" title="cisgender" label="cisgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="977" end="991" title="Demonstration (people)" label="demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q546490" start="1094" end="1111" title="Riki Wilchins" label="Riki Ann Wilchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q929268" start="1116" end="1131" title="Leslie Feinberg" label="Leslie Feinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530241" start="1183" end="1199" title="Lesbian Avengers" label="Lesbian Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="1474" end="1498" title="sex reassignment surgery" label="sex reassignment surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="1689" end="1706" title="transgender women" label="transgender women"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2126" end="2145" title="Lorrraine Donaldson" label="Lorrraine Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="4524" end="4531" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q207184" start="4683" end="4696" title="press release" label="press release"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="7420" end="7424" title="zine" label="zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462645" start="8487" end="8503" title="Leighton Buzzard" label="Leighton Buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q59677" start="8623" end="8634" title="Transphobia" label="Transphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837810" start="8636" end="8672" title="Michigan Womyn&amp;#x27;s Music Festival" label="Michigan Womyn&amp;#x27;s Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444692" start="8674" end="8708" title="List of transgender-related topics" label="List of transgender-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530241" start="8710" end="8726" title="Lesbian Avengers" label="Lesbian Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="8728" end="8734" title="Sexism" label="Sexism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262224" wikidata="Q171827" url="?curid=1262224" title="1977 United States Grand Prix West">
<text>The 1977 United States Grand Prix West (officially the [[Grand Prix of Long Beach|Long Beach Grand Prix]]) was a Formula One motor race held on April 3, 1977 in Long Beach, California. It was the fourth race of the 1977 World Championship of F1 Drivers and the 1977 International Cup for F1 Constructors.

The 80-lap race was won by Mario Andretti, driving a Lotus-Ford. Andretti held off Niki Lauda in the Ferrari to become the only American to win a Formula One race on home soil, while also giving the ground-effect Lotus 78 its first win. Jody Scheckter finished third in the Wolf-Ford.

== Summary ==
The Formula One circus arrived at Long Beach in mourning following the deaths of Tom Pryce at the South African Grand Prix and Carlos Pace in a light aircraft crash near São Paulo. The Shadow team signed Alan Jones as Pryce&#x27;s replacement, while Pace&#x27;s place at Brabham was taken by Hans-Joachim Stuck. Stuck had been expected to drive for the new ATS team with its old Penske car but changed his mind, meaning that ATS had to sign Jean-Pierre Jarier instead.

The first practice session saw Jody Scheckter fastest in the Wolf with a time of 1:22.79, just ahead of Andretti in the Lotus 78. In the second session, Andretti went faster with a 1:22.06, but Ferrari&#x27;s Niki Lauda took the pole position in final qualifying on Saturday with a 1:21.63. Scheckter was third, joined on the second row by the second Ferrari of Carlos Reutemann.

On Sunday, it was 68 degrees °F (20 °C) and very pleasant as the cars formed on the starting grid. At the green light, Scheckter shot past both Lauda and Andretti, and led into the first turn. Reutemann pulled next to Andretti on the inside approach to the turn, but braked too late and slid straight on. Andretti avoided a T-bone by braking in time to duck behind him into the corner.

James Hunt was allegedly pushed from behind, though no one knows for sure, and when he hit John Watson&#x27;s right rear wheel with his left front, he was launched six feet in the air, showing Watson the entire underside of his McLaren. On landing, he slid past Reutemann and down the escape road. Hunt was able to make it back to the pits, and though his suspension was bent, he carried on, and ended up missing a point for sixth by just two seconds.

Meanwhile, the trio of Scheckter, Andretti and Lauda continued the battle they had been waging all weekend, with Scheckter leading by 1.7 seconds after three laps. On lap 4, Lauda was pressuring Andretti and tried to pass in the hairpin at the end of the curving back straight. He locked the Ferrari&#x27;s brakes, but kept his foot down hard to avoid hitting Andretti&#x27;s Lotus. The resulting flat spots on Lauda&#x27;s tires caused a serious vibration throughout the race, and probably took away his chance of winning.

Scheckter maintained a consistent cushion over the battle for second; after 25 laps, Andretti was 2.5 seconds behind and Lauda was 4 seconds back. Even as they periodically worked their way through traffic, the three leaders never lost contact for more than half a lap. The Long Beach circuit was not particularly suited for cars that generate much downforce, and the new Lotus, with its higher aerodynamic drag, could not match the straight line speed of Scheckter&#x27;s Wolf; Andretti continually closed in through the corners, but could not find a way past.
&quot;I was preparing for a real banzai under braking,&quot; Andretti later said. &quot;I needed to go from fifth to first gear in order to do it, and the way the gearboxes were in those days, I had maybe one or two tries to do that. My objective was to do it if I was in a position at the end of the race. Then I saw a twitch and, obviously, he had a tire that was slightly deflating.&quot;

On lap 58, Scheckter&#x27;s lap time suddenly increased by two seconds, and as he passed the pits, he pointed emphatically to the crew at his right front tyre, which had developed a slow leak. The tyre began locking up time and again under braking, but Scheckter decided he was going to stay out and go as far as he could. For 18 laps, he tenaciously fought a losing battle as he held off each of Andretti&#x27;s desperate attempts to pass as his deflating tyre got softer and softer.

&quot;It was not at the point that the tyre was really going down, because it was the left side, not the right side, and it was not to the point that he really backed off any sooner because his braking point and turning point for the corner was the same.&quot;

On lap 77, Andretti outbraked the Wolf and pulled inside him entering the hairpin. &quot;It&#x27;s not that he went wide,&quot; he said afterwards, &quot;I just got him clear at the braking point, and then after I went by him, I distanced myself.&quot; The frenzied crowd of 70,000 finally burst into rapturous applause as Andretti accelerated into the lead. Scheckter&#x27;s despair was complete when Lauda also went by on the next lap. The crowd cheered Andretti home, deflecting considerable pressure from Lauda right to the flag, as he won by less than a second.

&quot;It is one of the nicest moments of my career, even more satisfying than winning Indianapolis and really gratifying to have so many people pulling for me,&quot; Andretti said. &quot;The car remained perfectly balanced throughout the race and the brakes were superb.&quot;

&quot;It was not that I was given a break,&quot; Mario still insists. &quot;I outbraked him clean. To me, it was just as satisfying a win. Jody tried to say that the only reason I passed him was because the tyre was going down; but if that was the case, he would have had a lot of smoke and a lot of locking up, and there was none of that. So, it was a good, satisfying win.&quot;

Scheckter held on for third place, and the scoring was completed by Patrick Depailler&#x27;s Tyrrell, over a minute behind; Emerson Fittipaldi in the Copersucar; and Jarier in the ATS Penske-Ford.

== Classification ==
===Qualifying===
===Race===
==Notes==

* This was the 50th Grand Prix start for Italian engine supplier Alfa Romeo.

==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


== References ==
==Further reading==
* Doug Nye (1978). &quot;The United States Grand Prix and Grand Prize Races, 1908–1977.&quot; B. T. Batsford. 
* Rob Walker (July, 1977). &quot;2nd United States Grand Prix West: Patience At 11,000 RPM&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 112–117.
* Gordon Kirby (April, 1997). &quot;Proof of Concept&quot;. &quot;RACER&quot;, 68–103.
* Pete Lyons (April, 2002). &quot;One Day At The Beach&quot;. &quot;RACER&quot;, 74–78.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171827" start="4" end="38" title="1977 United States Grand Prix West" label="1977 United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q171827" start="55" end="105" title="1977 United States Grand Prix West" label="[[Grand Prix of Long Beach|Long Beach Grand Prix]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="113" end="124" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="161" end="171" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="173" end="183" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="333" end="347" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q173269" start="359" end="364" title="Lotus 78" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="365" end="369" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="389" end="399" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q173480" start="407" end="414" title="Ferrari 312T" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11300146" start="505" end="518" title="Ground effect (cars)" label="ground-effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="543" end="557" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303687" start="580" end="584" title="Wolf WR1" label="Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q172835" start="687" end="696" title="Tom Pryce" label="Tom Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q171828" start="704" end="728" title="1977 South African Grand Prix" label="South African Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171443" start="733" end="744" title="Carlos Pace" label="Carlos Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="776" end="785" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173879" start="791" end="797" title="Shadow Racing Cars" label="Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172753" start="810" end="820" title="Alan Jones (racing driver)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="877" end="884" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q58654" start="898" end="916" title="Hans-Joachim Stuck" label="Hans-Joachim Stuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q784953" start="963" end="966" title="ATS (wheels)" label="ATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q173864" start="985" end="991" title="Penske PC4" label="Penske"/>
<link wikidata="Q171683" start="1047" end="1065" title="Jean-Pierre Jarier" label="Jean-Pierre Jarier"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="1107" end="1121" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q172997" start="1137" end="1141" title="Walter Wolf Racing" label="Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1270" end="1277" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="1285" end="1295" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q173238" start="1438" end="1454" title="Carlos Reutemann" label="Carlos Reutemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="1844" end="1854" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q171422" start="1935" end="1946" title="John Watson (racing driver)" label="John Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="2072" end="2079" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="5179" end="5191" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171611" start="5821" end="5838" title="Patrick Depailler" label="Patrick Depailler"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="5846" end="5853" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172849" start="5877" end="5895" title="Emerson Fittipaldi" label="Emerson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171665" start="5903" end="5913" title="Fittipaldi Automotive" label="Copersucar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="5944" end="5948" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="6076" end="6086" title="Alfa Romeo in Formula One" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262225" wikidata="Q171640" url="?curid=1262225" title="1978 United States Grand Prix West">
<text>The 1978 United States Grand Prix West (officially the [[Grand Prix of Long Beach|Long Beach Grand Prix]]) was a Formula One motor race held on April 2, 1978, at Long Beach, California.

==Summary==
Carlos Reutemann took over at the halfway mark from Ferrari teammate Gilles Villeneuve, when the Canadian crashed out of the lead, and won by eleven seconds. It was the second American victory for the Argentine, who also won for Brabham at Watkins Glen in 1974. American Mario Andretti finished second to maintain a share of the Championship lead with Reutemann.

At the start of the weekend, though only 22 cars would make the grid, there were 30 entries, requiring a one-hour pre-qualifying session on Friday morning for the eight non-FICA members. From these eight, the fastest four would join the rest of the field in qualifying for one of the 22 starting spots.

Niki Lauda, who had placed his Ferrari on pole for the previous year&#x27;s race, again set the early pace, this time in a Brabham. Late in the Friday morning session, however, Reutemann suddenly jumped to the top of the sheets with a 1:20.99 and eventually posted the day&#x27;s best of 1:20.636. As usual at Long Beach, a number of drivers suffered from broken gearboxes, and on Saturday, though the weather was better, no one was able to better Reutemann&#x27;s time. The first three rows of the final grid were occupied by just three teams, as Villeneuve completed the all-Ferrari front row, Brabham teammates Lauda and John Watson were third and fifth, and the Lotus pair of Andretti and Ronnie Peterson were fourth and sixth.

A beautiful California day and 75,000 paying fans showed up for the race on Sunday. The start had been moved from in front of the pits on Ocean Boulevard to the curving &quot;straight&quot; on Shoreline Drive in order to avoid another first corner tangle. The strategy seemed to work, as everyone got through cleanly, though John Watson&#x27;s late braking maneuver down the inside caused him to exit wide from the hairpin and force polesitter Reutemann wide with him, so Villeneuve tucked into the lead as they exited.

After one lap, the order was Villeneuve, Watson, Lauda, Reutemann, Andretti, Alan Jones, James Hunt and Peterson. In the lead of a Grand Prix for the first time, Villeneuve was driving superbly, as he began to extend his lead. On lap six, Hunt struck the wall at the apex of the last turn before the pit straight and knocked his right front wheel off. Three laps later, Watson retired from second with a blown engine. Andretti was dropping back in fourth, having chosen the wrong Goodyears and a poor top gear, and Jones was closing on him quickly. On lap 19, the Williams went through and took off after Reutemann.

With Villeneuve&#x27;s lead at two seconds, Reutemann was pushing Lauda hard for second place. Suddenly, on lap 28, the Brabham went straight on at Turn One, looking as if his brakes had failed. Lauda stopped safely, however, stepped out and removed his helmet. An electrical failure had cut the motor. Meanwhile, Jones had caught up to Reutemann, and the top three were separated by just 2.5 seconds.

On lap 39, just before the halfway point, Villeneuve came up to lap Clay Regazzoni, who was in a battle with Jean-Pierre Jabouille&#x27;s Renault. Rather than wait until the straight, the Canadian tried to get by in the twisty section leading up to Ocean Boulevard. There simply wasn&#x27;t room, however, and, when Regazzoni braked earlier than Villeneuve expected, the Ferrari&#x27;s right front wheel hit the left rear of the Shadow and was launched over the white car into the wall. Fortunately, no one was hurt.

This left Reutemann in the lead, ahead of Jones, then a long gap back to Andretti. Lap after lap, Jones hounded Reutemann, but the Ferrari was too fast down the straight for him to get by. On about lap 47, with Jones still on the Ferrari&#x27;s tail, the front wings of the Williams strangely flopped down, the result of a fabrication failure. Jones continued to battle, but began losing around a second a lap. Adding to the Aussie&#x27;s misery, his fuel pressure began fluctuating. His head jerked back and forth as the engine sputtered and, sometimes, cut out entirely. As one car after another passed, the struggling Williams fell all the way to eighth place. Recording the fastest lap of the race on lap 27 and repassing Emerson Fittipaldi on the last lap for seventh place were his only consolations after a spectacular drive.

Reutemann cruised to the finish, maintaining a twelve to fifteen second gap over Andretti, who had a similar cushion over Patrick Depailler in third.

==Classification==

===Pre-qualifying===

*Positions in red indicate entries that failed to pre-qualify.

===Qualifying===

*Positions in red indicate entries that failed to qualify.

===Race===
==Notes==

* This was the Formula One World Championship debut for Irish driver Derek Daly.
* This was the 1st fastest lap set by Williams.

==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Rob Walker (July, 1978). &quot;3rd United States Grand Prix West: Road Show&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 135–140.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171640" start="4" end="38" title="1978 United States Grand Prix West" label="1978 United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q171640" start="55" end="105" title="1978 United States Grand Prix West" label="[[Grand Prix of Long Beach|Long Beach Grand Prix]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="113" end="124" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="162" end="184" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q173238" start="199" end="215" title="Carlos Reutemann" label="Carlos Reutemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="251" end="258" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="268" end="285" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="428" end="435" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q172019" start="439" end="459" title="1974 United States Grand Prix" label="Watkins Glen in 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="470" end="484" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="867" end="877" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q171422" start="1491" end="1502" title="John Watson (racing driver)" label="John Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="1533" end="1538" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173280" start="1560" end="1575" title="Ronnie Peterson" label="Ronnie Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172753" start="2198" end="2208" title="Alan Jones (racing driver)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="2210" end="2220" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="2601" end="2610" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyears"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="2685" end="2693" title="WilliamsF1" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q173284" start="3209" end="3223" title="Clay Regazzoni" label="Clay Regazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q171462" start="3250" end="3271" title="Jean-Pierre Jabouille" label="Jean-Pierre Jabouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="3279" end="3286" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q173879" start="3570" end="3576" title="Shadow Racing Cars" label="Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172849" start="4385" end="4403" title="Emerson Fittipaldi" label="Emerson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171611" start="4615" end="4632" title="Patrick Depailler" label="Patrick Depailler"/>
<link wikidata="Q171635" start="4919" end="4929" title="Derek Daly" label="Derek Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="4969" end="4977" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262227" wikidata="Q3364515" url="?curid=1262227" title="Fet-Mats">
<text>Fet-Mats or Fat Mats (born Mats Israelsson; died 1677) was a natural mummy found in Sweden in 1719.

In 1719, miners in the Falun Mine found an intact dead body in a water-filled, long-unused tunnel. When the body was put on display, it was identified by his former fiancée, Margaret Olsdotter, as Fet-Mats Israelsson, a native of Boda, Svärdsjö, Kopparberg County, who had disappeared 42 years earlier.

==Discovery==
On 2 December 1719, miners discovered a dead man in the water-filled shaft known as Mårdskinnsfallet, in a part of the mine that had not been used for a long time. Both legs of the dead man were amputated and missing, but neither clothes, hands nor face showed signs of decay, which made it appear as if he had recently died; the find became a mystery because no person was reported as missing. When the body was raised to ground level, it began to dry and became &quot;hard as wood&quot; according to a contemporary description. According to others, the body had rather turned into stone, giving rise to the epithet &quot;the petrified miner&quot;.

After the body was put on display in Stora Kopparberget, Margaret Olsdotter identified it as belonging to Fet-Mats Israelsson, her fiancé who disappeared in March 1677. Local oral historians say a second woman also claimed to be his fiancée, but this could have been motivated by the benefits paid to miner&#x27;s widows.

When the naturalist Carl Linnaeus visited, he noticed that Fet-Mats was not petrified but just covered with vitriol, a substance now commonly known as the pesticide copper sulfate.

Linnaeus stated that as soon as the vitriol evaporated, the body would begin to decay. That proved to be correct.
However, Fet-Mats Israelsson&#x27;s body remained on display for thirty years, until he was buried in Stora Kopparberg Church in Falun on 21 December 1749. During renovation of the floor in the early 1860s, the remains of Fet-Mats were found again and exhibited in a display case, until he was finally buried in 1930 in the church&#x27;s graveyard.

==In culture==
Fet-Mats became an inspiration for the German romanticists. The philosopher and naturalist Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert wrote about him in &quot;Ansichten von der Nachtseite der Naturwissenschaft&quot;, Achim von Arnim wrote a ballad about Fet-Mats, Johann Peter Hebel wrote a short story about him called &quot;Unverhofftes Wiedersehen&quot; (). Friedrich Rückert also wrote about Fet-Mats. Most notably E. T. A. Hoffmann wrote the short story &quot;Die Bergwerke zu Falun&quot; published in his 1819 collection, &quot;Die Serapionsbrüder&quot;. In 1842, Richard Wagner wrote a libretto based on Hoffmann&#x27;s short story called &quot;Die Bergwerke zu Falun&quot;, but it was refused and instead he wrote &quot;Tannhäuser&quot;. In 1901, Hugo von Hofmannsthal&#x27;s &quot;Das Bergwerk zu Falun&quot; premiered at the Burgtheater in Vienna.

==References==
==External links==
*Fet-Mats.se
*Fet-Mats - den förstenade mannen</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3364515" start="0" end="8" title="Fet-Mats" label="Fet-Mats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364515" start="12" end="20" title="Fet-Mats" label="Fat Mats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364515" start="27" end="42" title="Fet-Mats" label="Mats Israelsson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61" end="74" title="Mummy#Natural" label="natural mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q636194" start="124" end="134" title="Falun Mine" label="Falun Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453241" start="337" end="345" title="Svärdsjö" label="Svärdsjö"/>
<link wikidata="Q103732" start="347" end="364" title="Dalarna County" label="Kopparberg County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1413" end="1426" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q427282" start="1501" end="1508" title="vitriol" label="vitriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q107184" start="1558" end="1572" title="Copper(II) sulfate" label="copper sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26509" start="1818" end="1823" title="Falun" label="Falun"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="2100" end="2111" title="romanticist" label="romanticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q66704" start="2145" end="2175" title="Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert" label="Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q70988" start="2259" end="2274" title="Achim von Arnim" label="Achim von Arnim"/>
<link wikidata="Q62512" start="2306" end="2324" title="Johann Peter Hebel" label="Johann Peter Hebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60644" start="2403" end="2420" title="Friedrich Rückert" label="Friedrich Rückert"/>
<link wikidata="Q150471" start="2461" end="2478" title="E. T. A. Hoffmann" label="E. T. A. Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="2612" end="2626" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="2635" end="2643" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q560619" start="2770" end="2780" title="Tannhäuser (opera)" label="Tannhäuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q51513" start="2797" end="2818" title="Hugo von Hofmannsthal" label="Hugo von Hofmannsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q308720" start="2877" end="2888" title="Burgtheater" label="Burgtheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2892" end="2898" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262232" wikidata="Q755465" url="?curid=1262232" title="Hanae Mori">
<text>was a Japanese fashion designer. She was one of only two Japanese women to have presented her collections on the runways of Paris and New York, and the first Asian woman to be admitted as an official &quot;haute couture&quot; design house by the Fédération française de la couture in France. Her fashion house, opened in Japan in 1951, grew to become a $500 million international business by the 1990s.

==Career==
Mori was born on 8 January 1926 in Muikaichi, Shimane. After graduating from Tokyo Women&#x27;s Christian University, she married and attended dress-making school. She opened her first atelier, Hiyoshiya, in 1951, and over the next several years designed costumes for hundreds of movies. In 1965, she presented her first New York City collection, &quot;East Meets West.&quot; Twelve years later, she opened an haute couture showroom in Paris, leading to her 1977 appointment as a member of the Chambre syndicale de la couture parisienne.

Mori designed three consecutive uniforms for the flight attendants of Japan Air Lines (JAL). The first uniform was worn from 1967 to 1970; the second, which created a sensation by featuring a miniskirt, worn from 1970 to 1977; and the third worn from 1977 to 1988. From 1989 to 1996, Mori employed Dominique Sirop as a designer. He became a &quot;grand couturier&quot; in 1997. In 1992, Mori designed the official uniform for the Japanese Delegation to the Barcelona Olympics and, in 1994, the official uniform for the Japanese Delegation to the Lillehammer Olympics. Also in 1993, Masako, Crown Princess of Japan wore a sleeveless white gown designed by Mori for her wedding ceremony. Mori had the patronage of Masako, Crown Princess of Japan, Hillary Clinton, Nancy Reagan, Renata Tebaldi, and Monegasque Princess and actress Grace Kelly.

Amidst company financial struggles, Mori sold the ready-to-wear and licensed apparel operations in January 2002 to an investment group formed by Japanese trading company Mitsui &amp; Co. and the Rothschild group in Britain. Opting for fast-track corporate rehabilitation, the company then applied to the Tokyo District Court for protection from its creditors on 30 May 2002, as it had () in liabilities.

Mori announced her retirement in June 2004, stating that she would be closing her fashion house after the Haute Couture Show for Fall 2004 in Paris. She held her last fashion show in July of that year.

==Awards==
In 1988, she received a Purple Ribbon Medal of Honor from the Government of Japan. In 1989 Mori was awarded the French Legion of Honor by President François Mitterrand of France. In 1996, Mori was awarded the Order of Culture by the Emperor of Japan.

== Personal life and death ==
In 1946, Mori met Ken Mori (1912–1996), a textile businessman who she later married. Ken died on 16 October 1996 of a heart attack. Mori had two sons with Ken named Akira and Kei. Both children help run Mori&#x27;s business.

Mori died at her home in Tokyo on 11 August 2022, at the age of 96. No cause of death has been revealed.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="206" end="219" title="haute couture" label="haute couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511543" start="246" end="280" title="Fédération française de la couture" label="Fédération française de la couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933111" start="450" end="468" title="Muikaichi, Shimane" label="Muikaichi, Shimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062928" start="492" end="531" title="Tokyo Women&amp;#x27;s Christian University" label="Tokyo Women&amp;#x27;s Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="736" end="749" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="851" end="856" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511543" start="909" end="951" title="Fédération française de la couture" label="Chambre syndicale de la couture parisienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q101539" start="1003" end="1019" title="flight attendant" label="flight attendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="1024" end="1039" title="Japan Air Lines" label="Japan Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q230823" start="1146" end="1155" title="miniskirt" label="miniskirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035476" start="1252" end="1267" title="Dominique Sirop" label="Dominique Sirop"/>
<link wikidata="Q120139653" start="1301" end="1316" title="List of grand couturiers" label="grand couturier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="1411" end="1429" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="Barcelona Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9663" start="1500" end="1520" title="1994 Winter Olympics" label="Lillehammer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q230433" start="1536" end="1567" title="Masako, Crown Princess of Japan" label="Masako, Crown Princess of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230433" start="1666" end="1697" title="Masako, Crown Princess of Japan" label="Masako, Crown Princess of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="1699" end="1714" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="1716" end="1728" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="1782" end="1793" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q904240" start="1966" end="1982" title="Mitsui &amp;amp; Co." label="Mitsui &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1537151" start="1991" end="2007" title="Rothschild group" label="Rothschild group"/>
<link wikidata="Q82678" start="2100" end="2120" title="Tokyo District Court" label="Tokyo District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300246" start="2453" end="2467" title="Medals of Honor (Japan)" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190574" start="2477" end="2496" title="Government of Japan" label="Government of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="2527" end="2549" title="French Legion of Honor" label="French Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="2563" end="2582" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q530124" start="2624" end="2640" title="Order of Culture" label="Order of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="2648" end="2664" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="2815" end="2827" title="Myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262233" wikidata="Q5543483" url="?curid=1262233" title="George Polley">
<text>George Gibson Polley (1898–1927) was an American pioneer of (the then-unnamed act of) buildering, or climbing the walls of tall buildings, earning him the nickname &quot;the human fly&quot;.

According to himself, he began his climbing career at the age of 12 in 1910 when an owner of a clothing store promised him a suit if he would climb to the roof of the building. He succeeded.

Over his career Polley climbed over 2000 buildings. In 1920 he climbed the Woolworth building but was arrested, just when he reached the 30th floor and had 27 floors to go, for climbing without official permission. He also climbed 500 ft up the Custom House Tower in Boston. He would often spice up his performance by pretending to slip and fall from a windowsill to another. George G. Polley was also a talented magician and performed in vaudeville with his wife the amazing Helen Stillman. He was a good friend of Harry Houdini and learned some of his tricks from him.

He had three sons: George, Gibson and Stillman.

George Polley died at the age of 29 due to a brain tumor.

==See also==
* Harry Gardiner, another &quot;human fly&quot; of the same era

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5543483" start="0" end="20" title="George Polley" label="George Gibson Polley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003048" start="86" end="96" title="buildering" label="buildering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="287" end="295" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q217652" start="459" end="477" title="Woolworth building" label="Woolworth building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007905" start="629" end="647" title="Custom House Tower" label="Custom House Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="651" end="657" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="900" end="913" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="1050" end="1061" title="brain tumor" label="brain tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q167237" start="1079" end="1093" title="Harry Gardiner" label="Harry Gardiner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262240" wikidata="Q171642" url="?curid=1262240" title="1979 United States Grand Prix West">
<text>The 1979 United States Grand Prix West, formally titled the Lubri Lon [[Grand Prix of Long Beach|Long Beach Grand Prix]], was a Formula One motor race held on April 8, 1979, at Long Beach, California. Canadian Gilles Villeneuve captured pole, fastest lap and the win for Scuderia Ferrari, followed by his teammate Jody Scheckter, as the Prancing Horses took a big step toward reclaiming the Constructors&#x27; and Drivers&#x27; Championships from Team Lotus. Villeneuve&#x27;s win came by almost half a minute over Scheckter, and Alan Jones joined them on the podium for Williams. It was the third win of Villeneuve&#x27;s career, his second in succession, and the third United States Grand Prix win in a row for Ferrari.

==Summary==
Qualifying was a battle between Ferrari, Lotus and Ligier, and, as is usually the case at Long Beach, the circuit was littered with broken cars by the end of each session. Carlos Reutemann, in the second Lotus, held the pole until the very end of the final session, when Villeneuve bumped him.

With only Ferrari and Renault on Michelin tires, Villeneuve was able to use seven sets of qualifiers in the final session, while the Goodyear runners had only two sets per car. On his final charge, Villeneuve switched off his rev limiter at the end of the straight, raising the revs by 200 to 12,600 and giving him enough extra speed to pip Reutemann by six hundredths of a second. Scheckter was third, ahead of the two Ligiers of Patrick Depailler and Jacques Laffite, then Mario Andretti in sixth.

On Saturday morning, Jean-Pierre Jabouille had a driveshaft on his Renault break on the curving back &quot;straight,&quot; flinging him into the wall at 180 mph. A badly sprained arm would keep him out of the race. Then, in the Sunday morning warmup, a stronger version of the driveshaft, produced by the team in the garage, broke on teammate René Arnoux&#x27;s car. Rather than taking a chance on duplicating Jabouille&#x27;s incident, the team withdrew their remaining car from the race, allowing Derek Daly&#x27;s Ensign onto the starting grid.

100,000 fans gathered on Sunday, which turned sunny and warm just in time for the race. As with the previous year, the start would be on the Shoreline Drive straight, rather than in front of the pits, giving the drivers more of a run down to the first corner. On the warmup lap preceding the drive around to the grid, Reutemann&#x27;s engine cut out, and he had to be helped back to the pits. The problem was quickly solved, and, while the organizers ruled that he must start from the back of the grid, Reutemann ignored the officials and went back out.

The cars made their way around for the start on Shoreline Drive, and, as they approached the grid markings, pole-sitter Villeneuve drove right past his starting position! This confused the entire field, who were taking their cue from Villeneuve. Some actually thought the race had started, and everyone ended up back at the pits! On the way to the grid, Laffite&#x27;s Ligier had suddenly slid across the track when the back end seized. He was allowed to switch to his spare car and, when they finally got under way, he started the race from the pits with Reutemann. After only eight laps, Laffite retired with overheated brakes, and Reutemann broke a driveshaft after just 21, so two of the top five qualifiers were out early, and the door was wide open for the Ferraris.

At the end of one full lap, Villeneuve led Depailler, Scheckter, Jean-Pierre Jarier,
Andretti, Riccardo Patrese, Jones and Nelson Piquet. Villeneuve got to the first corner ahead of Scheckter and quickly began to draw away. Scheckter lost a position to Depailler on the first half lap, but began pushing hard to take back second place. When Depailler missed a gear, Scheckter nearly hit him in the back, and Jarier slipped his Tyrrell past both of them. On the next lap, Scheckter also got around Depailler, whose troubles with fourth gear would last the entire race.

Villeneuve continued to run untroubled in the lead, expanding his margin whenever he chose and setting the race&#x27;s fastest lap before half-distance. The battle for second, however, was fierce as Jarier, Scheckter, Depailler, Andretti and Jones formed a massive train. Jarier was fighting a wheel vibration and holding everyone up, but no one could pass him on the straight.

On lap 28, Scheckter got by the struggling Tyrrell, but it was not until laps 45 and 46, respectively, that Depailler and Jones could follow. By that time, Scheckter had a cushion of nearly twenty seconds back to Depailler in third. With the Ligier still struggling, Jones moved into third place on lap 63. This left Andretti behind Depailler and the two traded positions several times, the Lotus able to go through in the curvy sections, while the Ligier continually repassed on the straight. Finally, as Depailler attempted to lap Jarier, now in sixth spot, he bent his front wing against Jarier&#x27;s wheel, and Andretti was able to take hold of fourth place for good.

Depailler&#x27;s persistence was rewarded with a hard-earned fifth place, and Jarier inherited sixth when Héctor Rebaque, having come from twenty-third to the points, collided with Daly while trying to lap him in the esses.

It was the second win of the season for Villeneuve and put him on top of the Driver&#x27;s standings.

==Classification==
===Qualifying===
=== Race ===
==Notes==

* This was the 1st pole position set by and first Grand Slam for a Canadian driver.
* This was the 10th Grand Prix start for Italian constructor Merzario.
* This race marked the 88th pole position for Ferrari. It broke the previous record set by Lotus at the 1978 Canadian Grand Prix.

==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Rob Walker (July, 1979). &quot;4th United States Grand Prix West: Runaway Horses&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 82-87.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171642" start="4" end="38" title="1979 United States Grand Prix West" label="1979 United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q171642" start="60" end="120" title="1979 United States Grand Prix West" label="Lubri Lon [[Grand Prix of Long Beach|Long Beach Grand Prix]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="128" end="139" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="177" end="199" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="210" end="227" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="271" end="287" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="314" end="328" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="447" end="457" title="Team Lotus" label="Team Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172753" start="530" end="540" title="Alan Jones (racing driver)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="571" end="579" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220251" start="786" end="792" title="Equipe Ligier" label="Ligier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173238" start="907" end="923" title="Carlos Reutemann" label="Carlos Reutemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="1052" end="1059" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="1063" end="1071" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="1163" end="1171" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q171611" start="1461" end="1478" title="Patrick Depailler" label="Patrick Depailler"/>
<link wikidata="Q171434" start="1483" end="1498" title="Jacques Laffite" label="Jacques Laffite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="1505" end="1519" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q171462" start="1552" end="1573" title="Jean-Pierre Jabouille" label="Jean-Pierre Jabouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q173279" start="1874" end="1885" title="René Arnoux" label="René Arnoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q171635" start="2030" end="2040" title="Derek Daly" label="Derek Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q173415" start="2048" end="2054" title="Ensign (racing team)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q171683" start="3474" end="3492" title="Jean-Pierre Jarier" label="Jean-Pierre Jarier"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="3504" end="3520" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="3532" end="3545" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="4400" end="4407" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171539" start="5137" end="5151" title="Héctor Rebaque" label="Héctor Rebaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="5486" end="5494" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172577" start="5564" end="5572" title="Merzario" label="Merzario"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="5620" end="5627" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="5665" end="5670" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65452" start="5678" end="5702" title="1978 Canadian Grand Prix" label="1978 Canadian Grand Prix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262242" wikidata="Q171753" url="?curid=1262242" title="1980 United States Grand Prix West">
<text>The 1980 United States Grand Prix West (officially the Toyota [[Grand Prix of Long Beach]]) was a Formula One motor race held on March 30, 1980, at Long Beach, California. It was the fourth round of the 1980 Formula One season. The race was the fifth United States Grand Prix West and the sixth street race to be held at Long Beach. The race was held over 80 laps of the 3.251-kilometre circuit for a total race distance of 260 kilometres.

The race was won by Brazilian driver Nelson Piquet driving a Brabham BT49. It was Piquet&#x27;s debut World Championship victory in just his fourth points finish and announced his emergence as a championship contender. Piquet won by 49 seconds over Italian driver Riccardo Patrese driving an Arrows A3. It was the best result for both Arrows and Patrese in two years after Patrese finished second at the 1978 Swedish Grand Prix. Third was Brazilian driver, twice-World Champion Emerson Fittipaldi driving a Fittipaldi F7. It was Fittipaldi&#x27;s best result since finishing second at the 1978 Brazilian Grand Prix.

==Summary==
Nelson Piquet took pole, fastest lap and his first career race win to dominate the weekend in his gleaming blue and white Brabham. The Brazilian&#x27;s qualifying time was a full second ahead of the rest of the field, and he led all 80 laps of the race to win by 49 seconds and grab a share of the lead in the Drivers&#x27; Championship. The race would be the last in Formula One for Swiss driver Clay Regazzoni, who suffered spinal damage when he lost the brakes in his Ensign approaching the Queen’s Hairpin, and struck a parked Brabham in the run-off followed by a concrete barrier and tires head on at .

In Friday qualifying, Frenchman Didier Pironi recorded the fastest time, but getting a good lap on Saturday was a matter of using the soft qualifying tires at the right time and slotting in a good time before the track became too oily. Piquet was easily the fastest man on the circuit, using Goodyear tires, but Championship leader René Arnoux grabbed second place in his Renault with an early run on soft Michelins. The big surprise, however, was Jan Lammers, who put his ATS in fourth position while subbing for the injured Marc Surer. James Hunt nearly made a comeback with McLaren, asking for $1 million for the race. This opportunity came about when French rookie driver Alain Prost broke his wrist during practice for the South African Grand Prix, and was not fully fit to drive at Long Beach. The team&#x27;s main sponsor, Marlboro, offered half the figure but negotiations ended after Hunt broke his leg while skiing. Stephen South substituted but South failed to qualify. Pironi slipped to ninth by the end of the session, while the Ferraris of Gilles Villeneuve and Jody Scheckter, so dominant here the year before, struggled to 10th and 16th, and Emerson Fittipaldi just managed to scramble onto the grid in the 24th and final spot. Americans Mario Andretti (Lotus) and Eddie Cheever (Osella), in his first full F1 season, were 15th and 19th.

The only mis-step of Piquet&#x27;s weekend came in the Sunday morning warmup when he and Derek Daly collided entering the corner after the pits. The Brabham was vaulted into the air and landed heavily on all four tires, while Daly&#x27;s Tyrrell went down the escape road. After careful examination, the Brabham crew decided that the car was fine and ready to race.

Entering the first corner Ricardo Zunino, Andretti, Jochen Mass and Jean-Pierre Jarier all made contact under braking. Zunino&#x27;s Brabham and Andretti&#x27;s Lotus were unable to continue. After one lap, Piquet led Patrick Depailler, who had gotten by René Arnoux in the hairpin. They were followed by Alan Jones, Bruno Giacomelli, Riccardo Patrese, Carlos Reutemann, Villeneuve and Daly.

On lap 4, Giacomelli lost control of his Alfa Romeo under braking for the hairpin at the beginning of Shoreline Drive, and slid sideways across the racing line. Reutemann, following directly behind, was the first to be collected and Jody Scheckter, Elio de Angelis, Cheever, Mass and Jarier also became involved. According to Reutemann, while Giacomelli&#x27;s Alfa was facing the inside wall, he let 6th-placed Patrese pass, and then immediately put his car in reverse, and backed onto the racing line, and the approaching 7th-placed Reutemann had to come to a dead stop to avoid hitting the Italian&#x27;s Alfa head on, while Villeneuve and Daly, who were behind Reutemann were both able to avoid hitting the Williams and the Alfa. Giacomelli, realizing he had made a mistake, went back to where he was, and this then caused Scheckter, de Angelis, Cheever, Jarier and Mass- all the cars that had been behind Daly to have a motorway-accordion-style accident where they crashed into the front and back of each other in order. By the time Giacomelli had realized what had happened, the 6 other aforementioned cars including Reutemann were already at a dead stop, although he and Scheckter, who had both stalled had not hit anything, de Angelis (who was injured), Cheever and Jarier had crashed, the latter most seriously; a wheel ripped off Jarier&#x27;s Tyrrell when he hit de Angelis’s Lotus and he went into the run-off area. Mass was the luckiest, although he had not stalled he would end up losing several positions. The marshals decided to move forward Giacomelli, Reutemann and Cheever, all were able to continue for the time being, though Giacomelli and Cheever retired later in the race, and Reutemann had retired soon afterwards with gearbox problems. Mass was able to get going again, and he, Jabouille, Laffite, Rosberg, Regazzoni, Fittipaldi and Watson just managed to squeeze through the carnage, and the marshals somehow got the track cleared before the leaders came around, avoiding a red flag to stop the race.

While Piquet continued to run unchallenged in front, Depailler was struggling with fading brakes on his Alfa Romeo. On lap 18, Jones caught and passed him on the outside of the hairpin to take second place. Meanwhile, Giacomelli was working his way back up through the field ahead of an extended battle between Regazzoni, Fittipaldi and John Watson. Gilles Villeneuve had managed to get the ill handling Ferrari into a good fourth place but his transmission failed on lap 46 and he was out of the race.

After pitting for tires on lap 47, Giacomelli rejoined in 12th place, just ahead of Jones, but about to be lapped by the Williams for the second time, and he continued his reckless on-track conduct. As Jones moved inside to pass the Italian entering the hairpin at the end of the straight, Giacomelli turned in and Jones struck the Alfa Romeo&#x27;s rear wheel, bending the steering arm on the Williams and putting Jones out of the race. This left Piquet with a lead of more than a minute over Patrese and Arnoux, and he began to ease off, allowing some cars to unlap themselves.

Lap 50 saw a horrific accident which would ultimately end the career of Clay Regazzoni, the brakes on his Ensign N180 car failed on the long start finish straight, unable to reduce speed, he hit the stationary Brabham of Ricardo Zunino which had been left at the run off of the Queen’s hairpin since lap 1, and then head on into a concrete wall. The accident left him paralyzed from the waist down. Regazzoni later sued the race organisers, but lost the case.

On lap 63, Arnoux had his right rear tire go completely flat, and by the time he was able to make it back to the pits for a replacement, he had dropped all the way to ninth place. Watson now began to challenge Fittipaldi for third, and even get around him briefly, but gearbox troubles allowed the Brazilian to retake the position and then pull away. Watson, in fact, came under fire from Scheckter&#x27;s Ferrari. Braking into the hairpin, Scheckter tried to go around the outside, as Watson defended the inside line. He slid wide on the dirt and marbles, however, and thereafter, decided to settle for 5th place and his final points in Formula One.

For Piquet, it was the first of 23 career wins and pulled him even with Arnoux in the Drivers&#x27; Championship. For Fittipaldi, who finished third behind a steady Patrese in the Arrows, it was his first podium in more than two years, and the last of his F1 career (both as a driver and as a constructor). The torch was passed from one Brazilian multiple World Champion to another.

==Classification==

=== Qualifying ===
=== Race ===
==Notes==

* This was the Formula One World Championship debut for British driver Stephen South.
* This was the first Grand Slam for a Brazilian driver.
* This race marked the 50th podium finish for an Australian driver.

==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Rob Walker (July, 1980). &quot;5th United States Grand Prix West: Winner Takes All&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 146–151.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171753" start="4" end="38" title="1980 United States Grand Prix West" label="1980 United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q171753" start="55" end="90" title="1980 United States Grand Prix West" label="Toyota [[Grand Prix of Long Beach]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="98" end="109" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="148" end="170" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q69423" start="203" end="226" title="1980 Formula One season" label="1980 Formula One season"/>
<link wikidata="Q9220" start="251" end="280" title="United States Grand Prix West" label="United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="478" end="491" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554031" start="502" end="514" title="Brabham BT49" label="Brabham BT49"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="705" end="721" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q173459" start="733" end="742" title="Arrows A3" label="Arrows A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q171603" start="845" end="868" title="1978 Swedish Grand Prix" label="1978 Swedish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172849" start="919" end="937" title="Emerson Fittipaldi" label="Emerson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275342" start="948" end="961" title="Fittipaldi F7" label="Fittipaldi F7"/>
<link wikidata="Q54399" start="1030" end="1055" title="1978 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="1978 Brazilian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="1070" end="1083" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="1192" end="1199" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q173284" start="1467" end="1481" title="Clay Regazzoni" label="Clay Regazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q173415" start="1541" end="1547" title="Ensign (racing team)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q171432" start="1711" end="1724" title="Didier Pironi" label="Didier Pironi"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="1971" end="1979" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q173279" start="2011" end="2022" title="René Arnoux" label="René Arnoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="2051" end="2058" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="2085" end="2093" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171457" start="2127" end="2138" title="Jan Lammers" label="Jan Lammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q784953" start="2152" end="2155" title="ATS (wheels)" label="ATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q171505" start="2205" end="2215" title="Marc Surer" label="Marc Surer"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="2217" end="2227" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="2256" end="2263" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="2355" end="2366" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q171659" start="2407" end="2431" title="1980 South African Grand Prix" label="South African Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q657158" start="2605" end="2618" title="Stephen South" label="Stephen South"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="2721" end="2729" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferraris"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="2733" end="2750" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="2755" end="2769" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q172849" start="2837" end="2855" title="Emerson Fittipaldi" label="Emerson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="2933" end="2947" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="2949" end="2954" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173205" start="2960" end="2973" title="Eddie Cheever" label="Eddie Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q171506" start="2975" end="2981" title="Osella" label="Osella"/>
<link wikidata="Q171635" start="3123" end="3133" title="Derek Daly" label="Derek Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="3272" end="3279" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172229" start="3427" end="3441" title="Ricardo Zunino" label="Ricardo Zunino"/>
<link wikidata="Q57459" start="3453" end="3464" title="Jochen Mass" label="Jochen Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q171683" start="3469" end="3487" title="Jean-Pierre Jarier" label="Jean-Pierre Jarier"/>
<link wikidata="Q171611" start="3619" end="3636" title="Patrick Depailler" label="Patrick Depailler"/>
<link wikidata="Q172753" start="3706" end="3716" title="Alan Jones (racing driver)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q173112" start="3718" end="3734" title="Bruno Giacomelli" label="Bruno Giacomelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="3736" end="3752" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q173238" start="3754" end="3770" title="Carlos Reutemann" label="Carlos Reutemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="3835" end="3845" title="Alfa Romeo (Formula One)" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="4027" end="4041" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173115" start="4043" end="4058" title="Elio de Angelis" label="Elio de Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="6172" end="6189" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="6447" end="6455" title="WilliamsF1" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q173284" start="6979" end="6993" title="Clay Regazzoni" label="Clay Regazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q174176" start="8200" end="8206" title="Arrows Grand Prix International" label="Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q171665" start="8313" end="8324" title="Fittipaldi Automotive" label="constructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q657158" start="8538" end="8551" title="Stephen South" label="Stephen South"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="8591" end="8600" title="Brazil" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8658" end="8668" title="Australia" label="Australian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262246" wikidata="Q171502" url="?curid=1262246" title="1981 United States Grand Prix West">
<text>The 1981 United States Grand Prix West (officially the Toyota [[Grand Prix of Long Beach]]) was a Formula One motor race held on March 15, 1981, at Long Beach, California. It was the opening race of the 1981 Formula One World Championship.

==Summary==
Defending World Champion Alan Jones finished nine seconds ahead of teammate Carlos Reutemann, and won his first Long Beach Grand Prix, as the 1981 season finally began after a winter of controversy and legal battles. It was the third consecutive Grand Prix win for Jones, and his second consecutive in the United States, after seizing the 1980 Drivers&#x27; title with season-ending wins in Montreal, Canada and Watkins Glen, New York.

The off-season had seen FISA (La Fédération Internationale du Sport Automobile) and FOCA (the Formula One Constructors&#x27; Association) in conflict, ostensibly over FISA&#x27;s scheduled ban of aerodynamic skirts on the cars, but also over financial control of the sport. After threatening to institute their own championship, FOCA agreed to the skirt ban on assurance of their continued control of the sport&#x27;s finances and FISA&#x27;s commitment to a four-year period of stability in the rules. Just 10 days prior to the season-opening race in Long Beach, the Concorde Agreement was signed in Paris, allowing all of the teams to appear.

In the meantime, the South African race, run in February under FOCA&#x27;s pre-agreement version of the rules, had been deprived of its World Championship status by the dispute, and the Argentine race, originally scheduled in January, was moved to April.

In addition to the new rules, Goodyear announced in December that it intended to withdraw immediately from all involvement in European racing. So, when the teams arrived in Long Beach for the first Championship race of the season, the Friday morning practice sessions were filled with frantic activity. Larger wings, softer springs and revised sidepods were in evidence for nearly everyone, trying to make up for the absence of the banned skirts. With all teams also using Michelin tires as well, many drivers were struggling to come to grips with a totally new set of challenges.

When the teams arrived in the Los Angeles area town of Long Beach, the demanding and tight street circuit had been slightly modified from the year before- the second left-hander on Pine Avenue had been made a single-apex corner instead of a double-apex.

On Saturday, yet another legal issue arose over the new twin-chassis Lotus 88, designed by Colin Chapman and Martin Ogilvie. A protest was lodged by a majority of the teams, although they did not specify what rules it was breaking. The car was initially approved by the FISA technical staff and passed by the scrutineers, allowing it to take part in Friday practice. Ultimately, however, the teams&#x27; appeal was allowed, the car was banned from the rest of the weekend and Lotus had to qualify and race the more conventional Lotus 81.

On the track, in final qualifying, Riccardo Patrese and Alan Jones traded the top spot back and forth several times during the session. Patrese finally managed to take the pole, clinching his first ever and the first (and only) for his Arrows team, by .01 seconds. Jones&#x27;s Williams teammate Reutemann was third, followed by Nelson Piquet&#x27;s Brabham, the Ferrari of Gilles Villeneuve and Mario Andretti in his first race for Alfa Romeo. The all-American Tyrrell driver team had Eddie Cheever in eighth place, but Kevin Cogan missed the final qualifying spot by .07 seconds. It was the first time a Tyrrell had ever failed to make the grid.

Sunday&#x27;s weather, typical of Long Beach was perfect, but the first lap was not. Villeneuve made a wild charge down the outside off the grid and briefly took the lead, but he left his braking for the Queens Hairpin far too late. As he went wide, Patrese and the Williams pair of Reutemann and Jones all went through. Villeneuve was able to gather it in and rejoin in fourth, but Andrea de Cesaris did not, as he ran his McLaren into the back of both Alain Prost and Héctor Rebaque approaching the hairpin. After being hit, Prost&#x27;s Renault slid across the track and shoved the Brabham of Rebaque into the wall. Prost and de Cesaris were out on the spot, but Rebaque was able to continue after pitting for four new tires. After one lap, the order was Patrese, Reutemann, Jones, Villeneuve, Piquet, Didier Pironi, Cheever and Andretti.

For the first part of the race, Patrese led Reutemann by around one second with Jones another three seconds behind. Then, almost the length of the pit straight back, was Pironi, who had traded places with Villeneuve (fifth and third) but was now holding up a line of cars as Piquet desperately tried to get by.

Lap 17 was a bad one for Ferrari as Piquet finally passed Pironi for fourth, and Villeneuve retired with a broken driveshaft. On lap 25, Reutemann took the lead from Patrese just a lap before Patrese pitted with a misfiring engine. He rejoined the race with a new spark box, but after two more stops for the same problem, finally retired with a broken fuel pickup.

Patrese&#x27;s retirement left Reutemann with a three-second lead over teammate Jones, who immediately began closing the gap by half a second per lap. Any questions about team orders letting the number one driver through were soon answered. On lap 32, while lapping Marc Surer&#x27;s Ensign, Reutemann slid wide in the esses on Pine Avenue, and Jones went through for the lead. Within 12 laps, the defending World Champion had stretched out a lead of ten seconds. At the same time, Reutemann was extending his lead over Piquet to 36 seconds.

On lap 41, Jacques Laffite tried to go by Cheever as they entered the right-hander after the pits. Instead, he ran into the back of the Tyrrell, bending the nose of his Ligier and damaging Cheever&#x27;s gearbox. Laffite had to limp around the entire course, and as he was finally about to enter the pits, Bruno Giacomelli approached, with Jan Lammers between the two of them. Giacomelli started to pass both cars on the inside, but realized he couldn&#x27;t when Laffite turned to enter the pit lane. Giacomelli tried to go around Lammers on the other side, but it was too late. He ran over Lammers&#x27;s ATS, pushing him into the wall.

Laffite&#x27;s retirement interrupted an extended battle with Pironi, Cheever and Andretti for fourth place. Andretti passed Cheever for fifth on lap 43, then traded fourth several times with Pironi, before finally taking the position for good on lap 54. Pironi&#x27;s Ferrari had developed a fuel feed problem and Cheever was also able to go by to take fifth. In making the pass, however, he lost his damaged second gear, by far the one most used on the tight street circuit.

The positions remained the same for the last quarter of the race with Jones and Reutemann easing up to take the third consecutive one-two for Williams. Piquet, having lost his shot at the leaders while bottled up behind Pironi, finished third, 35 seconds back. Mario Andretti thrilled the American crowd with his fourth place, just ahead of compatriot Eddie Cheever&#x27;s Tyrrell in fifth. It was the first time for two Americans to finish in the points since Andretti and Mark Donohue at the 1975 Swedish Grand Prix.

==Classification==
===Qualifying===
=== Race ===
==Notes==

* This was the Formula One World Championship debut for Brazilian driver Chico Serra, Italian driver Siegfried Stohr, Argentinian driver Miguel Ángel Guerra and Chilean driver Eliseo Salazar - the first Chilean to drive in Formula One.
* This race marked the 25th Grand Prix win for an Australian driver.
* This was the 1st pole position for Arrows.

==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Rob Walker (June 1981). &quot;6th United States Grand Prix West: Harmony Restored&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 160–165.
* Mike S. Lang (1992). &quot;Grand Prix!: Race-by-race account of Formula 1 World Championship motor racing. Volume 4: 1981 to 1984&quot;. Haynes Publishing Group. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171502" start="4" end="38" title="1981 United States Grand Prix West" label="1981 United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q171502" start="55" end="90" title="1981 United States Grand Prix West" label="Toyota [[Grand Prix of Long Beach]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="98" end="109" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="148" end="170" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q69431" start="203" end="238" title="1981 Formula One World Championship" label="1981 Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172753" start="278" end="288" title="Alan Jones (racing driver)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q173238" start="329" end="345" title="Carlos Reutemann" label="Carlos Reutemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q65483" start="644" end="660" title="1980 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Montreal, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q172039" start="665" end="687" title="1980 United States Grand Prix" label="Watkins Glen, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q173495" start="784" end="826" title="Formula One Constructors&amp;#x27; Association" label="Formula One Constructors&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="1622" end="1630" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="2065" end="2073" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2204" end="2215" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529044" start="2498" end="2506" title="Lotus 88" label="Lotus 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q173007" start="2520" end="2533" title="Colin Chapman" label="Colin Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="2905" end="2910" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="3003" end="3019" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="3246" end="3254" title="WilliamsF1" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="3297" end="3310" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="3318" end="3325" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="3331" end="3338" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="3342" end="3359" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="3364" end="3378" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="3401" end="3411" title="Alfa Romeo (Formula One)" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="3430" end="3437" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173205" start="3454" end="3467" title="Eddie Cheever" label="Eddie Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q552613" start="3489" end="3500" title="Kevin Cogan" label="Kevin Cogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173153" start="4000" end="4017" title="Andrea de Cesaris" label="Andrea de Cesaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="4041" end="4048" title="McLaren (racing)" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="4071" end="4082" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q171539" start="4087" end="4101" title="Héctor Rebaque" label="Héctor Rebaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="4157" end="4164" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q171432" start="4422" end="4435" title="Didier Pironi" label="Didier Pironi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171505" start="5404" end="5414" title="Marc Surer" label="Marc Surer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173415" start="5422" end="5428" title="Ensign (racing team)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q171434" start="5692" end="5707" title="Jacques Laffite" label="Jacques Laffite"/>
<link wikidata="Q173112" start="5987" end="6003" title="Bruno Giacomelli" label="Bruno Giacomelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q171457" start="6021" end="6032" title="Jan Lammers" label="Jan Lammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q784953" start="6288" end="6291" title="ATS (wheels)" label="ATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q171732" start="7273" end="7285" title="Mark Donohue" label="Mark Donohue"/>
<link wikidata="Q171823" start="7293" end="7316" title="1975 Swedish Grand Prix" label="1975 Swedish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171507" start="7452" end="7463" title="Chico Serra" label="Chico Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172147" start="7480" end="7495" title="Siegfried Stohr" label="Siegfried Stohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q172131" start="7516" end="7535" title="Miguel Ángel Guerra" label="Miguel Ángel Guerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q173254" start="7555" end="7569" title="Eliseo Salazar" label="Eliseo Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="7582" end="7589" title="Chile" label="Chilean"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="7665" end="7675" title="Australia" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174176" start="7721" end="7727" title="Arrows Grand Prix International" label="Arrows"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262247" wikidata="Q171814" url="?curid=1262247" title="1982 Detroit Grand Prix">
<text>The 1982 Detroit Grand Prix was a Formula One motor race held on June 6, 1982, in Detroit, Michigan.

==Summary==
===Qualifying===
Due to organizational problems, extra practice planned for Thursday was cancelled, and the first qualifying session on Friday had to be postponed. There was time for only a one-hour practice session on Friday, and so qualifying would take place on Saturday in two one-hour sessions, four hours apart. Saturday was cold and overcast with a threat of rain, and nearly all the drivers scrambled to get a time in on the dry track while they could, with many spins and trips down the escape roads of the unfamiliar circuit. The afternoon session was wet throughout, as expected, and the times from the morning session did indeed determine the grid.

Alain Prost took Renault&#x27;s sixth pole in seven races on the season with a lap of 1:48.537, an average of less than 83 miles per hour (134 kilometers per hour), slower than Monaco. Andrea de Cesaris, the only non-Renault driver with a pole so far in 1982 (Long Beach), put his Alfa Romeo alongside Prost on the front row with a 1:48.872, ahead of the Williams of Keke Rosberg. For the second straight race, Ferrari had only one entry following the death of Gilles Villeneuve in Belgium four weeks earlier, and Didier Pironi qualified it in fourth spot.

The lone American driver in the race, Eddie Cheever, put on a fine show for the home crowd, placing his Ligier ninth, behind the Lotus pair of Nigel Mansell and Elio de Angelis and just ahead of Niki Lauda&#x27;s McLaren. The biggest surprise, however, was seeing defending World Champion Nelson Piquet at the bottom of the time sheets. Problems with the BMW engines in both his race car and spare during the morning session and rain in the afternoon combined to keep him off the grid for Sunday&#x27;s race. This is one of only two instances of a reigning World Champion failing to qualify for a Grand Prix, the other being when Jody Scheckter failed to qualify for the 1980 Canadian Grand Prix.

===Race===
In contrast to Saturday afternoon, Sunday was mostly sunny and pleasant as a flotilla of boats dotted the river across from the circuit. The top three drivers all managed excellent starts, and Prost led de Cesaris and Rosberg through the first turn. Following them at the end of Lap one were Pironi, Mansell, Bruno Giacomelli, Cheever and Lauda. Manfred Winkelhock retired from an excellent fifth position when a front hub upright that had been replaced on the grid broke anyway, putting his ATS into the wall. Just two laps later, on Lap three, de Cesaris limped into the pits with a broken driveshaft, leaving Rosberg in second place, three seconds behind Prost.

On Lap seven, under pressure from de Angelis, Roberto Guerrero&#x27;s Ensign went wide at the first corner. De Angelis tried to go through on the inside, but when Guerrero resumed his line, the two collided. The Lotus was able to continue, but Guerrero slid to a halt in the tire wall. Jochen Mass and Watson were able to avoid the disabled Ensign, but when Riccardo Patrese came upon the scene, he locked up and hit the tire wall right next to Guerrero, losing a wheel. A brake duct on Patrese&#x27;s car quickly caught fire, and though the disabled cars seemed to be out of the way, the sight of two cars stopped on the track, one in flames, prompted the Clerk of the Course to call for the red flag.

The cars returned to the pits and waited for nearly an hour while all manner of repairs were made by the mechanics. Prost had his skirts changed and fuel topped off, Lauda changed his leaking oil cooler, and Guerrero, Winkelhock and Patrese, who had retired, even brought their spare cars out on the grid for the restart! This, at least, was not allowed, and eighteen cars restarted the race in running order, with the final result to be determined by the sum of the two times recorded in the two parts of the race.

Prost again took the lead off the grid, and one lap later he led Rosberg, Pironi, Giacomelli, Cheever, René Arnoux, Lauda and Mansell. Immediately, Prost began to distance himself from Rosberg, who was also pulling away from Pironi and, after fifteen laps (total), led by five seconds. Gradually, however, the Renault began to develop electronic injection problems, as teammate Arnoux had several laps earlier, and the Frenchman saw his lead over Rosberg begin to evaporate. By Lap 21, the two cars were nose to tail, and a lap later, the Williams took the lead in brilliant fashion as Rosberg pulled alongside entering one of the many tight right-hand corners, stayed there through the corner on the outside, and emerged slightly sideways but in front. Prost continued to fall back and eventually pitted, while a furious dice continued behind Rosberg, now over second place, between Pironi, Giacomelli, Cheever and Lauda.

Behind this group, amazingly, came the charging McLaren of John Watson, who had stormed through nearly the entire field from seventeenth place on the original grid. When Cheever and Lauda both overtook Giacomelli as he got sideways exiting a corner, Watson was quickly nose to tail behind Giacomelli and struggling to get through. On Lap 30, with Rosberg leading by 15 seconds, Watson passed Giacomelli, but the Italian counterattacked a moment later when the McLaren went wide. Giacomelli tried to force his way through on the inside, but his left front wheel hit Watson&#x27;s right rear, and Giacomelli ended up in the wall. Pironi had been holding up both Lauda and Cheever, but when Watson latched on to them, he passed all three on the same lap to take over second place, thirteen seconds behind Rosberg.

In two laps, the gap was down to seven seconds, then two seconds, and at the end of Lap 37, Watson was two seconds up, as Rosberg had lost third gear. Overall, however, on combined time, Rosberg was still eighteen seconds ahead, so he attempted merely to stay close to the McLaren. Meanwhile Lauda, perhaps inspired by his teammate, had passed both Cheever and Pironi, and now also approached Rosberg. Likely knowing the Williams was in trouble, he unwisely made a late dive down the inside of Turn One. He locked his wheels, hit the wall and broke his suspension, leaving Cheever in third place.

Secure in the lead, Watson was able to back off as Rosberg struggled with fuel feed problems and worn tires, in addition to his ailing gearbox, and dropped all the way back to fifth on the track and fourth on combined time. With an average speed of only 78 mph, the two-hour time limit was well short of the intended 76 laps, and Watson took his second win of the season, which was the first Detroit Grand Prix, at America&#x27;s sixth different Formula One venue. American Eddie Cheever claimed second for his best Grand Prix finish, ahead of Pironi in third.

Despite a mountain of teething problems with the new circuit, the organizers of the race received excellent reviews for their efforts, and a new American city had made its entrance to Formula One. With two US races already run in 1982, one still remained, as, for the first time ever, one country would host three events in a single Grand Prix season.

==Classification==

=== Qualifying ===
=== Race ===
==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Innes Ireland (October, 1982). &quot;1st Detroit Grand Prix: Wattie, The Renaissance Man&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 140-144.
* Mike S. Lang (1992). &quot;Grand Prix!: Race-by-race account of Formula 1 World Championship motor racing. Volume 4: 1981 to 1984&quot;. Haynes Publishing Group. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171814" start="4" end="27" title="1982 Detroit Grand Prix" label="1982 Detroit Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="34" end="45" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="82" end="99" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="776" end="787" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="793" end="800" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="953" end="959" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173153" start="961" end="978" title="Andrea de Cesaris" label="Andrea de Cesaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q171464" start="1036" end="1046" title="1982 United States Grand Prix West" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="1057" end="1067" title="Alfa Romeo (Formula One)" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="1131" end="1139" title="WilliamsF1" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q171381" start="1143" end="1155" title="Keke Rosberg" label="Keke Rosberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1187" end="1194" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="1237" end="1254" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q20918" start="1258" end="1265" title="1982 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q171432" start="1290" end="1303" title="Didier Pironi" label="Didier Pironi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173205" start="1372" end="1385" title="Eddie Cheever" label="Eddie Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220251" start="1438" end="1444" title="Equipe Ligier" label="Ligier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="1463" end="1468" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="1477" end="1490" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173115" start="1495" end="1510" title="Elio de Angelis" label="Elio de Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="1529" end="1539" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="1547" end="1554" title="McLaren (racing)" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="1623" end="1636" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928692" start="1689" end="1692" title="BMW in Formula One" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="1964" end="1978" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q65483" start="2005" end="2029" title="1980 Canadian Grand Prix" label="1980 Canadian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173112" start="2352" end="2368" title="Bruno Giacomelli" label="Bruno Giacomelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q57733" start="2389" end="2407" title="Manfred Winkelhock" label="Manfred Winkelhock"/>
<link wikidata="Q784953" start="2535" end="2538" title="ATS (wheels)" label="ATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q126940" start="2755" end="2771" title="Roberto Guerrero" label="Roberto Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q173415" start="2779" end="2785" title="Ensign (racing team)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q57459" start="2995" end="3006" title="Jochen Mass" label="Jochen Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="3067" end="3083" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q173279" start="4033" end="4044" title="René Arnoux" label="René Arnoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q363434" start="7062" end="7080" title="1982 Caesars Palace Grand Prix" label="one still remained"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262249" wikidata="Q171464" url="?curid=1262249" title="1982 United States Grand Prix West">
<text>The 1982 United States Grand Prix West (officially the Toyota [[Grand Prix of Long Beach]]) was a Formula One motor race held on April 4, 1982, at the temporary street circuit at Long Beach, California.

==Summary==
In his third race since returning from a self-imposed two-year &quot;retirement,&quot; Austrian Niki Lauda won the seventh United States Grand Prix West at Long Beach, ahead of Keke Rosberg. It was the 18th victory of Lauda&#x27;s career, and his first for McLaren. Canada&#x27;s Gilles Villeneuve crossed the line in third, but he was disqualified after the race when a protest of his Ferrari&#x27;s rear wing was upheld by the officials.

Just five days after the previous race in Brazil, Carlos Reutemann had shocked his boss Frank Williams, and everyone else in the paddock, by announcing his retirement. When former World Champion (for Williams) Alan Jones insisted he was not available, Williams contacted another former Champion, American Mario Andretti. His commitment to the Patrick Indy racing team posed no conflicts, so he agreed to drive the second Williams for the weekend, saying, &quot;I had nothing else to do, so I accepted.&quot;

Significant changes had been made to the course since the previous year&#x27;s race. The Queen&#x27;s Hairpin at the end of Shoreline Drive had been transformed into a right-angle turn that led into a new section of track with several demanding corners, leading up to Ocean Boulevard. On the other end of the course, the short straight at the bottom of the hill from Linden Avenue had been lengthened and a chicane had been inserted near the beginning of the curving Shoreline Drive &quot;straight,&quot; in anticipation of the pits being moved there from Ocean Boulevard. The changes increased the length of the lap only slightly, but added about ten seconds to the previous year&#x27;s times as the drivers became acclimated to the new layout.

In Saturday&#x27;s qualifying, the cars running on Michelin tires had a decided advantage over the Goodyear teams, though the Michelin men had all learned from Lauda&#x27;s times on Friday that their harder race tires were faster than the qualifiers. Seeing this development, Lauda intentionally used only one set and kept a brand new set for Sunday&#x27;s race. Lauda topped the charts through almost the entire session, but, after crashing into a wall early on, Andrea de Cesaris threw his Alfa Romeo around in 1:27.316 to beat Lauda&#x27;s time by .012 of a second, three minutes before the session ended. It was the Italian&#x27;s first pole position (his &quot;only&quot; pole in 208 career starts), and he was ecstatic. At the time, de Cesaris was the youngest driver to achieve pole position, a record beaten by Rubens Barrichello at the 1994 Belgian Grand Prix. Lauda, meanwhile, knew he had a fresh set of rubber for the race, while de Cesaris did not. Defending World Champion Nelson Piquet was the fastest Goodyear runner, in sixth position on the grid. The two American drivers were together in Row 7 as Eddie Cheever recovered from an early collision with the wall to put his Talbot Ligier in the thirteenth spot, while Andretti was still getting used to the Williams and ended up alongside Cheever in fourteenth.

Sunday was clear, warm and gorgeous with a crowd of 82,000. As the cars formed on the grid for the start, Lotus driver Elio de Angelis lined up on the wrong side (he claimed he was waved into the wrong place). He quickly backed out of the spot, bumping his teammate Nigel Mansell behind him. When Mansell put his car into reverse, thinking that de Angelis was coming back further, the green light came on. As a result, Mansell claims to be the only driver to have started a race in reverse. Everyone got away cleanly, though Mansell found himself near the back of the field. At the front, de Cesaris made an excellent start, jumping into the lead ahead of Lauda and René Arnoux.

At the end of the first lap, de Cesaris led by two seconds, followed by Arnoux, Lauda, Bruno Giacomelli, Villeneuve, Alain Prost, Didier Pironi, Rosberg, Piquet, Michele Alboreto, John Watson, Cheever and Andretti. On lap six, with the Italian beginning to stretch his lead slightly, his Alfa Romeo teammate Giacomelli closed up on Lauda, who was right behind Arnoux. As the three cars approached the hairpin, Giacomelli made a run down the outside of Lauda, locked up his brakes and slid into the back of Arnoux&#x27;s Renault. Both cars were out, and de Cesaris now led Lauda by 5.7 seconds, with Villeneuve in third. Prost hit the inside wall whilst under braking for the right hander at the end of Ocean Boulevard and was immediately out.

Lauda now began to cut into de Cesaris&#x27; lead, setting the race&#x27;s fastest lap in the process. On lap 15, de Cesaris was held up by Raul Boesel&#x27;s March in the chicane entering Shoreline Drive as he came up to lap him. This gave Lauda the momentum he needed to sweep by into the lead at the end of the straight, and the Austrian immediately began to pull away.

At the same time, Rosberg and Villeneuve were in the middle of a smashing battle over fourth place, behind John Watson. Over several laps, Rosberg closed the gap to Villeneuve until, on lap 19, he was right on the Ferrari&#x27;s tail. On the next lap, the Williams edged briefly ahead between the hairpin and the new chicane, but the Ferrari&#x27;s horsepower advantage allowed Villeneuve to retake the position down the Shoreline Drive straight. Rosberg repeated his pass in the same spot on the following lap, and this time was able to fight off Villeneuve&#x27;s attempt to outbrake him into the right-hander at the end of the straight. Villeneuve, in fact, overshot the corner and slid up the escape road. Piquet was just about to slip by when Villeneuve jumped back on the track in front of him and salvaged his hold on fifth place.

Meanwhile, Andretti had advanced from fourteenth on the grid to ninth in the second Williams, with a best lap faster than teammate Rosberg&#x27;s. On lap 19, however, he lost it in the &quot;marbles&quot; of tire rubber that were collecting off-line and damaged his suspension against the wall in Turn 4. Rosberg continued, his eyes now on Watson&#x27;s McLaren. Watson had jumped from eleventh on the grid to third in just eight laps, taking advantage of the softer Michelin tire compound he had chosen. For six laps, the two cars were nose to tail, until Watson had to give way on lap 27 as his softer tires went off. Rosberg quickly pulled away and Watson stopped for new rubber just two laps later.

Around lap 23, the new parts of the track began to break up and 4 cars spun off and crashed over the next 4 laps. First Daly, then Piquet, Laffite and Guerrero. At the front, Lauda suddenly increased his lead over de Cesaris from five seconds to 10 around lap 30, when the Alfa developed brake trouble. Apparently content now with second place, but possibly distracted by smoke from an engine fire, the Italian lost concentration and shockingly flew off the road into the Turn Five wall on lap 34, ripping off two wheels and the right sidepod. This left Lauda almost a full minute ahead of Rosberg, with only Villeneuve, Alboreto and Cheever also on the lead lap.

After a tire stop, Cheever retired from a fine drive in the Talbot Ligier with gearbox failure. On lap 59, Riccardo Patrese took fourth from Alboreto, who was struggling with damage from a battle with Villeneuve. This became third in the books when the stewards accepted Tyrrell&#x27;s protest of Ferrari&#x27;s staggered, two-part rear wing, aimed at circumventing the 110 cm limit on its width, and Villeneuve was disqualified.

Lauda came home nearly 15 seconds ahead for his second win in the United States, along with the 1975 Watkins Glen race, and Rosberg secured a fine second place. For the first time (and the last until 2023), this would be one of three American races in the same season, with the inaugural Detroit race and the Championship clincher in Las Vegas still to come.

==Classification==

=== Pre-qualifying ===
=== Qualifying ===
=== Race ===
==Notes==

* This was the 25th pole position for an Italian driver.
* This was the 1st Grand Prix start for a Colombian driver.
* This race marked the 100th podium finish for Brabham.
* This was the 4th United States Grand Prix West win for a Ford-powered car. It broke the previous record set by Ferrari at the 1979 United States Grand Prix West.

==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Rob Walker (July, 1982). &quot;7th United States Grand Prix West: Three Is A Charm&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 96–100.
* Mike S. Lang (1992). &quot;Grand Prix!: Race-by-race account of Formula 1 World Championship motor racing. Volume 4: 1981 to 1984&quot;. Haynes Publishing Group. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171464" start="4" end="38" title="1982 United States Grand Prix West" label="1982 United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q171464" start="55" end="90" title="1982 United States Grand Prix West" label="Toyota [[Grand Prix of Long Beach]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="98" end="109" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="179" end="201" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="312" end="322" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q171381" start="393" end="405" title="Keke Rosberg" label="Keke Rosberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="473" end="480" title="McLaren (racing)" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="496" end="513" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="602" end="609" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q54404" start="682" end="705" title="1982 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="previous race in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q173238" start="707" end="723" title="Carlos Reutemann" label="Carlos Reutemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q173214" start="745" end="759" title="Frank Williams (Formula One)" label="Frank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="857" end="865" title="WilliamsF1" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q172753" start="867" end="877" title="Alan Jones (racing driver)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="962" end="976" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269772" start="1000" end="1024" title="Patrick Racing" label="Patrick Indy racing team"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="1964" end="1972" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="2012" end="2020" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q173153" start="2377" end="2394" title="Andrea de Cesaris" label="Andrea de Cesaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="2405" end="2415" title="Alfa Romeo (Formula One)" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169846" start="2732" end="2750" title="Rubens Barrichello" label="Rubens Barrichello"/>
<link wikidata="Q20940" start="2758" end="2781" title="1994 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1994 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="2900" end="2913" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173205" start="3029" end="3042" title="Eddie Cheever" label="Eddie Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220251" start="3109" end="3115" title="Equipe Ligier" label="Ligier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="3347" end="3352" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173115" start="3360" end="3375" title="Elio de Angelis" label="Elio de Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="3507" end="3520" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173279" start="3907" end="3918" title="René Arnoux" label="René Arnoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q173112" start="4008" end="4024" title="Bruno Giacomelli" label="Bruno Giacomelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="4038" end="4049" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q171432" start="4051" end="4064" title="Didier Pironi" label="Didier Pironi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172983" start="4083" end="4099" title="Michele Alboreto" label="Michele Alboreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q171422" start="4101" end="4112" title="John Watson (racing driver)" label="John Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="4441" end="4448" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q171727" start="4805" end="4816" title="Raul Boesel" label="Raul Boesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="4824" end="4829" title="March Engineering" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="7354" end="7370" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="7518" end="7525" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171910" start="7774" end="7796" title="1975 United States Grand Prix" label="1975 Watkins Glen race"/>
<link wikidata="Q109323149" start="7878" end="7882" title="2023 Formula One World Championship" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q171814" start="7956" end="7978" title="1982 Detroit Grand Prix" label="inaugural Detroit race"/>
<link wikidata="Q363434" start="8012" end="8021" title="1982 Caesars Palace Grand Prix" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8165" end="8172" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="8223" end="8232" title="Colombia" label="Colombian"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="8288" end="8295" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9220" start="8316" end="8345" title="United States Grand Prix West" label="United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="8356" end="8360" title="Cosworth" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="8410" end="8417" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q171642" start="8425" end="8459" title="1979 United States Grand Prix West" label="1979 United States Grand Prix West"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262251" wikidata="Q526012" url="?curid=1262251" title="1983 Detroit Grand Prix">
<text>The 1983 Detroit Grand Prix was a Formula One motor race held on June 5, 1983, in Detroit, Michigan.

==Summary==
===Circuit changes===
The circuit had been slightly modified from its original configuration the year before, with the pit lane extended to place the entrance before the final chicane, and a short new section of track eliminating the extremely tight hairpin at Turn Five. The new layout was faster and much preferred by the drivers. Friday&#x27;s entire agenda was run in the rain, however, and it was left to a single hour on Saturday to decide the starting grid.

===Qualifying===
Contrary to the usual pattern, after the first fifteen minutes or so of qualifying, the track became slower as more rubber was laid down. This was apparently due to moisture still in the track being drawn out by the now-present sunshine. The pole-winning time of 1:44.734 was posted by René Arnoux on his Ferrari&#x27;s first set of qualifying tires; on his second set, he was more than two seconds slower. Many who did not record a quick time early in the session were caught out by the changing conditions, and the grid held many surprises as a result. Defending Champion Keke Rosberg was twelfth, Alain Prost thirteenth and Niki Lauda eighteenth, while the non-turbocharged cars of Marc Surer and Alboreto were fifth and sixth. American Eddie Cheever, in the only competitive ride of his F1 career with Renault, was in seventh spot, six places ahead of his highly regarded teammate.

===Race===
Over 70,000 fans enjoyed beautiful weather for the race on Sunday. The boats on the Detroit River, the blaring music and the floods of people from the downtown hotels created quite an atmosphere, inevitably bringing comparisons to Monaco, as the Long Beach event often did.

The first attempt at a start was halted just as the green light was about to come on, when Andrea de Cesaris signalled from the grid that his Alfa Romeo had stalled. The whole process was begun again, with another pace lap that reduced the race distance from 61 laps to 60, and this time the green light came on. This time, however, Patrick Tambay&#x27;s Ferrari, in the second row, stalled on the grid. He held his breath while everyone made their way safely around him, and then, expecting a push-start, instead was removed from the circuit by tow truck.

Piquet made an excellent start and beat Arnoux to Turn One. He led after the first lap, with Arnoux ahead of de Angelis, de Cesaris, Alboreto, Derek Warwick, Rosberg (already up from twelfth) and Cheever. The two leaders quickly began to separate themselves from the rest, while a four-way nose-to-tail battle raged for fourth. On lap five, Cheever retired with ignition failure, de Angelis forfeited third place with a broken gearbox and Piercarlo Ghinzani abandoned his Osella in the pits with an overheating engine.

Arnoux, after steadily closing the gap to Piquet, overtook the Brabham into Turn One and gained the lead on lap 10. Piquet let him through without a fight, knowing that the Ferrari was planning a fuel and tire stop, while he was not. When Rosberg finally got by de Cesaris for third at the end of lap 11, he was almost 15 seconds behind Piquet, but clearly faster. Alboreto, in fifth place and also threatening de Cesaris, had started on full tanks and, like Piquet, was not planning a pit stop.

By lap 20, Rosberg had caught up with Piquet&#x27;s Brabham and easily went by to take second, about twenty seconds behind Arnoux. On lap 29, the Ferrari&#x27;s lead was up to almost 30 seconds when Arnoux came into the pits, as expected, followed soon after by Rosberg&#x27;s Williams, whose intentions had been unclear. Arnoux rejoined after a stop of just 13.5 seconds, still barely in the lead; by the time Rosberg was able to get back on the track (his stop lasted 17.5 seconds), he was in fifth place behind Piquet, Alboreto and Jacques Laffite, none of whom had stopped. But just three laps after his pit stop, Arnoux suddenly coasted to a halt on the circuit with an electrical failure.

When Laffite pitted, Piquet was back in the lead, with Alboreto up to second and Rosberg third, 25 seconds back. John Watson, having started in 21st position on the grid, was now in fourth, making his regular charge through an American Grand Prix field. It looked as if Nelson Piquet and Brabham-BMW were on their way to victory as Alboreto was doing all he could to stay close. Suddenly, on lap 51, Piquet slowed with a punctured left rear tire, and as he made his way back to the pits, Alboreto and Rosberg went by. While he was in the pits, Watson also came through. All that was left was for Alboreto to bring the Tyrrell home over the final nine laps, taking it rather easy since he was too far in front for Rosberg to catch him. Watson, meanwhile, was doing anything &quot;but&quot; taking it easy, and he set the race&#x27;s fastest lap (1.6 seconds faster than his qualifying time) while just failing to catch the Williams for second place. Piquet rejoined to finish in fourth, ahead of Laffite in the second Williams and Nigel Mansell&#x27;s Lotus.

Alboreto&#x27;s teammate, American Danny Sullivan, in his only season of Formula One, retired at the halfway point of the race when his engine failed. His only points for the season came from his fifth place at Monaco, though he did finish second at the non-Championship Race of Champions at Brands Hatch. When Sullivan could not secure a drive with turbo power for 1984, he saw the writing on the wall and returned to the US and the CART Indy Car series.

Tyrrell&#x27;s Michele Alboreto scored his second Grand Prix win and first points of the season. The tight downtown street course took away much of the advantage of the turbocharged cars, and Alboreto&#x27;s win for Cosworth-Ford was the last of the season&#x27;s three non-turbo victories. It was also the last for a normally aspirated engine until the turbos were outlawed after the 1988 season, and the last of a record 155 wins for the legendary Cosworth DFV and also the last victory for the Tyrrell team.

==Classification==

=== Qualifying ===

 - Driver failed to qualify for the race.

=== Race ===
==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Innes Ireland (October, 1983). &quot;2nd Detroit Grand Prix: Cosworth Counterattack&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 162–166.
* Mike S. Lang (1992). &quot;Grand Prix!: Race-by-race account of Formula 1 World Championship motor racing. Volume 4: 1981 to 1984&quot;. Haynes Publishing Group. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q526012" start="4" end="27" title="1983 Detroit Grand Prix" label="1983 Detroit Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="34" end="45" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="82" end="99" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173279" start="883" end="894" title="René Arnoux" label="René Arnoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="902" end="909" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q171381" start="1171" end="1183" title="Keke Rosberg" label="Keke Rosberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="1197" end="1208" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="1224" end="1234" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q171505" start="1282" end="1292" title="Marc Surer" label="Marc Surer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173205" start="1337" end="1350" title="Eddie Cheever" label="Eddie Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="1403" end="1410" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="1726" end="1732" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9220" start="1741" end="1757" title="United States Grand Prix West" label="Long Beach event"/>
<link wikidata="Q173153" start="1861" end="1878" title="Andrea de Cesaris" label="Andrea de Cesaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="1912" end="1922" title="Alfa Romeo (Formula One)" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173020" start="2103" end="2117" title="Patrick Tambay" label="Patrick Tambay"/>
<link wikidata="Q171442" start="2471" end="2484" title="Derek Warwick" label="Derek Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q172994" start="2767" end="2785" title="Piercarlo Ghinzani" label="Piercarlo Ghinzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q171506" start="2800" end="2806" title="Osella" label="Osella"/>
<link wikidata="Q171434" start="3880" end="3895" title="Jacques Laffite" label="Jacques Laffite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171422" start="4154" end="4165" title="John Watson (racing driver)" label="John Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="5071" end="5084" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="5092" end="5097" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173105" start="5135" end="5149" title="Danny Sullivan" label="Danny Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171936" start="5311" end="5317" title="1983 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172880" start="5392" end="5404" title="Brands Hatch" label="Brands Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751410" start="5534" end="5554" title="Champ Car" label="CART Indy Car series"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="5557" end="5564" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172983" start="5572" end="5588" title="Michele Alboreto" label="Michele Alboreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="5773" end="5786" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth-Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q195996" start="6007" end="6019" title="Cosworth DFV" label="Cosworth DFV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262252" wikidata="Q241193" url="?curid=1262252" title="James Hampton (artist)">
<text>James Hampton (April 8, 1909 – November 4, 1964) was an American outsider artist. Hampton worked as a janitor and secretly built a large assemblage of religious art from scavenged materials, known as the &quot;Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations&#x27; Millennium General Assembly&quot;. Often abbreviated to simply the &quot;Throne&quot;, it is currently on display at the Smithsonian American Art Museum in Washington. Art critic Robert Hughes of &quot;Time&quot; magazine wrote that the &quot;Throne&quot; &quot;may well be the finest work of visionary religious art produced by an American.&quot;

==Early life==
James Hampton was born in 1909 in Elloree, South Carolina. His father, who had abandoned the family, was a gospel singer and a traveling Baptist preacher who was also a known criminal who had worked on chain gangs. In 1928, Hampton moved to Washington, D.C. and shared an apartment with his older brother Lee. Hampton worked as a short-order cook until 1943 when he was drafted into the United States Army Air Forces. He served with the 385th Aviation Squadron in Texas, Hawaii and in the jungles of Saipan and Guam. The segregated unit was noncombatant and duties included carpentry and maintenance of airstrips. Hampton built a small, shrine-like object during his time in Guam that he later incorporated into his larger artwork. He was awarded the Bronze Star and was honorably discharged in 1945, after which he returned to Washington. In 1946, Hampton was hired by the General Services Administration as a janitor and worked there until his death.

==&quot;Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations&#x27; Millennium General Assembly&quot;==

In 1950, Hampton rented a garage on 7th street in northwest Washington. Over the next 14 years, Hampton built a complex work of religious art inside the garage with various scavenged materials such as aluminum and gold foil, old furniture, pieces of cardboard, light bulbs, jelly jars, shards of mirror and desk blotters held together with tacks, glue, pins and tape.

The complete work consists of 180 objects, many of them inscribed with quotes from the Book of Revelation. The centerpiece of the exhibit is a throne, seven feet tall, built on the foundation of an old maroon-cushioned armchair with the words &quot;Fear Not&quot; at its crest. The throne is flanked by dozens of altars, crowns, lecterns, tablets and winged pulpits. Wall plaques on the left bear the name of apostles and those on the right list various biblical patriarchs and prophets such as Abraham and Ezekiel. The text &quot;The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations&#x27; Millennium General Assembly&quot; was written on the objects in Hampton&#x27;s handwriting.

Hampton described his work as a monument to Jesus in Washington. It was made based on several religious visions that prompted him to prepare for Christ&#x27;s return to earth. Hampton wrote that God visited him often, that Moses appeared to him in 1931, the Virgin Mary in 1946, and Adam on the day of Harry S. Truman&#x27;s inauguration in 1949. The term &quot;third heaven&quot; is based on scriptures that refer to it as the &quot;heaven of heavens&quot; or God&#x27;s realm.

The work is based on biblical prophecies of the millennium, including St. John&#x27;s vision of God seated on a silver and gold throne surrounded by angels, references to Judgment Day, the crowns to be worn by the saved and other events described in Revelation. The work also has an affiliation with African-American yard shows as well as altars used in African-derived New World religions such as Vodou, Santería and Candomblé. Art critic Robert Farris Thompson describes the Throne as &quot;a unique fusion of biblical and Afro-American traditional imagery.&quot;

The work is associated with the American millenarian and dispensationalist movements of the 19th and 20th centuries. These movements divided the history of God&#x27;s interactions with humanity into seven phases or dispensations, the last of which would be the &quot;Millennium.&quot;

==&quot;St. James: The Book of the 7 Dispensation&quot;==
Hampton kept a 108-page loose-leaf notebook titled &quot;St James: The Book of the 7 Dispensation&quot;. Most of the text was written in an unknown script that remains undeciphered. The text is available online and has been the subject of research.

Hampton altered the seventh dispensation so that he became not only the author of &quot;The Book of the 7 Dispensation&quot; but also a prophetic counselor of the Millennium. Hampton recorded &quot;the Old and the New Covenant&quot; and a second set of commandments, which Hampton believed God had given to him to pass along because man no longer followed the original Ten Commandments.

Some of the text was accompanied by notes in English in Hampton&#x27;s handwriting. In the notebook, Hampton referred to himself as St. James with the title &quot;Director, Special Projects for the State of Eternity&quot; and ended each page with the word &quot;Revelation.&quot; Hampton had also written texts, some of which refer to religious visions, on various pieces of paper and cardboard and on a few pages in each of seven other notebooks. Tacked to a bulletin board in a corner of the garage was a quotation from Proverbs 29, &quot;Where there is no vision, the people perish.&quot;

Hampton also created wall plaques with Roman numerals one through ten and his undecipherable script suggesting commandment-bearing tablets. The largest plaque on the left side of the display contains the text &quot;Nations Readjustment Plan&quot; and is trimmed in gold foil.

Hampton approached local churches about using his creation as a teaching tool but none were interested. Two reporters came to view the display but did not deem it worthy of news coverage. Hampton hoped to develop a storefront ministry but never achieved that goal.

Hampton was somewhat reclusive. He had few close friends and spent most of his personal time working on his shrine. Hampton attended various churches in Washington but never joined a particular congregation because of his belief that the proliferation of denominations contradicted the oneness of God. He expressed an interest in finding a &quot;holy woman&quot; to assist with his life&#x27;s work but never married.

It is unknown whether Hampton considered himself an artist. Hampton&#x27;s work is an example of outsider or naïve art – art made by people who are self-taught, who have not studied art techniques, art history or art theory.

==Death and discovery of the display==
Hampton died of stomach cancer on November 4, 1964, at the Veteran&#x27;s Hospital in Washington.

The art was not discovered until after Hampton&#x27;s death in 1964, when the owner of the garage, Meyer Wertlieb, came to find out why the rent had not been paid. He knew that Hampton had been building something in the garage. When he opened the door, he found a room filled with the artwork.

Hampton had kept his project secret from most of his friends and family. His relatives first heard about it when his sister came to claim his body. When Hampton&#x27;s sister refused to take the artwork, the landlord placed an advertisement in local newspapers. Ed Kelly, a sculptor, answered the advertisement and was so astounded by the exhibit, he contacted art collector Alice Denney. Denney brought art dealers Leo Castelli and Ivan Karp, and artist Robert Rauschenberg, to see the exhibit in the garage. Harry Lowe, the assistant director of the Smithsonian Art Museum, told the &quot;Washington Post&quot; that walking into the garage &quot;was like opening Tut&#x27;s tomb.&quot;

The story of Hampton and his artwork finally became public in the December 15, 1964 issue of the &quot;Washington Post&quot;. Lowe paid Hampton&#x27;s outstanding rent and took possession of the art display. In 1970, Hampton&#x27;s work was donated to the Smithsonian American Art Museum, where it has been on display ever since.

==In popular culture==
Author and poet Denis Johnson published a book with the name &quot;The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations Millennium General Assembly: Poems Collected and New&quot;, which includes a poem named after Hampton&#x27;s work.

In 2007, composer Jefferson Friedman premiered a musical piece inspired by Hampton&#x27;s artwork titled &quot;The Throne of the Third Heaven,&quot; commissioned jointly by the National Symphony Orchestra and the ASCAP Foundation.

The indie music group Le Loup named their 2007 debut album &quot;The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations&#x27; Millennium General Assembly&quot;.

In 2015, author Shelley Pearsall published a young adult novel, &quot;The Seventh Most Important Thing&quot;, which put the artwork and the artist in a fictional context, imagining a meeting between Hampton and a troubled thirteen-year-old boy. The author says she was inspired by the fact that &quot;for more than a decade, Hampton had labored alone, without fanfare, to create art for art&#x27;s sake – a nearly impossible concept to grasp in today&#x27;s world of rampant social-media sharing and instant celebrity.&quot;

In 2018, Cheyenne/Arapaho author Tommy Orange published a short story, &quot;The State,&quot; that references Hampton and &quot;The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations Millennium General Assembly&quot;. The story was an excerpted chapter from Orange&#x27;s 2018 novel &quot;There There&quot;.

==References==

* &quot;St. James the Janitor,&quot; &quot;Fortean Times&quot; #150, 2001

==External links==
*James Hampton - Smithsonian American Art Museum
*&quot;The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations&#x27; Millennium General Assembly&quot;, exhibition label - Smithsonian American Art Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q241193" start="0" end="13" title="James Hampton (artist)" label="James Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q594150" start="65" end="77" title="outsider art" label="outsider art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760141" start="102" end="109" title="janitor" label="janitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864737" start="151" end="164" title="sacred art" label="religious art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192305" start="379" end="410" title="Smithsonian American Art Museum" label="Smithsonian American Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811222" start="437" end="450" title="Robert Hughes (critic)" label="Robert Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="454" end="479" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455087" start="656" end="679" title="Elloree, South Carolina" label="Elloree, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="729" end="735" title="Gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="759" end="766" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059039" start="824" end="834" title="chain gang" label="chain gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358431" start="952" end="968" title="short-order cook" label="short-order cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="1009" end="1038" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1086" end="1091" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="1093" end="1099" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="1122" end="1128" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="1133" end="1137" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="1143" end="1153" title="Racial segregation" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1225" end="1234" title="Aerodrome#Airstrip" label="airstrips"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="1373" end="1384" title="Bronze Star" label="Bronze Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="1393" end="1413" title="honorable discharge" label="honorably discharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501657" start="1496" end="1527" title="General Services Administration" label="General Services Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463524" start="1919" end="1928" title="Corrugated fiberboard" label="cardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="1930" end="1940" title="light bulb" label="light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="1965" end="1971" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="2125" end="2143" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15026" start="2257" end="2265" title="Armchair (furniture)" label="armchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="2351" end="2356" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="2396" end="2402" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="2533" end="2540" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q194064" start="2545" end="2552" title="Ezekiel" label="Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="2859" end="2888" title="Second Coming" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s return to earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="2909" end="2912" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="2937" end="2942" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="2972" end="2983" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="2997" end="3001" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918145" start="3016" end="3059" title="Second inauguration of Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman&amp;#x27;s inauguration in 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="3264" end="3272" title="John the Apostle" label="St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="3365" end="3377" title="Last Judgment" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="3592" end="3597" title="Haitian Vodou" label="Vodou"/>
<link wikidata="Q927277" start="3599" end="3607" title="Santería" label="Santería"/>
<link wikidata="Q752660" start="3612" end="3621" title="Candomblé" label="Candomblé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344276" start="3634" end="3656" title="Robert Farris Thompson" label="Robert Farris Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="3802" end="3813" title="Millenarianism" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q849459" start="3818" end="3835" title="Dispensationalism" label="dispensationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="4724" end="4740" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q12471905" start="5265" end="5276" title="Proverbs 29" label="Proverbs 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="5375" end="5389" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q281108" start="6407" end="6416" title="naïve art" label="naïve art"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="6579" end="6593" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603477" start="6622" end="6645" title="VA Hospital" label="Veteran&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725815" start="7332" end="7344" title="Alice Denney" label="Alice Denney"/>
<link wikidata="Q553617" start="7373" end="7385" title="Leo Castelli" label="Leo Castelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096588" start="7390" end="7399" title="Ivan Karp" label="Ivan Karp"/>
<link wikidata="Q164358" start="7412" end="7431" title="Robert Rauschenberg" label="Robert Rauschenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="7548" end="7563" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="7622" end="7625" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192305" start="7902" end="7933" title="Smithsonian American Art Museum" label="Smithsonian American Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q340016" start="8016" end="8029" title="Denis Johnson" label="Denis Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175472" start="8247" end="8265" title="Jefferson Friedman" label="Jefferson Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744749" start="8406" end="8433" title="National Symphony Orchestra" label="National Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="8442" end="8458" title="ASCAP Foundation" label="ASCAP Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507160" start="8483" end="8490" title="Le Loup" label="Le Loup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769156" start="8526" end="8605" title="The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations&amp;#x27; Millennium General Assembly (album)" label="The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations&amp;#x27; Millennium General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q63341394" start="9173" end="9185" title="Tommy Orange" label="Tommy Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635667" start="9420" end="9431" title="There There (novel)" label="There There"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356679" start="9499" end="9512" title="Fortean Times" label="Fortean Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262254" wikidata="Q599379" url="?curid=1262254" title="1983 United States Grand Prix West">
<text>The 1983 United States Grand Prix West (officially the Toyota [[Grand Prix of Long Beach]]) was a Formula One motor race held on March 27, 1983 at Long Beach, California. It was the second race of the 1983 Formula One World Championship.

The 75-lap race was won by Northern Irishman John Watson, driving a McLaren-Ford. Watson took his fifth and final F1 victory having started from 22nd position, the lowest from which a driver has won an F1 race. Austrian teammate Niki Lauda finished second, having himself started 23rd, with Frenchman René Arnoux third in a Ferrari.

This was the final running of the Long Beach race as an F1 event, before organizer Chris Pook switched to the CART IndyCar series.

==Background==

==Qualifying==

===Qualifying report===
Once again, the Long Beach circuit had been slightly modified, primarily to free up Ocean Boulevard, one of the city&#x27;s main thoroughfares. Since the alternate route on Seaside Way included a tunnel under the Long Beach convention center, the pits were moved to the long, curving Shoreline Drive section, where the start and finish lines were reunited for the first time since 1977.

As practice began on Friday, two bumps where the circuit rejoined the old layout at the end of the Seaside Way straight were causing problems. Some teams were concerned that the suspension on their cars would not last more than a few laps under race conditions. René Arnoux (Ferrari) was the first to go over the bumps flat out and his 1:26.935 led Alain Prost (Renault), Patrick Tambay (Ferrari) and Riccardo Patrese (Brabham) on the day&#x27;s timing chart, while Nelson Piquet (Brabham), Lauda and Watson found their Michelin qualifying tires virtually useless and set poor times.

Overnight repair work smoothed the problematic bumps. Tambay grabbed his first pole with a lap of 1:26.117, the only lap to beat teammate Arnoux&#x27;s Friday time; Keke Rosberg (Williams) took third with 1:27.145, ahead of teammate Jacques Laffite. American Danny Sullivan (Tyrrell), in his only season of Formula One, managed ninth, while the other American in F1, Eddie Cheever (driving the older model Renault RE30C) was 15th, 7 places behind team mate Prost in the newer RE40 model. The McLarens of Watson and Lauda were never able to arrive at a balanced setup, and they would start in 22nd and 23rd position.

Making what would be an abortive comeback to Formula One, Australia&#x27;s World Champion Alan Jones took Chico Serra&#x27;s drive in the No.30 Arrows-Ford. Still recovering from a broken hip requiring a pin, the result of falling off a horse on his farm north of Melbourne, Jones qualified in a creditable 12th place for his first F1 GP since winning the final race of the season at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas.

===Qualifying classification===
*† — time disallowed

==Race==

===Race report===
The race took place in warm and sunny conditions and marked the 300th Grand Prix start for Lotus. Tambay held the lead at the first corner. Rosberg, immediately behind him, tried to squeeze through the middle of the all-Ferrari front row. He touched Arnoux&#x27;s right front with his left rear as he swung wide, but both continued, with Rosberg in second, followed by Laffite and Arnoux. Rosberg spun later in the lap while attempting to overtake, but continued without damage.

After one lap, Sullivan was up to sixth, behind Arnoux, and Cheever was ninth, immediately behind Prost. Sullivan was passed by Patrese on the second lap, and then by Prost and Cheever on lap three. Before long, however, Prost began dropping back with a misfire that had been plaguing him recurrently all weekend, and he finally pitted on lap 16. Cheever was able to get by Arnoux and Patrese when Arnoux began to lose grip from his Goodyears, and was up into fifth place. When Cheever entered the Renault pit for a new set of tires, however, he found the crew still working on Prost&#x27;s car; he was forced to continue. Prost&#x27;s problem was eventually solved and he continued, albeit three laps down.

Meanwhile, Rosberg had regained second place behind Tambay and, by lap 20, was again looking for a way by. The top six cars were all running very close together, and Rosberg soon found himself under increasing pressure from Laffite, who was in turn being hounded by Jean-Pierre Jarier&#x27;s Ligier and Patrese&#x27;s Brabham.

On lap 26, Rosberg attempted to take the lead again, but collided with Tambay, who spun and stalled. Rosberg continued again, driving around the outside of the disabled car. As he entered the chicane before the start/finish line, he found his teammate Laffite alongside and Jarier almost touching his gearbox behind. The two Williams cars touched briefly, and Jarier ran into the back of Rosberg, who hit the wall, bounced off, and hit it again before sliding to a stop. Jarier continued, but only briefly, as a damaged front wing had spoiled his handling, and he retired in the pits.

Laffite was now in the lead, with Patrese in second. By lap 28, the McLarens were lying third and fourth, having passed Marc Surer, Sullivan and Johnny Cecotto. When Watson got by Lauda at the end of Shoreline Drive, he was 20 seconds behind the two leaders. With Watson closing the gap to the front and Laffite&#x27;s tires going off quickly, Patrese challenged Laffite for the lead. He slid wide, and Watson and Lauda both passed before he rejoined the track. Soon after, the McLarens passed Laffite as well, and, from 22nd and 23rd on the grid, were now first and second.

With Laffite still struggling with his tires, Patrese was able to catch him up again and took third on lap 52. Arnoux was coming back through the field after a second tire stop, and was waging battle with Cheever for fifth place when they came upon Laffite on lap 67, again at the end of Shoreline Drive. At the hairpin, the Williams and Ferrari swapped places around Cheever, as Arnoux went from sixth to fourth in one corner. On the next lap, however, Cheever lost fifth place when he pulled off with a broken gearbox. With just three laps to go, Patrese retired from third place when his distributor broke.

Semi-retired World Champion, Australian Alan Jones replaced regular Arrows driver Chico Serra for the race in what was to prove to be a short-lived comeback to Formula One. After qualifying a credible 12th on the grid in the Cosworth powered Arrows A6, Jones ran in the top 10 until retiring on lap 58 with fatigue. Jones, who had only raced at home in Australia since retiring from F1 following the season, was still suffering the effects of a fall from a horse on his farm a couple of months earlier where he had broken his hip.

Lauda, suffering from a worsening cramp in his right leg, could not challenge Watson in the later stages, and the Ulsterman came home nearly half a minute ahead for his fifth victory. It was the farthest back from which a modern Grand Prix driver had ever come to win a race, and as of 2024, it remains the only time in F1 history a driver has won who qualified 20th or worst. Arnoux came through for third, and Laffite hung on for fourth, ahead of Surer and Cecotto, who scored a point in his second F1 race. It was the first ever points for a Venezuelan driver, and the last until Pastor Maldonado finished tenth in the 2011 Belgian Grand Prix. 

Rumors persisted all weekend that race organizer Chris Pook, the main figure in the attempt to create a &quot;Monte Carlo of the United States&quot; in Long Beach, had decided that Formula One was too expensive and risky, and, indeed, after the race, he announced that he planned to run a CART race at Long Beach in 1984 instead of F1. Despite tremendous success since the race&#x27;s inception in 1976, and the observable impact of the global exposure it brought to the city and to the Los Angeles area in general, the organizers believed that the less expensive and more popular (in the United States at least) CART championship, dominated by American drivers, would be a more promising investment.

===Race classification===
==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Rob Walker (July 1983). &quot;8th United States Grand Prix West: Whiz Kids&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 144–149.
* Mike S. Lang (1992). &quot;Grand Prix!: Race-by-race account of Formula 1 World Championship motor racing. Volume 4: 1981 to 1984&quot;. Haynes Publishing Group. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q599379" start="4" end="38" title="1983 United States Grand Prix West" label="1983 United States Grand Prix West"/>
<link wikidata="Q599379" start="55" end="90" title="1983 United States Grand Prix West" label="Toyota [[Grand Prix of Long Beach]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="98" end="109" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="147" end="169" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q69561" start="201" end="236" title="1983 Formula One World Championship" label="1983 Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171422" start="284" end="295" title="John Watson (racing driver)" label="John Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303685" start="307" end="314" title="McLaren MP4/1" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="315" end="319" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="468" end="478" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q173279" start="540" end="551" title="René Arnoux" label="René Arnoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q173598" start="563" end="570" title="Ferrari 126C" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q840399" start="683" end="695" title="Championship Auto Racing Teams" label="CART IndyCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173279" start="1411" end="1422" title="René Arnoux" label="René Arnoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q173598" start="1424" end="1431" title="Ferrari 126 C" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="1498" end="1509" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q534462" start="1511" end="1518" title="Renault RE40" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q173020" start="1521" end="1535" title="Patrick Tambay" label="Patrick Tambay"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="1550" end="1566" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583686" start="1568" end="1575" title="Brabham BT52" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="1615" end="1628" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="1669" end="1677" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171381" start="1899" end="1911" title="Keke Rosberg" label="Keke Rosberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669748" start="1913" end="1921" title="Williams FW08" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q171434" start="1967" end="1982" title="Jacques Laffite" label="Jacques Laffite"/>
<link wikidata="Q173105" start="1993" end="2007" title="Danny Sullivan" label="Danny Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333880" start="2009" end="2016" title="Tyrrell 012" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173205" start="2101" end="2114" title="Eddie Cheever" label="Eddie Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451978" start="2140" end="2153" title="Renault RE30C" label="Renault RE30C"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2409" end="2418" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172753" start="2441" end="2451" title="Alan Jones (racing driver)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q171507" start="2457" end="2468" title="Chico Serra" label="Chico Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q174176" start="2495" end="2501" title="Arrows Grand Prix International" label="Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q195996" start="2502" end="2506" title="Cosworth DFV" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="2615" end="2624" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q171676" start="2735" end="2749" title="1981 Caesars Palace Grand Prix" label="Caesars Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="2753" end="2762" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="2938" end="2943" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="3067" end="3074" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="3760" end="3769" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyears"/>
<link wikidata="Q171683" start="4302" end="4320" title="Jean-Pierre Jarier" label="Jean-Pierre Jarier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220251" start="4328" end="4334" title="Equipe Ligier" label="Ligier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="4354" end="4361" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q171505" start="5070" end="5080" title="Marc Surer" label="Marc Surer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173107" start="5095" end="5109" title="Johnny Cecotto" label="Johnny Cecotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q172753" start="6177" end="6187" title="Alan Jones (racing driver)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q174176" start="6205" end="6211" title="Arrows Grand Prix International" label="Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q171507" start="6219" end="6230" title="Chico Serra" label="Chico Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q591937" start="6379" end="6388" title="Arrows A6" label="Arrows A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q25050781" start="7214" end="7231" title="Formula One drivers from Venezuela" label="Venezuelan driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q82845" start="7252" end="7268" title="Pastor Maldonado" label="Pastor Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q21007" start="7291" end="7314" title="2011 Belgian Grand Prix" label="2011 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751410" start="7607" end="7611" title="Champ Car" label="CART"/>
<link wikidata="Q171816" start="7716" end="7720" title="1976 United States Grand Prix West" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7805" end="7816" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1262256" wikidata="Q578129" url="?curid=1262256" title="1984 Detroit Grand Prix">
<text>The 1984 Detroit Grand Prix was a Formula One motor race held on June 24, 1984 in Detroit, Michigan. It was the eighth race of the 1984 Formula One World Championship.

The 63-lap race was won from pole position by Brazilian driver Nelson Piquet, driving a Brabham-BMW. Englishman Martin Brundle finished second in a Tyrrell-Ford, less than a second behind Piquet, before the Tyrrell team were disqualified from the championship for various alleged rule infringements. Italian Elio de Angelis was thus promoted to second in his Lotus-Renault with another Italian, Teo Fabi, third in the other Brabham-BMW.

==Pre-race==
After breaking his leg at the Monaco Grand Prix three weeks before, and subsequently withdrawing from the next race in Canada, Patrick Tambay was back driving for the works Renault team. Mario Andretti, who had been called in as a possible replacement for Tambay in the race, was satisfied to spend the weekend as a spectator, watching his two sons run in the support races. Elsewhere, a lack of Hart turbo engines meant that the Spirit team were forced to modify their car to accommodate a naturally-aspirated Ford Cosworth DFV for this race.

==Qualifying report==
Qualifying saw Nelson Piquet take pole position in his Brabham-BMW, his second in succession and fourth of the season, by over 0.6 seconds from Alain Prost in the McLaren-TAG. Nigel Mansell, having set the fastest time in the Friday session in his Lotus-Renault, was third, a further 0.5 seconds behind, with Michele Alboreto fourth in the Ferrari. On the third row of the grid were Mansell&#x27;s teammate Elio de Angelis and Derek Warwick in the factory Renault, and on the fourth row were Ayrton Senna in the Toleman and Eddie Cheever in the Alfa Romeo. Patrick Tambay in the second Renault and Niki Lauda in the second McLaren completed the top ten. Piquet&#x27;s teammate Teo Fabi could only manage 23rd, while Huub Rothengatter came 27th and last in the Spirit-Ford and thus failed to qualify.

===Qualifying classification===
==Race report==
Warm and sunny weather returned on Sunday after an overnight storm had washed the track clean, but at the green light, there was immediate chaos. Nigel Mansell had decided that he could get by Nelson Piquet off the grid and aimed his Lotus for the space between Piquet&#x27;s Brabham and Alain Prost&#x27;s McLaren. He struck the back of Prost and bounced into the side of Piquet, sending the Brabham sliding to the outside wall of the track and into Michele Alboreto&#x27;s Ferrari. The Brabham&#x27;s right rear wheel was launched into the air and landed on the front of Ayrton Senna&#x27;s Toleman, breaking the suspension. At the same time, Marc Surer suddenly found his charge from the back of the grid blocked by Piquet&#x27;s stricken car, and drove his Arrows into the Brabham&#x27;s left front wheel. Taking no chances, the organizers stopped the race and made preparations for a restart.

Piquet, Alboreto and Senna took to their spare cars, but the Arrows team had none to offer Surer, so the Swiss driver was absent when the field reassembled on the grid. The second start came off without a hitch, as Piquet led from Prost and Mansell. At the end of the first lap, these three were followed by Alboreto, Eddie Cheever who had already gained three places, Derek Warwick, Elio de Angelis, Niki Lauda, Patrick Tambay and Ayrton Senna. Prost followed closely behind Piquet for the first few laps, then dropped back when his rear tires began to lose grip. As a result, Mansell closed up on the Frenchman and overtook him on lap 10, with Piquet five seconds ahead.

Immediately, Mansell fought hard to catch the leading Brabham, taking over a second per lap off his lead. Piquet, it seemed, was driving just fast enough to stay in front, however, and Mansell was unable to get within striking distance. On lap 17, the Lotus slowed noticeably while entering the Atwater Tunnel, as he had lost second gear. Meanwhile, not only Prost, but the Renaults of Warwick and Tambay, and then Lauda were forced to stop for new tires, while Piquet was having no trouble at all with the abrasive surface. Within moments of each other on lap 22, Senna&#x27;s right rear wheel came off in 5th gear on the main straight and he spun into the tire barrier in Turn one while under pressure from Keke Rosberg, and Cheever retired from third place with a cracked inter-cooler. Mansell finally gave up the struggle with his disintegrating gearbox on lap 28, handing second place to Alboreto, 15 seconds behind Piquet. Elio de Angelis was a close third in the second Lotus, then a long gap back to Rosberg and the stunning Tyrrell rookies, Martin Brundle and Stefan Bellof.

The Tyrrell team, still loyal to the normally aspirated Cosworth-Ford V8 engine, were given no chance on the season of being competitive against the mighty turbos. Already, however, they had been in the points four times in seven races, and on a tight circuit, their lighter weight and lower horsepower combined to give much better tire wear. In Detroit, this allowed them to use the softer Goodyear compound, while all the others had to use the harder compound. Also, the compactness of the cars, in comparison with the turbos, was an advantage in threading between the concrete walls, especially through the chicane leading on to the pit straight. Most importantly, Brundle and Bellof were putting in much better performances in their first year than anyone could have expected. Here, with things threatening to deteriorate at half distance, it was Brundle who would bring the race back to life.

Bellof, however, suddenly ground to a halt on lap 34 when he struck the wall exiting the chicane before the pits. Then, just as Brundle was pitting for water ballast, Warwick set the fastest lap of the race and passed Rosberg and de Angelis on consecutive laps to take third place. About to set off after Alboreto, Warwick&#x27;s Renault suddenly lost fifth gear, allowing de Angelis and Rosberg to repass him on lap 37. His gearbox completely expired on lap 41, and he became the eighteenth retirement of the day, leaving only eight cars still running. Rosberg succumbed next with a broken turbocharger, and when Alboreto blew his engine on lap 50, Piquet led by more than 30 seconds.

Brundle now found himself in third place and gaining on de Angelis, who was driving without second gear in his Lotus as teammate Mansell had done before retiring. By lap 56, Brundle had erased the ten seconds between him and the Lotus, and he passed by as they approached the chicane to take second place. With seven laps to go, Piquet was 20 seconds ahead and winding down his boost as he allowed Prost to unlap himself. Brundle continued to charge, however, taking almost five seconds per lap off the Champion&#x27;s lead. Even as Brundle pulled within a second on their last entrance to the Tunnel, Piquet remained cool and took his second victory in eight days by just a few car lengths. The only remaining finishers were de Angelis, thirty seconds back; the second Brabham of Teo Fabi (scoring his first points); Prost and the Williams of Jacques Laffite.

Soon after the podium ceremony, word arrived that the officials had found impurities in the water injection system on Brundle&#x27;s Tyrrell and lead balls in the rubber bag containing the water. Samples of the water were shipped to France and Texas for analysis and were found to contain significant levels of hydrocarbons, though this finding was later overturned on retesting. Ken Tyrrell was called to a meeting of the FISA Executive Committee on July 18 and, based on the impurities in the water, which had been topped up during a pit stop, was accused of refueling the car during the race. (Refueling had been banned prior to the 1984 season and remained illegal until 1994.) The team was banned from the remainder of the World Championship and lost the 13 points they had already gained, though they continued to race, unable to score points. That was weeks later, however, and the organizers in Detroit were grateful for the stirring drive by the English rookie that was the highlight of their event. With his disqualification, however, only 5 drivers were given points, so it wasn&#x27;t a sixth classified as Alboreto, the last retiree, didn&#x27;t complete the 90% of the race distance.

===Race classification===
==Championship standings after the race==
;Drivers&#x27; Championship standings
;Constructors&#x27; Championship standings


==References==
==Further reading==
* Innes Ireland (October 1984). &quot;3rd Detroit Grand Prix: Look Out, Alain!&quot;. &quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;, 150-154.
* Mike S. Lang (1992). &quot;Grand Prix!: Race-by-race account of Formula 1 World Championship motor racing. Volume 4: 1981 to 1984&quot;. Haynes Publishing Group. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q578129" start="4" end="27" title="1984 Detroit Grand Prix" label="1984 Detroit Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="34" end="45" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="46" end="56" title="motor race" label="motor race"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="82" end="89" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="91" end="99" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q69576" start="131" end="166" title="1984 Formula One World Championship" label="1984 Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q588596" start="198" end="211" title="pole position" label="pole position"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="232" end="245" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567625" start="257" end="264" title="Brabham BT53" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928692" start="265" end="268" title="BMW in Formula One" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q172854" start="281" end="295" title="Martin Brundle" label="Martin Brundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333880" start="317" end="324" title="Tyrrell 012" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="325" end="329" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q173115" start="477" end="492" title="Elio de Angelis" label="Elio de Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548438" start="528" end="533" title="Lotus 95T" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="534" end="541" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q171610" start="564" end="572" title="Teo Fabi" label="Teo Fabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567625" start="593" end="600" title="Brabham BT53" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928692" start="601" end="604" title="BMW in Formula One" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q418271" start="650" end="667" title="1984 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q65534" start="739" end="745" title="1984 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q173020" start="747" end="761" title="Patrick Tambay" label="Patrick Tambay"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="793" end="800" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="807" end="821" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q173241" start="1016" end="1020" title="Hart Racing Engines" label="Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q173088" start="1050" end="1056" title="Spirit Racing" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q195996" start="1131" end="1148" title="Cosworth DFV" label="Ford Cosworth DFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="1202" end="1215" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="1242" end="1249" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928692" start="1250" end="1253" title="BMW in Formula One" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="1331" end="1342" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="1350" end="1357" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q173224" start="1358" end="1361" title="Techniques d&amp;#x27;Avant Garde" label="TAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="1363" end="1376" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="1435" end="1440" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="1441" end="1448" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q172983" start="1496" end="1512" title="Michele Alboreto" label="Michele Alboreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1527" end="1534" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q173115" start="1594" end="1609" title="Elio de Angelis" label="Elio de Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171442" start="1614" end="1627" title="Derek Warwick" label="Derek Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="1643" end="1650" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="1679" end="1691" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172987" start="1699" end="1706" title="Toleman" label="Toleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q173205" start="1711" end="1724" title="Eddie Cheever" label="Eddie Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="1732" end="1742" title="Alfa Romeo in Formula One" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173020" start="1744" end="1758" title="Patrick Tambay" label="Patrick Tambay"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="1773" end="1780" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="1785" end="1795" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="1810" end="1817" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q171610" start="1864" end="1872" title="Teo Fabi" label="Teo Fabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171716" start="1903" end="1920" title="Huub Rothengatter" label="Huub Rothengatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173088" start="1947" end="1953" title="Spirit Racing" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1954" end="1958" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="2182" end="2195" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="2229" end="2242" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="2270" end="2275" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="2312" end="2319" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="2324" end="2335" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="2343" end="2350" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q172983" start="2487" end="2503" title="Michele Alboreto" label="Michele Alboreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="2511" end="2518" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="2609" end="2621" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172987" start="2629" end="2636" title="Toleman" label="Toleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q171505" start="2681" end="2691" title="Marc Surer" label="Marc Surer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174176" start="2797" end="2803" title="Arrows Grand Prix International" label="Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q173205" start="3253" end="3266" title="Eddie Cheever" label="Eddie Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q171442" start="3304" end="3317" title="Derek Warwick" label="Derek Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q173115" start="3319" end="3334" title="Elio de Angelis" label="Elio de Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="3336" end="3346" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q173020" start="3348" end="3362" title="Patrick Tambay" label="Patrick Tambay"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="3367" end="3379" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="3983" end="3990" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q171381" start="4318" end="4330" title="Keke Rosberg" label="Keke Rosberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="4642" end="4649" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172854" start="4659" end="4673" title="Martin Brundle" label="Martin Brundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57435" start="4678" end="4691" title="Stefan Bellof" label="Stefan Bellof"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="4750" end="4763" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth-Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="5085" end="5093" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q171610" start="7061" end="7069" title="Teo Fabi" label="Teo Fabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="7112" end="7120" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q171434" start="7124" end="7139" title="Jacques Laffite" label="Jacques Laffite"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7375" end="7381" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="7386" end="7391" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q173413" start="7522" end="7533" title="Ken Tyrrell" label="Ken Tyrrell"/>
</links>
</doc>
