<doc id="14532" wikidata="Q38" url="?curid=14532" title="Italy">
<text>Italy, officially the Italian Republic, is a country in Southern and Western Europe. It consists of a peninsula that extends into the Mediterranean Sea, with the Alps on its northern land border, as well as nearly 800 islands, notably Sicily and Sardinia. Italy shares its borders with France, Switzerland, Austria, Slovenia, and two enclaves—Vatican City and San Marino. It is the tenth-largest country in Europe by area, covering , and the third-most populous member state of the European Union, with nearly 60 million inhabitants. Italy&#x27;s capital and largest city is Rome; other major urban areas include Milan, Naples, Turin, Palermo, Bologna, Florence, Genoa, and Venice.

The history of Italy goes back to numerous Italic peoples, notably including the ancient Romans, who conquered the Mediterranean world during the Roman Republic and ruled it for centuries during the Roman Empire. With the spread of Christianity, Rome became the seat of the Catholic Church and the Papacy. Barbarian invasions and other factors led to the decline and fall of the Western Roman Empire between late antiquity and the Early Middle Ages. By the 11th century, Italian city-states and maritime republics expanded, bringing renewed prosperity through commerce and laying the groundwork for modern capitalism. The Italian Renaissance flourished during the 15th and 16th centuries and spread to the rest of Europe. Italian explorers discovered new routes to the Far East and the New World, contributing significantly to the European Age of Discovery.

After centuries of political and territorial divisions, Italy was almost entirely unified in 1861, following wars of independence and the Expedition of the Thousand, establishing the Kingdom of Italy. From the late 19th to the early 20th century, Italy rapidly industrialised, mainly in the north, and acquired a colonial empire, while the south remained largely impoverished, fueling a large immigrant diaspora to the Americas. From 1915 to 1918, Italy took part in World War I with the Entente against the Central Powers. In 1922, the Italian fascist dictatorship was established. During World War II, Italy was first part of the Axis until its surrender to the Allied powers (1940–1943), then a co-belligerent of the Allies during the Italian resistance and the liberation of Italy (1943–1945). Following the war, the monarchy was replaced by a republic and the country enjoyed a strong recovery.

A developed country with an advanced economy, Italy has the ninth-largest nominal GDP in the world, the second-largest manufacturing industry in Europe, and plays a significant role in regional and—to a lesser extent—global economic, military, cultural, and political affairs. Italy is a founding and leading member of the European Union, and is part of numerous other international organizations and forums. As a cultural superpower, Italy has long been a renowned global centre of art, music, literature, cuisine, fashion, science and technology, and the source of multiple inventions and discoveries. It has the highest number of World Heritage Sites (60) and is the fourth-most visited country in the world.

== Name ==


Hypotheses for the etymology of &quot;Italia&quot; are numerous. One theory suggests it originated from an Ancient Greek term for the land of the &quot;Italói&quot;, a tribe that resided in the region now known as Calabria. Originally thought to be named &quot;Vituli&quot;, some scholars suggest their totemic animal to be the calf (Latin: &quot;vitulus&quot;; Umbrian: &quot;vitlo&quot;; Oscan: &quot;Víteliú&quot;). Several ancient authors said it was named after a local ruler Italus.

The ancient Greek term for Italy initially referred only to the south of the Bruttium peninsula and parts of Catanzaro and Vibo Valentia. The larger concept of Oenotria and &quot;Italy&quot; became synonymous, and the name applied to most of Lucania as well. Before the Roman Republic&#x27;s expansion, the name was used by Greeks for the land between the strait of Messina and the line connecting the gulfs of Salerno and Taranto, corresponding to Calabria. The Greeks came to apply &quot;Italia&quot; to a larger region. In addition to the &quot;Greek Italy&quot; in the south, historians have suggested the existence of an &quot;Etruscan Italy&quot;, which consisted of areas of central Italy.

The borders of Roman Italy, &quot;Italia&quot;, are better established. Cato&#x27;s &quot;Origines&quot; describes Italy as the entire peninsula south of the Alps. In 264 BC, Roman Italy extended from the Arno and Rubicon rivers of the centre-north to the entire south. The northern area, Cisalpine Gaul, considered geographically part of Italy, was occupied by Rome in the 220s BC, but remained politically separated. It was legally merged into the administrative unit of Italy in 42 BC. Sardinia, Corsica, Sicily, and Malta were added to Italy by Diocletian in 292 AD, which made late-ancient Italy coterminous with the modern Italian geographical region.

The Latin &quot;Italicus&quot; was used to describe &quot;a man of Italy&quot; as opposed to a &quot;provincial&quot;, or one from the Roman province. The adjective &quot;italianus&quot;, from which &quot;Italian&quot; was derived, is from medieval Latin and was used alternatively with &quot;Italicus&quot; during the early modern period. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the Ostrogothic Kingdom of Italy was created. After the Lombard invasions, &quot;Italia&quot; was retained as the name for their kingdom, and its successor kingdom within the Holy Roman Empire.

== History ==
=== Prehistory and antiquity ===

Lower Paleolithic artefacts, dating back 850,000 years, have been recovered from Monte Poggiolo. Excavations throughout Italy revealed a Neanderthal presence in the Middle Palaeolithic period 200,000 years ago, while modern humans appeared about 40,000 years ago at Riparo Mochi.

The ancient peoples of pre-Roman Italy were Indo-European, specifically the Italic peoples. The main historic peoples of possible non-Indo-European or pre-Indo-European heritage include the Etruscans, the Elymians and Sicani of Sicily, and the prehistoric Sardinians, who gave birth to the Nuragic civilisation. Other ancient populations include the Rhaetian people and Camunni, known for their rock drawings in Valcamonica. A natural mummy, Ötzi, dated 3400–3100 BC, was discovered in the Similaun glacier in 1991.

The first colonisers were the Phoenicians, who established emporiums on the coasts of Sicily and Sardinia. Some became small urban centers and developed parallel to Greek colonies. During the 8th and 7th centuries, Greek colonies were established at Pithecusae, eventually extending along the south of the Italian Peninsula and the coast of Sicily, an area later known as Magna Graecia. Ionians, Doric colonists, Syracusans, and the Achaeans founded various cities. Greek colonisation placed the Italic peoples in contact with democratic forms of government and high artistic and cultural expressions.

=== Ancient Rome ===

Ancient Rome, a settlement on the River Tiber in central Italy, founded in 753 BC, was ruled for 244 years by a monarchical system. In 509 BC, the Romans, favouring a government of the Senate and the People (SPQR), expelled the monarchy and established an oligarchic republic.

The Italian Peninsula, named &quot;Italia&quot;, was consolidated into a unified entity during Roman expansion, the conquest of new territories often at the expense of the other Italic tribes, Etruscans, Celts, and Greeks. A permanent association, with most of the local tribes and cities, was formed, and Rome began the conquest of Western Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East. In the wake of Julius Caesar&#x27;s assassination in 44 BC, Rome grew into a massive empire stretching from Britain to the borders of Persia, engulfing the whole Mediterranean basin, in which Greek, Roman, and other cultures merged into a powerful civilisation. The long reign of the first emperor, Augustus, began an age of peace and prosperity. Roman Italy remained the metropole of the empire, homeland of the Romans and territory of the capital.

The Roman Empire was among the largest in history, wielding great economical, cultural, political, and military power. At its greatest extent, it had an area of . The Roman legacy has deeply influenced Western civilisation shaping the modern world. The widespread use of Romance languages derived from Latin, numerical system, modern Western alphabet and calendar, and the emergence of Christianity as a world religion, are among the many legacies of Roman dominance.

=== Middle Ages ===

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Italy fell under the Odoacer&#x27;s kingdom, and was seized by the Ostrogoths. Invasions resulted in a chaotic succession of kingdoms and the supposed &quot;Dark Ages&quot;. The invasion of another Germanic tribe in the 6th century, the Lombards, reduced Byzantine presence and ended political unity of the peninsula. The north formed the Lombard kingdom, central-south was also controlled by the Lombards, and other parts remained Byzantine.
The Lombard kingdom was absorbed into Francia by Charlemagne in the late 8th century and became the Kingdom of Italy. The Franks helped form the Papal States. Until the 13th century, politics was dominated by relations between the Holy Roman Emperors and the Papacy, with city-states siding with the former (Ghibellines) or with the latter (Guelphs) for momentary advantage. The Germanic emperor and Roman pontiff became the universal powers of medieval Europe. However, conflict over the Investiture Controversy and between Guelphs and Ghibellines ended the imperial-feudal system in the north, where cities gained independence. In 1176, the Lombard League of city-states, defeated Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, ensuring their independence.

City-states—e.g. Milan, Florence, Venice—played a crucially innovative role in financial development by devising banking practices, and enabling new forms of social organisation. In coastal and southern areas, maritime republics dominated the Mediterranean and monopolised trade to the Orient. They were independent thalassocratic city-states, in which merchants had considerable power. Although oligarchical, the relative political freedom they afforded was conducive to academic and artistic advancement. The best-known maritime republics were Venice, Genoa, Pisa, and Amalfi. Each had dominion over overseas lands, islands, lands on the Adriatic, Aegean, and Black seas, and commercial colonies in the Near East and North Africa.

Venice and Genoa were Europe&#x27;s gateways to the East, and producers of fine glass, while Florence was a centre of silk, wool, banking, and jewellery. The wealth generated meant large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned. The republics participated in the Crusades, providing support, transport, but mostly taking political and trading opportunities. Italy first felt the economic changes which led to the commercial revolution: Venice was able to sack Byzantine&#x27;s capital and finance Marco Polo&#x27;s voyages to Asia; the first universities were formed in Italian cities, and scholars such as Aquinas obtained international fame; capitalism and banking families emerged in Florence, where Dante and Giotto were active around 1300. In the south, Sicily had become an Arab Islamic emirate in the 9th century, thriving until the Italo-Normans conquered it in the late 11th century, together with most of the Lombard and Byzantine principalities of southern Italy. The region was subsequently divided between the Kingdom of Sicily and Kingdom of Naples. The Black Death of 1348 killed perhaps a third of Italy&#x27;s population.

=== Early modern period ===

During the 1400s and 1500s, Italy was the birthplace and heart of the Renaissance. This era marked the transition from the medieval period to the modern age and was fostered by the wealth accumulated by merchant cities and the patronage of dominant families. Italian polities were now regional states effectively ruled by princes, in control of trade and administration, and their courts became centres of the arts and sciences. These princedoms were led by political dynasties and merchant families, such as the Medici of Florence. After the end of the Western Schism, newly elected Pope Martin V returned to the Papal States and restored Italy as the sole centre of Western Christianity. The Medici Bank was made the credit institution of the Papacy, and significant ties were established between the Church and new political dynasties.
In 1453, despite activity by Pope Nicholas V to support the Byzantines, the city of Constantinople fell to the Ottomans. This led to the migration of Greek scholars and texts to Italy, fuelling the rediscovery of Greek humanism. Humanist rulers such as Federico da Montefeltro and Pope Pius II worked to establish ideal cities, founding Urbino and Pienza. Pico della Mirandola wrote the &quot;Oration on the Dignity of Man&quot;, considered the manifesto of the Renaissance. In the arts, the Italian Renaissance exercised a dominant influence on European art for centuries, with artists such as Leonardo da Vinci, Botticelli, Michelangelo, Raphael, Giotto, Donatello, and Titian, and architects such as Filippo Brunelleschi, Andrea Palladio, and Donato Bramante. Italian explorers and navigators from the maritime republics, eager to find an alternative route to the Indies to bypass the Ottomans, offered their services to monarchs of Atlantic countries and played a key role in ushering the Age of Discovery and colonization of the Americas. The most notable were: Christopher Columbus, who opened the Americas for conquest by Europeans; John Cabot, the first European to explore North America since the Norse; and Amerigo Vespucci, for whom the continent of America is named.

A defensive alliance known as the Italic League was formed between Venice, Naples, Florence, Milan, and the Papacy. Lorenzo &quot;the Magnificent&quot; de Medici was the Renaissance&#x27;s greatest patron, his support allowed the League to abort invasion by the Turks. The alliance, however, collapsed in the 1490s; the invasion of Charles VIII of France initiated a series of wars in the peninsula. During the High Renaissance, popes such as Julius II (1503–1513) fought for control of Italy against foreign monarchs; Paul III (1534–1549) preferred to mediate between the European powers to secure peace. In the middle of such conflicts, the Medici popes Leo X (1513–1521) and Clement VII (1523–1534) faced the Protestant Reformation in Germany, England and elsewhere.

In 1559, at the end of the Italian wars between France and the Habsburgs, about half of Italy (the southern Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, and the Duchy of Milan) was under Spanish rule, while the other half remained independent (many states continued to be formally part of the Holy Roman Empire). The Papacy launched the Counter-Reformation, whose key events include: the Council of Trent (1545–1563); adoption of the Gregorian calendar; the Jesuit China mission; the French Wars of Religion; end of the Thirty Years&#x27; War (1618–1648); and the Great Turkish War. The Italian economy declined in the 1600s and 1700s.
During the war of the Spanish succession (1700–1714), Austria acquired most of the Spanish domains in Italy, namely Milan, Naples and Sardinia; the latter was given to the House of Savoy in exchange for Sicily in 1720. Later, a branch of the Bourbons ascended to the throne of Sicily and Naples. During the Napoleonic Wars, north and central Italy were reorganised as Sister Republics of France and, later, as a Kingdom of Italy. The south was administered by Joachim Murat, Napoleon&#x27;s brother-in-law. 1814&#x27;s Congress of Vienna restored the situation of the late 18th century, but the ideals of the French Revolution could not be eradicated, and re-surfaced during the political upheavals that characterised the early 19th century. The first adoption of the Italian tricolour by an Italian state, the Cispadane Republic, occurred during Napoleonic Italy, following the French Revolution, which advocated national self-determination. This event is celebrated by Tricolour Day.

=== Unification ===

The birth of the Kingdom of Italy was the result of efforts of Italian nationalists and monarchists loyal to the House of Savoy to establish a united kingdom encompassing the entire Italian Peninsula. By the mid-19th century, rising Italian nationalism led to revolution. Following the Congress of Vienna in 1815, the political and social Italian unification movement, or Risorgimento, emerged to unite Italy by consolidating the states and liberating them from foreign control. A radical figure was the patriotic journalist Giuseppe Mazzini, founder of the political movement Young Italy in the 1830s, who favoured a unitary republic and advocated a broad nationalist movement. 1847 saw the first public performance of &quot;Il Canto degli Italiani&quot;, which became the national anthem in 1946.
The most famous member of Young Italy was the revolutionary and general Giuseppe Garibaldi who led the republican drive for unification in southern Italy. However, the Italian monarchy of the House of Savoy, in the Kingdom of Sardinia, whose government was led by Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, also had ambitions of establishing a united Italian state. In the context of the 1848 liberal revolutions that swept Europe, an unsuccessful First Italian War of Independence was declared against Austria. In 1855, Sardinia became an ally of Britain and France in the Crimean War. Sardinia fought the Austrian Empire in the Second Italian War of Independence of 1859, with the aid of France, resulting in liberating Lombardy. On the basis of the Plombières Agreement, the Sardinia ceded Savoy and Nice to France, an event that caused the Niçard exodus.

In 1860–1861, Garibaldi led the drive for unification in Naples and Sicily. Teano was the site of a famous meeting between Garibaldi and Victor Emmanuel II, the last king of Sardinia, during which Garibaldi shook Victor Emanuel&#x27;s hand and hailed him as King of Italy. Cavour agreed to include Garibaldi&#x27;s southern Italy in a union with the Kingdom of Sardinia in 1860. This allowed the Sardinian government to declare a united Italian kingdom on 17 March 1861, with Victor Emmanuel II as its first king. In 1865, the kingdom&#x27;s capital was moved from Turin to Florence. In 1866, Victor Emmanuel II, allied with Prussia during the Austro-Prussian War, waged the Third Italian War of Independence, which resulted in Italy annexing Venetia. Finally, in 1870, as France abandoned Rome during the Franco-Prussian War, the Italians captured the Papal States, unification was completed, and the capital moved to Rome.

=== Liberal period ===

Sardinia&#x27;s constitution was extended to all of Italy in 1861, and provided basic freedoms for the new state; but electoral laws excluded the non-propertied classes. The new kingdom was governed by a parliamentary constitutional monarchy dominated by liberals. As northern Italy quickly industrialised, southern and northern rural areas remained underdeveloped and overpopulated, forcing millions to migrate and fuelling a large and influential diaspora. The Italian Socialist Party increased in strength, challenging the traditional liberal and conservative establishment. In the last two decades of the 19th century, Italy developed into a colonial power by subjugating Eritrea, Somalia, Tripolitania, and Cyrenaica in Africa. In 1913, male universal suffrage was adopted. The pre-World War I period was dominated by Giovanni Giolitti, prime minister five times between 1892 and 1921.
Italy entered into the First World War in 1915 with the aim of completing national unity, so it is also considered the Fourth Italian War of Independence, from a historiographical perspective, as the conclusion of the unification of Italy. Italy, nominally allied with German and the Austro-Hungarian empires in the Triple Alliance, in 1915 joined the Allies, entering World War I with a promise of substantial territorial gains that included west Inner Carniola, the former Austrian Littoral, and Dalmatia, as well as parts of the Ottoman Empire. The country&#x27;s contribution to the Allied victory earned it a place as one of the &quot;Big Four&quot; powers. Reorganisation of the army and conscription led to Italian victories. In October 1918, the Italians launched a massive offensive, culminating in victory at the Battle of Vittorio Veneto. This marked the end of war on the Italian Front, secured dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and was instrumental in ending the war less than two weeks later.

During the war, more than 650,000 Italian soldiers and as many civilians died, and the kingdom was on the brink of bankruptcy. The Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919) and Treaty of Rapallo (1920) allowed for annexation of Trentino Alto-Adige, the Julian March, Istria, the Kvarner Gulf, and the Dalmatian city of Zara. The subsequent Treaty of Rome (1924) led to annexation of Fiume by Italy. Italy did not receive other territories promised by the Treaty of London, so this outcome was denounced as a &quot;mutilated victory&quot;, by Benito Mussolini, which helped lead to the rise of Italian fascism. Historians regard &quot;mutilated victory&quot; as a &quot;political myth&quot;, used by fascists to fuel Italian imperialism. Italy gained a permanent seat in the League of Nations&#x27;s executive council.

=== Fascist regime and World War II ===

The socialist agitations that followed the devastation of the Great War, inspired by the Russian Revolution, led to counter-revolution and repression throughout Italy. The liberal establishment, fearing a Soviet-style revolution, started to endorse the small National Fascist Party, led by Mussolini. In October 1922, the Blackshirts of the National Fascist Party organised a mass demonstration and the &quot;March on Rome&quot; coup. King Victor Emmanuel III appointed Mussolini as prime minister, transferring power to the fascists without armed conflict. Mussolini banned political parties and curtailed personal liberties, establishing a dictatorship. These actions attracted international attention and inspired similar dictatorships in Nazi Germany and Francoist Spain.

Fascism was based upon Italian nationalism and imperialism, seeking to expand Italian possessions via irredentist claims based on the legacy of the Roman and Venetian empires. For this reason the fascists engaged in interventionist foreign policy. In 1935, Mussolini invaded Ethiopia and founded Italian East Africa, resulting in international isolation and leading to Italy&#x27;s withdrawal from the League of Nations. Italy then allied with Nazi Germany and the Empire of Japan, and strongly supported Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War. In 1939, Italy annexed Albania.

Italy entered World War II on 10 June 1940. At different times, Italians advanced in British Somaliland, Egypt, the Balkans, and eastern fronts. They were, however, defeated on the Eastern Front as well as in the East African and North African campaigns, losing their territories in Africa and the Balkans. Italian war crimes included extrajudicial killings and ethnic cleansing by deportation of about 25,000 people—mainly Yugoslavs—to Italian concentration camps and elsewhere. Yugoslav Partisans perpetrated their own crimes against the ethnic Italian population during and after the war, including the foibe massacres. An Allied invasion of Sicily began in July 1943, leading to the collapse of the Fascist regime on 25 July. Mussolini was deposed and arrested by order of King Victor Emmanuel III. On 8 September, Italy signed the Armistice of Cassibile, ending its war with the Allies. The Germans, with the assistance of Italian fascists, succeeded in taking control of north and central Italy. The country remained a battlefield, with the Allies moving up from the south.
In the north, the Germans set up the Italian Social Republic (RSI), a Nazi puppet state and collaborationist regime with Mussolini installed as leader after he was rescued by German paratroopers. What remained of the Italian troops was organised into the Italian Co-belligerent Army, which fought alongside the Allies, while other Italian forces, loyal to Mussolini, opted to fight alongside the Germans in the National Republican Army. German troops, with RSI collaboration, committed massacres and deported thousands of Jews to death camps. The post-armistice period saw the emergence of the Italian Resistance, who fought a guerrilla war against the Nazi German occupiers and collaborators. This has been described as an Italian civil war due to fighting between partisans and fascist RSI forces. In April 1945, with defeat looming, Mussolini attempted to escape north, but was captured and summarily executed by partisans.

Hostilities ended on 29 April 1945, when the German forces in Italy surrendered. Nearly half a million Italians died in the conflict, society was divided, and the economy all but destroyed—per capita income in 1944 was at its lowest point since 1900. The aftermath left Italy angry with the monarchy for its endorsement of the Fascist regime, contributing to a revival of Italian republicanism.

=== Republican era ===

Italy became a republic after the 1946 Italian institutional referendum held on 2 June, a day celebrated since as &quot;Festa della Repubblica&quot;. This was the first time women voted nationally. Victor Emmanuel III&#x27;s son, Umberto II, was forced to abdicate. The Republican Constitution was approved in 1948. Under the Treaty of Paris between Italy and the Allied Powers, areas next to the Adriatic Sea were annexed by Yugoslavia, resulting in the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus, which involved the emigration of around 300,000 Istrian and Dalmatian Italians. Italy lost all colonial possessions, ending the Italian Empire.
Fears of a Communist takeover proved crucial in 1948, when the Christian Democrats, under Alcide De Gasperi, won a landslide victory. Consequently, in 1949 Italy became a member of NATO. The Marshall Plan revived the economy, which, until the late 1960s, enjoyed a period called the Economic Miracle. In the 1950s, Italy became a founding country of the European Communities, a forerunner of the European Union. From the late 1960s until the early 1980s, the country experienced the &quot;Years of Lead&quot;, characterised by economic difficulties, especially after the 1973 oil crisis; social conflicts; and terrorist massacres.

The economy recovered and Italy became the world&#x27;s fifth-largest industrial nation after it gained entry into the G7 in the 1970s. However, national debt skyrocketed past 100% of GDP. Between 1992 and 1993, Italy faced terror attacks perpetrated by the Sicilian Mafia as a consequence of new anti-mafia measures by the government. Voters—disenchanted with political paralysis, massive public debt and extensive corruption uncovered by the Clean Hands investigation—demanded radical reform. The Christian Democrats, who had ruled for almost 50 years, underwent a crisis and disbanded, splitting into factions. The Communists reorganised as a social-democratic force. During the 1990s and 2000s, centre-right (dominated by media magnate Silvio Berlusconi) and centre-left coalitions (led by professor Romano Prodi) alternately governed.

In 2011, amidst the Great Recession, Berlusconi resigned and was replaced by the technocratic cabinet of Mario Monti. In 2014, Matteo Renzi became prime minister and the government started constitutional reform. This was rejected in a 2016 referendum and Paolo Gentiloni became prime minister.

During the European migrant crisis of the 2010s, Italy was the entry point and leading destination for most asylum seekers entering the EU. Between 2013 and 2018, it took in over 700,000 migrants, mainly from sub-Saharan Africa, which put a strain on the public purse and led to a surge in support for far-right or euro-sceptic parties. After the 2018 general election, Giuseppe Conte became prime minister of a populist coalition.

With almost 200,000 victims, Italy was one of the countries with the most deaths in the COVID-19 pandemic and one of the most affected economically. In February 2021, after a government crisis, Conte resigned. Mario Draghi, former president of the European Central Bank, formed a national unity government supported by most main parties, pledging to implement an economic stimulus to face the crisis caused by the pandemic. In 2022, Giorgia Meloni was sworn in as Italy&#x27;s first female prime minister.

== Geography ==


Italy, whose territory largely coincides with the eponymous geographical region, is located in Southern Europe (and is also considered part of Western Europe) between latitudes 35° and 47° N, and longitudes 6° and 19° E. To the north, from west to east, Italy borders France, Switzerland, Austria, and Slovenia, and is roughly delimited by the Alpine watershed, enclosing the Po Valley and the Venetian Plain. It consists of the entirety of the Italian Peninsula, Sicily and Sardinia (the biggest islands of the Mediterranean), and many smaller islands. Some of Italy&#x27;s territory extends beyond the Alpine basin, and some islands are located outside the Eurasian continental shelf.

The country&#x27;s area is , of which is land and is water. Including the islands, Italy has a coastline of on the Mediterranean Sea, the Ligurian and Tyrrhenian seas, the Ionian Sea, and the Adriatic Sea. Its border with France runs for ; Switzerland, ; Austria, ; and Slovenia, . The sovereign states of San Marino and Vatican City (the smallest country in the world and headquarters of the worldwide Catholic Church under the governance of the Holy See) are enclaves within Italy, while Campione d&#x27;Italia is an Italian exclave in Switzerland. The border with San Marino is long, that with Vatican City, .
Over 35% of Italian territory is mountainous. The Apennine Mountains form the peninsula&#x27;s backbone, and the Alps form most of its northern boundary, where Italy&#x27;s highest point is located on the summit of Mont Blanc (&quot;Monte Bianco&quot;) at . Other well-known mountains include the Matterhorn (&quot;Monte Cervino&quot;) in the western Alps, and the Dolomites in the eastern Alps. Many parts of Italy are of volcanic origin. Most small islands and archipelagos in the south are volcanic islands. There are active volcanoes: Mount Etna in Sicily (the largest in Europe), Vulcano, Stromboli, and Vesuvius.

Most rivers of Italy drain into the Adriatic or Tyrrhenian Sea. The longest is the Po, which flows from the Alps on the western border, and crosses the Padan plain to the Adriatic. The Po Valley is the largest plain, with , and contains over 70% of the country&#x27;s lowlands. The largest lakes are, in descending size: Garda (), Maggiore (), and Como ().

=== Climate ===

The climate is influenced by the seas that surround Italy on every side except the north, which constitute a reservoir of heat and humidity. Within the southern temperate zone, they determine a Mediterranean climate with local differences. Because of the length of the peninsula and the mostly mountainous hinterland, the climate is highly diverse. In most inland northern and central regions, the climate ranges from humid subtropical to humid continental and oceanic. The Po Valley is mostly humid subtropical, with cool winters and hot summers. The coastal areas of Liguria, Tuscany, and most of the south generally fit the Mediterranean climate stereotype, as in the Köppen climate classification.

Conditions on the coast are different from those in the interior, particularly during winter when the higher altitudes tend to be cold, wet, and often snowy. The coastal regions have mild winters, and hot and generally dry summers; lowland valleys are hot in summer. Winter temperatures vary from in the Alps to in Sicily; so, average summer temperatures range from to over . Winters can vary widely with lingering cold, foggy, and snowy periods in the north, and milder, sunnier conditions in the south. Summers are hot across the country, except at high altitude, particularly in the south. Northern and central areas can experience strong thunderstorms from spring to autumn.

=== Biodiversity ===
Italy&#x27;s varied geography, including the Alps, Apennines, central Italian woodlands, and southern Italian Garigue and Maquis shrubland, contribute to habitat diversity. As the peninsula is in the centre of the Mediterranean, forming a corridor between Central Europe and North Africa, and having of coastline, Italy has received species from the Balkans, Eurasia, and the Middle East. Italy has probably the highest level of faunal biodiversity in Europe, with over 57,000 species recorded, representing more than a third of all European fauna, and the highest level of biodiversity of animal and plant species within the EU.
The fauna of Italy includes 4,777 endemic animal species, which include the Sardinian long-eared bat, Sardinian red deer, spectacled salamander, brown cave salamander, Italian newt, Italian frog, Apennine yellow-bellied toad, Italian wall lizard, and Sicilian pond turtle. There are 119 mammals species, 550 bird species, 69 reptile species, 39 amphibian species, 623 fish species, and 56,213 invertebrate species, of which 37,303 are insect species.

The flora of Italy was traditionally estimated to comprise about 5,500 vascular plant species. However, , 6,759 species are recorded in the &quot;Data bank of Italian vascular flora&quot;. Italy has 1,371 endemic plant species and subspecies, which include Sicilian fir, Barbaricina columbine, Sea marigold, Lavender cotton, and Ucriana violet. Italy is a signatory to the Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats and the Habitats Directive.

Italy has many botanical and historic gardens. The Italian garden is stylistically based on symmetry, axial geometry, and the principle of imposing order on nature. It influenced the history of gardening, especially French and English gardens. The Italian garden was influenced by Roman and Italian Renaissance gardens.

The Italian wolf is the national animal of Italy, while the national tree is the strawberry tree. The reasons for this are that the Italian wolf, which inhabits the Apennine Mountains and the Western Alps, features prominently in Latin and Italian cultures, such as the legend of the founding of Rome, while the green leaves, white flowers, and red berries of the strawberry tree, native to the Mediterranean, recall the colours of the flag. The national bird is the Italian sparrow, while the national flower is the flower of the strawberry tree.

=== Environment ===

After its quick industrial growth, Italy took time to address its environmental problems. After improvements, Italy now ranks 84th in the world for ecological sustainability. The total area protected by national parks, regional parks, and nature reserves covers about 11% of Italian territory, and 12% of Italy&#x27;s coastline is protected.

Italy has been one of the world&#x27;s leading producers of renewable energy, in 2010 ranking as the fourth largest provider of installed solar energy capacity and sixth largest of wind power capacity. Renewable energy provided approximately 37% Italy&#x27;s energy consumption in 2020.

The country operated nuclear reactors between 1963 and 1990 but, after the Chernobyl disaster and referendums, the nuclear programme was terminated, a decision overturned by the government in 2008, with plans to build up to four nuclear power plants. This was in turn struck down by a referendum following the Fukushima nuclear accident.

Air pollution remains severe, especially in the industrialised north. Italy is the twelfth-largest carbon dioxide producer. Extensive traffic and congestion in large cities continue to cause environmental and health issues, even if smog levels have decreased since the 1970s and 1980s, with smog becoming an increasingly rare phenomenon and levels of sulphur dioxide decreasing.

Deforestation, illegal building, and poor land-management policies have led to significant erosion in Italy&#x27;s mountainous regions, leading to ecological disasters such as the 1963 Vajont Dam flood, the 1998 Sarno, and the 2009 Messina mudslides.

== Politics ==

Italy has been a unitary parliamentary republic since 1946, when the monarchy was abolished. The president of Italy, Sergio Mattarella since 2015, is Italy&#x27;s head of state. The president is elected for a single seven-year term by the Italian Parliament and regional voters in joint session. Italy has a written democratic constitution that resulted from a Constituent Assembly formed by representatives of the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy, in World War II.

=== Government ===

Italy has a parliamentary government based on a mixed proportional and majoritarian voting system. The parliament is perfectly bicameral; each house has the same powers. The two houses: the Chamber of Deputies meets in Palazzo Montecitorio, and the Senate of the Republic in Palazzo Madama. A peculiarity of the Italian Parliament is the representation given to Italian citizens permanently living abroad: 8 Deputies and 4 Senators are elected in four distinct overseas constituencies. There are senators for life, appointed by the president &quot;for outstanding patriotic merits in the social, scientific, artistic or literary field&quot;. Former presidents are &quot;ex officio&quot; life senators.
The prime minister of Italy is head of government and has executive authority, but must receive a vote of approval from the Council of Ministers to execute most policies. The prime minister and cabinet are appointed by the president, and confirmed by a vote of confidence in parliament. To remain as prime minister, one has to pass votes of confidence. The role of prime minister is similar to most other parliamentary systems, but they are not authorised to dissolve parliament. Another difference is that the political responsibility for intelligence is with the prime minister, who has exclusive power to coordinate intelligence policies, determine financial resources, strengthen cybersecurity, apply and protect State secrets, and authorise agents to carry out operations, in Italy or abroad.

The major political parties are the Brothers of Italy, Democratic Party, and Five Star Movement. During the 2022 general election, these three and their coalitions won 357 of the 400 seats in the Chamber of Deputies, and 187 of 200 in the Senate. The centre-right coalition, which included Giorgia Meloni&#x27;s Brothers of Italy, Matteo Salvini&#x27;s League, Silvio Berlusconi&#x27;s , and Maurizio Lupi&#x27;s Us Moderates, won most seats in parliament. The rest were taken by the centre-left coalition, which included the Democratic Party, the Greens and Left Alliance, Aosta Valley, More Europe, Civic Commitment, the Five Star Movement, Action – Italia Viva, South Tyrolean People&#x27;s Party, South calls North, and the Associative Movement of Italians Abroad.

=== Law and criminal justice ===

The law of Italy has several sources. These are hierarchical: the law or regulation from a lower source cannot conflict with the rule of an upper source (hierarchy of sources). The Constitution of 1948 is the highest source. The Constitutional Court of Italy rules on the conformity of laws with the constitution. The judiciary bases their decisions on Roman law modified by the Napoleonic Code and later statutes. The Supreme Court of Cassation is the highest court for both criminal and civil appeals.

Italy lags behind other Western European nations in LGBT rights. Italy&#x27;s law prohibiting torture is considered behind international standards.

Law enforcement is complex with multiple police forces. The national policing agencies are the &quot;Polizia di Stato&quot; (&#x27;State Police&#x27;), the Carabinieri, the &quot;Guardia di Finanza&quot; (&#x27;Financial Police&#x27;), and the &quot;Polizia Penitenziaria&quot; (&#x27;Prison Police&#x27;), as well as the &quot;Guardia Costiera&quot; (&#x27;Coast Guard Police&#x27;). Although policing is primarily provided on a national basis, there are also the provincial and municipal police.

Since their appearance in the middle of the 19th century, Italian organised crime and criminal organisations have infiltrated the social and economic life of many regions in southern Italy; the most notorious is the Sicilian Mafia, which expanded into foreign countries, including the US. Mafia receipts may reach 9% of GDP. A 2009 report identified 610  which have a strong Mafia presence, where 13 million Italians live and 15% of GDP is produced. The Calabrian &#x27;Ndrangheta, probably the most powerful crime syndicate of Italy, accounts alone for 3% of GDP.

At 0.013 per 1,000 people, Italy has the 47th highest murder rate, compared to 61 countries, and the 43rd highest number of rapes per 1,000 people, compared to 64 countries in the world. These are relatively low figures among developed countries.

=== Foreign relations ===

Italy is a founding member of the European Economic Community (EEC), now the European Union (EU), and of NATO. Italy was admitted to the United Nations in 1955, and is a member and strong supporter of international organisations, such as the OECD, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade/World Trade Organization (GATT/WTO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of Europe, and the Central European Initiative. Its turns in the rotating presidencies of international organisations include the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2018, G7 in 2017, and the EU Council in 2014. Italy is a recurrent non-permanent member of the UN Security Council.

Italy strongly supports multilateral international politics, endorsing the UN and its international security activities. In 2013, Italy had 5,296 troops deployed abroad, engaged in 33 UN and NATO missions in 25 countries. Italy deployed troops in support of UN peacekeeping missions in Somalia, Mozambique, and East Timor. Italy provides support for NATO and UN operations in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Albania, and deployed over 2,000 troops to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) from 2003.

Italy supported international efforts to reconstruct and stabilise Iraq, but it had withdrawn its military contingent of 3,200 troops by 2006. In August 2006, Italy deployed about 2,450 troops for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Italy is one of the largest financiers of the Palestinian Authority, contributing €60 million in 2013 alone.

=== Military ===

The military history of Italy chronicles a vast time period, lasting from the military conflicts fought by the ancient peoples of Italy, most notably the conquest of the Mediterranean world by the ancient Romans, through the expansion of the Italian city-states and maritime republics during the medieval period and the involvement of the historical Italian states in the Italian Wars and the wars of succession, to the Napoleonic period, the Italian unification, the campaigns of the colonial empire, the two world wars, and into the modern day, with world peacekeeping operations under the aegis of NATO, the EU or the UN.

The Italian Army, Navy, Air Force, and Carabinieri collectively form the Italian Armed Forces, under the command of the High Council of Defence, presided over by the president, per the Constitution of Italy. According to Article 78, the Parliament has the authority to declare a state of war and vest the necessary war-making powers in the government.

Despite not being a branch of the armed forces, the &quot;Guardia di Finanza&quot; has military status and is organised along military lines. Since 2005, military service has been voluntary. In 2010, the Italian military had 293,202 personnel on active duty, of which 114,778 are Carabinieri. As part of NATO&#x27;s nuclear sharing strategy, Italy hosts 90 US B61 nuclear bombs located at the Ghedi and Aviano air bases.

The Army is the national ground defence force. It was formed in 1946, when Italy became a republic, from what remained of the &quot;Royal Italian Army&quot;. Its best-known combat vehicles are the Dardo infantry fighting vehicle, the B1 Centauro tank destroyer, and the Ariete tank, and among its aircraft are the Mangusta attack helicopter, deployed on EU, NATO, and UN missions. It has at its disposal Leopard 1 and M113 armoured vehicles.

The Italian Navy is a blue-water navy. It was also formed in 1946 from what remained of the &quot;Regia Marina&quot; (the &#x27;Royal Navy&#x27;). The Navy, being a member of the EU and NATO, has taken part in coalition peacekeeping operations around the world. In 2014, the Navy operated 154 vessels in service, including minor auxiliary vessels.

The Italian Air Force was founded as an independent service arm in 1923 by King Victor Emmanuel III as the &quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot; (&#x27;Royal Air Force&#x27;). After World War II, it was renamed as the &quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot;. In 2021, the Italian Air Force operated 219 combat jets. A transport capability is guaranteed by a fleet of 27 C-130Js and C-27J Spartan. The acrobatic display team is the &quot;Frecce Tricolori&quot; (&#x27;Tricolour Arrows&#x27;).

An autonomous corps of the military, the Carabinieri are the gendarmerie and military police of Italy, policing the military and civilian population alongside Italy&#x27;s other police forces. While different branches of the Carabinieri report to separate ministries, the corps reports to the Ministry of Internal Affairs when maintaining public order and security.

===Administrative divisions===


Italy is constituted of 20 regions (&quot;regioni&quot;)—five of which have special autonomous status which enables them to enact legislation on additional matters.
* Abruzzo
* Aosta Valley
* Apulia
* Basilicata
* Calabria
* Campania
* Emilia-Romagna
* Friuli-Venezia Giulia
* Lazio
* Liguria
* Lombardy
* Marche
* Molise
* Piedmont
* Sardinia
* Sicily
* Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol
* Tuscany
* Umbria
* Veneto
The &quot;regioni&quot; contain 107 provinces (&quot;province&quot;) or metropolitan cities (&quot;città metropolitane&quot;), and 7,904 municipalities (&quot;comuni&quot;).

== Economy ==
Italy has an advanced mixed economy that is the third-largest in the eurozone and 13th-largest in the world by purchasing power parity-adjusted GDP. It has the ninth-largest national wealth and the third-largest central bank gold reserve. As a founding member of the G7, the eurozone, and the OECD, it is one of the most industrialised nations and a leading country in international trade. It is a developed country ranked 30th on the Human Development Index. It performs well in life expectancy, healthcare, and education. The country is well known for its creative and innovative businesses, a competitive agricultural sector (with the world&#x27;s largest wine production), and for its influential and high-quality automobile, machinery, food, design, and fashion industries.


Italy is the world&#x27;s sixth-largest manufacturing country and the second-largest in Europe, characterised by fewer multinational corporations than other economies of comparable size and many dynamic small and medium-sized enterprises, clustered in industrial districts, which are the backbone of Italian industry. This has produced a niche-markets manufacturing sector often focused on the export of luxury products. While less capable of competing on quantity, it can compete with Asian economies that have lower labor costs through higher-quality products. Italy was the world&#x27;s 10th-largest exporter in 2019. Its closest trade ties are with other EU countries, and its largest export partners in 2019 were Germany (12%), France (11%), and the US (10%).

The Italian automotive industry is a significant part of the country&#x27;s manufacturing sector, with over 144,000 firms and almost 485,000 employees in 2015, contributing 9% to GDP. The country boasts a wide range of vehicles, from mass market-oriented brands such as Fiat and premium brands like Alfa Romeo and Maserati to luxury supercars such as Pagani, Lamborghini, and Ferrari.

The Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena is the world&#x27;s oldest or second oldest bank in continuous operation, depending on the definition, and the fourth-largest Italian commercial and retail bank. Italy has a strong cooperative sector with the largest share in the EU of the population (4.5%) employed by a cooperative. The Val d&#x27;Agri area, Basilicata, hosts the largest onshore hydrocarbon field in Europe. Moderate natural gas reserves, mainly in the Po Valley and offshore under the Adriatic, have been discovered and constitute the country&#x27;s most important mineral resource. Italy is one of the world&#x27;s leading producers of pumice, pozzolana, and feldspar. Another notable resource is marble, especially the famous white Carrara marble from Tuscany.

Italy is part of a monetary union, the eurozone, which represents around 330 million citizens, and of the European single market, which represents more than 500 million consumers. Several domestic commercial policies are determined by agreements among EU members and EU legislation. Italy joined the common European currency, the euro, in 2002. Its monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank.

Italy was hit hard by the 2007–2008 financial crisis, which exacerbated structural problems. After strong GDP growth of 5–6% per year from the 1950s to the early 1970s, and a progressive slowdown in the 1980–90s, the country stagnated in the 2000s. Political efforts to revive growth with massive government spending produced a severe rise in public debt, that stood at over 132% of GDP in 2017, the second highest in the EU, after Greece. The largest portion of Italian public debt is owned by national subjects, a major difference between Italy and Greece, and the level of household debt is much lower than the OECD average.

A gaping north–south divide is a major factor of socio-economic weakness; there is a huge difference in official income between northern and southern regions and municipalities. The richest province, Alto Adige-South Tyrol, earns 152% of the national GDP per capita, while the poorest region, Calabria, earns 61%. The unemployment rate (11%) is above the eurozone average, but the disaggregated figure is 7% in the north and 19% in the south. The youth unemployment rate (32% in 2018) is extremely high.

=== Agriculture ===

According to the last agricultural census, there were 1.6 million farms in 2010 (−32% since 2000) covering (63% are in south Italy). 99% are family-operated and small, averaging only . Of the area in agricultural use, grain fields take up 31%, olive orchards 8%, vineyards 5%, citrus orchards 4%, sugar beets 2%, and horticulture 2%. The remainder is primarily dedicated to pastures (26%) and feed grains (12%).

Italy is the world&#x27;s largest wine producer, and a leading producer of olive oil, fruits (apples, olives, grapes, oranges, lemons, pears, apricots, hazelnuts, peaches, cherries, plums, strawberries, and kiwifruits), and vegetables (especially artichokes and tomatoes). The most famous Italian wines are the Tuscan Chianti and the Piedmontese Barolo. Other famous wines are Barbaresco, Barbera d&#x27;Asti, Brunello di Montalcino, Frascati, Montepulciano d&#x27;Abruzzo, Morellino di Scansano, and the sparkling wines Franciacorta and Prosecco.

Quality goods in which Italy specialises, particularly wines and regional cheeses, are often protected under the quality assurance labels DOC/DOP. This geographical indication certificate, accredited by the EU, is considered important to avoid confusion with ersatz goods.

=== Transport ===


Italy was the first country to build motorways, the &quot;autostrade&quot;, reserved for fast traffic and motor vehicles. In 2002 there were of serviceable roads in Italy, including of motorways, state-owned but privately operated by Atlantia. In 2005, about 34,667,000 cars (590 per 1,000 people) and 4,015,000 goods vehicles circulated on the network.
The railway network, state-owned and operated by Rete Ferroviaria Italiana (FSI), in 2008 totalled , of which is electrified, and on which 4,802 locomotives and railcars run. The main public operator of high-speed trains is Trenitalia, part of FSI. High-speed trains are in three categories: Frecciarossa (&#x27;red arrow&#x27;) trains operate at a maximum 300km/h on dedicated high-speed tracks; Frecciargento (&#x27;silver arrow&#x27;) operate at a maximum 250km/h on high-speed and mainline tracks; and Frecciabianca (&#x27;white arrow&#x27;) operate on high-speed regional lines at a maximum 200km/h. Italy has 11 rail border crossings over the Alpine mountains with neighbouring countries.

Italy is fifth in Europe by number of passengers using air transport, with about 148 million passengers, or about 10% of the European total in 2011. In 2022, there were 45 civil airports, including the hubs of Milan Malpensa Airport and Rome Fiumicino Airport. Since 2021, Italy&#x27;s flag carrier has been ITA Airways, which took over from Alitalia.

In 2004, there were 43 major seaports, including Genoa, the country&#x27;s largest and second-largest in the Mediterranean. In 2005, Italy maintained a civilian air fleet of about 389,000 units and a merchant fleet of 581 ships. The national inland waterways network had a length of for commercial traffic in 2012. North Italian ports, such as the deep-water port of Trieste, with its extensive rail connections to Central and Eastern Europe, are the destination of subsidies and significant foreign investment.

=== Energy ===


Italy has become one of the world&#x27;s largest producers of renewable energy, ranking as the second largest producer in the EU and the ninth in the world. Wind power, hydroelectricity, and geothermal power are significant sources of electricity in the country. Renewable sources account for 28% of all electricity produced, with hydro alone reaching 13%, followed by solar at 6%, wind at 4%, bioenergy at 3.5%, and geothermal at 1.6%. The rest of the national demand is supplied by fossil fuels (natural gas 38%, coal 13%, oil 8%) and imports. Eni, operating in 79 countries, is one of the seven &quot;Big Oil&quot; companies, and one of the world&#x27;s largest industrial companies.

Solar energy production alone accounted for 9% of electricity in 2014, making Italy the country with the highest contribution from solar energy in the world. The Montalto di Castro Photovoltaic Power Station, completed in 2010, is the largest photovoltaic (PV) power station in Italy. Italy was the first country to exploit geothermal energy to produce electricity. Nuclear power in Italy was abandoned after 1987 referendums (in the wake of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster), although Italy still imports nuclear energy from Italy-owned reactors in foreign territories.

=== Science and technology ===


Through the centuries, Italy has fostered a scientific community that produced major discoveries the sciences. Galileo Galilei played a major role in the Scientific Revolution and is considered the &quot;father&quot; of observational astronomy, modern physics, and the scientific method.

The Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso (LNGS) is the largest underground research centre in the world. ELETTRA, Eurac Research, ESA Centre for Earth Observation, Institute for Scientific Interchange, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Centre for Maritime Research and Experimentation, and the International Centre for Theoretical Physics conduct basic research. Trieste has the highest percentage of researchers in Europe, in relation to the population. Italy was ranked 26th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024. There are technology parks in Italy such as the Science and Technology Parks Kilometro Rosso (Bergamo), the AREA Science Park (Trieste), The VEGA-Venice Gateway for Science and Technology (Venezia), the Toscana Life Sciences (Siena), the Technology Park of Lodi Cluster (Lodi), and the Technology Park of Navacchio (Pisa), as well as science museums such as the Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci in Milan.

The north–south large difference in income leads to a &quot;digital divide&quot;.

=== Tourism ===

People have visited Italy for centuries, yet the first to visit the peninsula for tourism were aristocrats during the Grand Tour, which began in the 17th century, and flourished in the 18th and the 19th centuries. This was a period in which European aristocrats, many of whom were British, visited parts of Europe, with Italy as a key destination. For Italy, this was in order to study ancient architecture, local culture, and admire its natural beauty.

Italy is the fourth most visited country, with a total of 57 million arrivals in 2023. In 2014, the income from travel and tourism was EUR163billion (10% of GDP) and 1,082,000 jobs were directly related to it (5% of employment).

Tourist interest is mainly in culture, cuisine, history, architecture, art, religious sites and routes, wedding tourism, naturalistic beauties, nightlife, underwater sites, and spas. Winter and summer tourism are present in locations in the Alps and the Apennines, while seaside tourism is widespread among locations along the Mediterranean. Italy is the leading cruise tourism destination in the Mediterranean. Small, historical, and artistic villages are promoted through the association I Borghi più belli d&#x27;Italia ().

The most visited regions are Veneto, Tuscany, Lombardy, Emilia-Romagna, and Lazio. Rome is the third most visited city in Europe, and 12th in the world, with 9.4 million arrivals in 2017. Venice and Florence are among the world&#x27;s top 100 destinations.

Italy has the most World Heritage Sites of any country: 59, of which 53 are cultural and 6 natural.

== Demographics ==

In 2020, Italy had 60,317,116 inhabitants. Its population density of is higher than most West European countries. However, distribution is uneven: the most densely populated areas are the Po Valley (almost half the population) and the metropolitan areas of Rome and Naples, while vast regions such as the Alps and Apennine highlands, the plateaus of Basilicata, and the island of Sardinia, as well as much of Sicily, are sparsely populated.

Italy&#x27;s population almost doubled during the 20th century, but the pattern of growth was uneven because of large-scale internal migration from the rural south to the industrial north, a consequence of the Italian economic miracle of the 1950–1960s. High fertility and birth rates persisted until the 1970s, after which they started to decline; the total fertility rate (TFR) reached an all-time low of 1.2 children per woman in 1995, well below the replacement rate of 2.1 and considerably below the high of 5 in 1883. Since 2008, when the rate climbed slightly to 1.4, the number of births has consistently declined every year, reaching a record low of 379,000 in 2023—the fewest since 1861. Although as of 2013 the TFR is expected to reach 1.6–1.8 in 2030, in 2024, it stood at 1.2.

As a result of these trends, Italy&#x27;s population is rapidly aging and gradually shrinking. Nearly one in four Italians is over 65, and the country has the fourth oldest population in the world, with a median age of 48 and an average age of 46.6. The overall population has been falling steadily since 2014 and is estimated to have fallen just below 59 million in 2024, representing a cumulative loss of more than 1.36 million people over the span of a decade.

From the late 19th century to the 1960s, Italy was a country of mass emigration. Between 1898 and 1914, the peak years of Italian diaspora, approximately 750,000 Italians emigrated annually. The diaspora included more than 25 million Italians and is considered the greatest mass migration of recent times.

=== Largest cities ===
=== Immigration ===

In the 1980s, until then a linguistically and culturally homogeneous society, Italy began to attract substantial flows of immigrants. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, and enlargements of the EU, waves of migration originated from the former socialist countries of East Europe. Another source of immigration is neighbouring North Africa, with arrivals soaring as a consequence of the Arab Spring. Growing migration fluxes from Asia-Pacific (notably China and the Philippines) and Latin America have been recorded.

In 2010, the foreign-born population was from the following regions: Europe (54%), Africa (22%), Asia (16%), the Americas (8%), and Oceania (0.06%). The distribution of the foreign population is geographically varied: in 2020, 61% of foreign citizens lived in the north, 24% in the centre, 11% in the south, and 4% on the islands.

In 2021, Italy had about 5.2 million foreign residents, making up 9% of the population. The figures include more than half a million children born in Italy to foreign nationals, but exclude foreign nationals who have subsequently acquired Italian citizenship; in 2016, about 201,000 people became Italian citizens. The official figures also exclude illegal immigrants, which was estimated to be 670,000 in 2008. About one million Romanian citizens are registered as living in Italy, representing the largest migrant population.

=== Languages ===

Italy&#x27;s official language is Italian. There are an estimated 64 million native Italian speakers around the world, and another 21 million use it as a second language. Italian is often natively spoken as a regional dialect, not to be confused with Italy&#x27;s regional and minority languages; however, during the 20th century, the establishment of a national education system led to a decrease in regional dialects. Standardisation was further expanded in the 1950s and 1960s, due to economic growth and the rise of mass media and television.

Twelve &quot;historical minority languages&quot; are formally recognised: Albanian, Catalan, German, Greek, Slovene, Croatian, French, Franco-Provençal, Friulian, Ladin, Occitan, and Sardinian. Four of these enjoy co-official status in their respective regions: French in the Aosta Valley; German in South Tyrol, and Ladin as well in some parts of the same province and in parts of the neighbouring Trentino; and Slovene in the provinces of Trieste, Gorizia, and Udine. Other Ethnologue, ISO, and UNESCO languages are not recognised under Italian law. Like France, Italy has signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, but has not ratified it.

Due to recent immigration, Italy has sizeable populations whose native language is not Italian, nor a regional language. According to the Italian National Institute of Statistics, Romanian is the most common mother tongue among foreign residents: almost 800,000 people speak Romanian as their first language (22% of foreign residents aged 6 and over). Other prevalent mother tongues are Arabic (spoken by over 475,000; 13% of foreign residents), Albanian (380,000), and Spanish (255,000).

=== Religion ===


The Holy See, the episcopal jurisdiction of Rome, contains the government of Vatican City and the worldwide Catholic Church. It is recognised as a sovereign entity, headed by the pope, who is also the Bishop of Rome, with which diplomatic relations can be maintained.

Although historically dominated by Catholicism, religiosity in Italy is declining. Most Catholics are nominal; the Associated Press describes Italian Catholicism as &quot;nominally embraced but rarely lived&quot;. Italy has the world&#x27;s fifth-largest Catholic population and the largest in Europe. Since 1985, Catholicism is no longer the official religion.

In 2011, minority Christian faiths included an estimated 1.5 million Orthodox Christians, while Protestantism has been growing. Italy has for centuries welcomed Jews expelled from other countries, notably Spain. However, about 20% of Italian Jews were killed during the Holocaust. This, together with emigration before and after World War II, has left around 28,000 Jews. There are 120,000 Hindus and 70,000 Sikhs.

The state devolves shares of income tax to recognised religious communities, under a regime known as eight per thousand. Donations are allowed to Christian, Jewish, Buddhist, and Hindu communities; however, Islam remains excluded, as no Muslim communities have signed a concordat. Taxpayers who do not wish to fund a religion contribute their share to the welfare system.

=== Education ===

Education is mandatory and free from ages six to sixteen, and consists of five stages: kindergarten, primary school, lower secondary school, upper secondary school, and university.

Primary school lasts eight years. Students are given a basic education in Italian, English, mathematics, natural sciences, history, geography, social studies, physical education, and visual and musical arts. Secondary school lasts for five years and includes three traditional types of schools focused on different academic levels: the &quot;liceo&quot; prepares students for university studies with a classical or scientific curriculum, while the &quot;istituto tecnico&quot; and the &quot;istituto professionale&quot; prepare pupils for vocations.

In 2018, secondary education was evaluated as being below the average among OECD countries. Italy scored below the OECD average in reading and science, and near the OECD average in mathematics. A wide gap exists between northern schools, which perform near average, and the south, which had much poorer results.

Tertiary education is divided between public universities, private universities, and the prestigious and selective superior graduate schools, such as the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa. 33 Italian universities were ranked among the world&#x27;s top 500 in 2019. Bologna University, founded in 1088, is the oldest university still in operation, and one of the leading academic institutions in Europe. Bocconi University, the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, LUISS, the Polytechnic University of Turin, the Polytechnic University of Milan, the Sapienza University of Rome, and the University of Milan are also ranked among the best.

=== Health ===

Italy&#x27;s life expectancy in 2015 was 80.5 years for men and 84.8 for women, placing the country 5th in the world. Compared to other Western countries, Italy has a low rate of adult obesity (below 10%), as the health benefits of the Mediterranean diet are very significant. In 2013, UNESCO, prompted by Italy, added the Mediterranean diet to the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity of Italy, Morocco, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Cyprus, and Croatia.

The proportion of daily smokers was 22% in 2012, down from 24% in 2000 but above the OECD average. Since 2005, smoking in public places has been restricted to &quot;specially ventilated rooms&quot;.

Since 1978, the state has run a universal public healthcare system. However, healthcare is provided to all citizens and residents by a mixed public-private system. The public part is the Servizio Sanitario Nazionale, which is organised under the Ministry of Health and administered on a devolved regional basis. Healthcare spending accounted for 10% of GDP in 2020. Italy&#x27;s healthcare system has been consistently ranked among the best in the world; according to research by the World Health Organization (WHO) dating back to 2000, Italy had the second best healthcare system in the world in terms of spending efficiency and access to public care for citizens, after France.

== Culture ==

Italy is one of the birthplaces of Western culture and a cultural superpower. Italy&#x27;s culture has been shaped by a multitude of regional customs and local centres of power and patronage. Italy has made a substantial contribution to the cultural and historical heritage of Europe.

=== Architecture ===

Italy is known for its architectural achievements, such as the construction of arches, domes, and similar structures by ancient Rome, the founding of the Renaissance architectural movement in the late 14th to 16th centuries, and as the home of Palladianism, a style that inspired movements such as Neoclassical architecture and influenced designs of country houses all over the world, notably in the UK and US during the late 17th to early 20th centuries.

The first to begin a recognised sequence of designs were the Greeks and the Etruscans, progressing to classical Roman, then the revival of the classical Roman era during the Renaissance, and evolving into the Baroque era. The Christian concept of the basilica, a style that came to dominate in the Middle Ages, was invented in Rome. Romanesque architecture, which flourished from approximately 800 to 1100 AD, was one of the most fruitful and creative periods in Italian architecture, when masterpieces, such as the Leaning Tower of Pisa and the Basilica of Sant&#x27;Ambrogio in Milan, were built. It was known for its usage of Roman arches, stained glass windows, and curved columns. The main innovation of Italian Romanesque architecture was the vault, which had never been seen in Western architecture.

Italian architecture significantly evolved during the Renaissance. Filippo Brunelleschi contributed to architectural design with his dome for the Cathedral of Florence, a feat of engineering not seen since antiquity. A popular achievement of Italian Renaissance architecture was St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, designed by Donato Bramante in the early 16th century. Andrea Palladio influenced architects throughout Western Europe with the villas and palaces he designed.

The Baroque period produced outstanding Italian architects. The most original work of late Baroque and Rococo architecture is the Palazzina di caccia of Stupinigi. In 1752, Luigi Vanvitelli began the construction of the Royal Palace of Caserta. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, Italy was influenced by the Neoclassical architectural movement. Villas, palaces, gardens, interiors, and art began again to be based on ancient Roman and Greek themes.

During the Fascist period, the supposedly &quot;Novecento movement&quot; flourished, based on the rediscovery of imperial Rome. Marcello Piacentini, responsible for the urban transformations of cities, devised a form of simplified Neoclassicism.

=== Visual art ===

The history of Italian visual arts is significant to Western painting. Roman art was influenced by Greece and can be taken as a descendant of ancient Greek painting. The only surviving Roman paintings are wall paintings. These may contain the first examples of trompe-l&#x27;œil, pseudo-perspective, and pure landscape.

The Italian Renaissance is considered to be the golden age of painting, spanning from the 14th through the mid-17th centuries and having significant influence outside Italy. Artists such as Masaccio, Filippo Lippi, Tintoretto, Sandro Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Raphael, and Titian took painting to a higher level through the use of perspective. Michelangelo was also active as a sculptor; his works include masterpieces such as &quot;David&quot;, &quot;Pietà&quot;, and &quot;Moses&quot;.

In the 15th and 16th centuries, the High Renaissance gave rise to a stylised art known as Mannerism. In place of the balanced compositions and rational approach to perspective that characterised art at the dawn of the 16th century, the Mannerists sought instability, artifice, and doubt. The unperturbed faces and gestures of Piero della Francesca and the calm Virgins of Raphael were replaced by the troubled expressions of Pontormo and emotional intensity of El Greco.
In the 17th century, among the greatest painters of Italian Baroque are Caravaggio, Artemisia Gentileschi, Carlo Saraceni, and Bartolomeo Manfredi. In the 18th century, Italian Rococo was mainly inspired by French Rococo. Italian Neoclassical sculpture focused, with Antonio Canova&#x27;s nudes, on the idealist aspect of the movement.

In the 19th century, Romantic painters included Francesco Hayez and Francesco Podesti. Impressionism was brought from France to Italy by the &quot;Macchiaioli&quot;, and realism by Gioacchino Toma and Giuseppe Pellizza da Volpedo. In the 20th century, with futurism, Italy rose again as a seminal country for evolution in painting and sculpture. Futurism was succeeded by the metaphysical paintings of Giorgio de Chirico, who exerted an influence on the surrealists.

=== Literature ===

Formal Latin literature began in 240 BC, when the first stage play was performed in Rome. Latin literature was, and is, highly influential, with numerous writers, poets, philosophers, and historians, such as Pliny the Elder, Pliny the Younger, Virgil, Horace, Propertius, Ovid, and Livy. The Romans were famous for their oral tradition, poetry, drama, and epigrams. In the early 13th century, Francis of Assisi was the first Italian poet, with his religious song &quot;Canticle of the Sun&quot;.
At the court of Emperor Frederick II in Sicily, in the 13th century, lyrics modelled on Provençal forms and themes were written in a refined version of the local vernacular. One of these poets was Giacomo da Lentini, inventor of the sonnet form; the most famous early sonneteer was Petrarch.

Guido Guinizelli is the founder of the &quot;Dolce Stil Novo&quot;, a school that added a philosophical dimension to love poetry. This new understanding of love, expressed in a smooth style, influenced the Florentine poet Dante Alighieri, who established the basis of modern Italian. Dante&#x27;s work, the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;, is among the finest in literature. Petrarch and Giovanni Boccaccio sought and imitated the works of antiquity and cultivated their own artistic personalities. Petrarch achieved fame through his collection of poems, &quot;Il Canzoniere&quot;. Equally influential was Boccaccio&#x27;s &quot;The Decameron&quot;, a very popular collection of short stories.

Renaissance authors&#x27; works include Niccolò Machiavelli&#x27;s &quot;The Prince&quot;, an essay on political science in which the &quot;effectual truth&quot; is taken to be more important than any abstract ideal. Giovanni Francesco Straparola and Giambattista Basile, who wrote &quot;The Facetious Nights of Straparola&quot; (1550–55) and the &quot;Pentamerone&quot; (1634), respectively, printed some of the first known versions of fairy tales in Europe. The Baroque period produced the clear scientific prose of Galileo. In the 17th century, the Arcadians began a movement to restore simplicity and classical restraint to poetry.

Italian writers embraced Romanticism in the 19th century; it coincided with ideas of the Risorgimento, the movement that brought Italian unification. Unification was heralded by the poets Vittorio Alfieri, Ugo Foscolo, and Giacomo Leopardi. Works by Alessandro Manzoni, the leading Italian Romantic, are a symbol of Italian unification for their patriotic message and because of his efforts in the development of modern, unified Italian.
In the late 19th century, a literary movement called &quot;verismo&quot;, which extolled realism, played a major role in Italian literature. Emilio Salgari, a writer of action-adventure swashbucklers and a pioneer of science fiction, published his &quot;Sandokan&quot; series. In 1883, Carlo Collodi published &quot;The Adventures of Pinocchio&quot;, which became the most celebrated children&#x27;s classic by an Italian author and one of the world&#x27;s most translated non-religious books. A movement called futurism influenced literature in the early 20th century. Filippo Tommaso Marinetti wrote &quot;Manifesto of Futurism&quot; and called for the use of language and metaphors that glorified the speed, dynamism, and violence of the machine age.

Modern literary figures and Nobel laureates are Gabriele D&#x27;Annunzio, nationalist poet Giosuè Carducci 1906 Nobel laureate, realist writer Grazia Deledda 1926 laureate, modern theatre author Luigi Pirandello in 1936, short story writer Italo Calvino in 1960, poets Salvatore Quasimodo in 1959 and Eugenio Montale in 1975, Umberto Eco in 1980, and satirist and theatre author Dario Fo in 1997.

=== Philosophy ===

Italian philosophy had an influence on Western philosophy, beginning with the Greeks and Romans, and Renaissance humanism, the Age of Enlightenment, and modern philosophy. Formal philosophy was introduced to Italy by Pythagoras, founder of the Italian school of philosophy in Crotone. Italian philosophers of the Greek period include Xenophanes, Parmenides, and Zeno. Roman philosophers include Cicero, Lucretius, Seneca the Younger, Plutarch, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and Augustine of Hippo.
Italian medieval philosophy was mainly Christian, and included theologians such as Thomas Aquinas, a classical proponent of natural theology, who reintroduced Aristotelian philosophy to Christianity. Renaissance philosophers include: Giordano Bruno, a major scientific figure of the West; Marsilio Ficino, a humanist philosopher; and Niccolò Machiavelli, a founder of modern political science. Machiavelli&#x27;s most famous work is &quot;The Prince&quot;, whose contribution to political thought is the fundamental break between political idealism and realism. University cities such as Padua, Bologna, and Naples remained centres of scholarship, with philosophers such as Giambattista Vico. Cesare Beccaria was a significant Enlightenment figure and a father of classical criminal theory and penology.

Italy had a renowned philosophical movement in the 1800s, with idealism, sensism, and empiricism. During the late 19th and 20th centuries, there were other movements that gained popularity, such as Ontologism, anarchism, communism, socialism, futurism, fascism, and Christian democracy. Antonio Gramsci remains a relevant philosopher within communist theory, credited with creating the theory of cultural hegemony. Italian philosophers were influential in development of the non-Marxist liberal socialism philosophy. In the 1960s, left-wing activists adopted the anti-authoritarian pro-working class theories that became known as autonomism and workerism.

Italian feminists include Sibilla Aleramo, Alaide Gualberta Beccari, and Anna Maria Mozzoni, and proto-feminist philosophies had previously been touched upon by Italian writers. Italian educator Maria Montessori created the philosophy of education that bears her name. Giuseppe Peano was a founder of analytic philosophy and the contemporary philosophy of mathematics. Analytic philosophers include Carlo Penco, Gloria Origgi, Pieranna Garavaso, and Luciano Floridi.

=== Theatre ===

Italian theatre came about in the Middle Ages, with its antecedents dating back to ancient Greek colonies in southern Italy (Magna Graecia), as well as the theatre of the Italic peoples and the theatre of ancient Rome. There were two main lines along which theatre developed. The first, dramatization of Catholic liturgies, and the second, formed by pagan forms of spectacle, such as staging for city festivals, court preparations of jesters, and songs of the troubadours. Renaissance theatre marked the beginning of modern theatre. Ancient theatrical texts were translated and staged at courts, and moved to public theatres. In the late 15th century, the cities of Ferrara and Rome were important for the rediscovery and renewal of theatre.

During the 16th into the 18th century, commedia dell&#x27;arte was a form of improvisational theatre, and is still performed. Travelling troupes of players set up an outdoor stage and provided amusement in the form of juggling, acrobatics, and humorous plays. Plays did not originate from written drama, but scenarios called &quot;lazzi&quot;, loose frameworks around which actors would improvise. The characters of the &quot;commedia&quot; usually represent fixed social types and stock characters, each of which has a distinct costume. The first recorded commedia dell&#x27;arte performances came from Rome as early as 1551. Female roles were played by women, documented as early as the 1560s, making them the first known professional actresses in Europe since antiquity. Lucrezia Di Siena, named on a 1564 contract, has been referred to as the first Italian actress known by name, with Vincenza Armani and Barbara Flaminia as the first prima donnas.

Ballet originated in Italy during the Renaissance, as an outgrowth of court pageantry.

=== Music ===

From folk to classical, music is an intrinsic part of Italian culture. Instruments associated with classical music, including the piano and violin, were invented in Italy, and many prevailing forms, such as the symphony, concerto, and sonata, trace their roots back to innovations in 16th- and 17th-century Italian music.

Italy&#x27;s most famous composers include the Renaissance Palestrina, Monteverdi, and Gesualdo; the Baroque Scarlatti, and Vivaldi; the classical Paganini, and Rossini; and the Romantic Verdi and Puccini. Classical music has a strong hold in Italy, as evidenced by the fame of its opera houses, such as La Scala, and performers such as the pianist Maurizio Pollini and tenor Luciano Pavarotti. Italy is known as the birthplace of opera. Italian opera is believed to have been founded in the 17th century.

Introduced in the early 1920s, jazz gained a strong foothold in Italy, and remained popular despite xenophobic policies of the fascists. Italy was represented in the progressive rock and pop movements of the 1970s, with bands such as PFM, Banco del Mutuo Soccorso, Le Orme, Goblin, and Pooh. The same period saw diversification in the cinema of Italy, and Cinecittà films included complex scores by composers including Ennio Morricone. In the 1980s, the first star to emerge from Italian hip hop was singer Jovanotti. Italian metal bands include Rhapsody of Fire, Lacuna Coil, Elvenking, Forgotten Tomb, and Fleshgod Apocalypse.

Italy contributed to the development of disco and electronic music, with Italo disco, known for its futuristic sound and prominent use of synthesisers and drum machines, one of the earliest electronic dance genres. Producers such as Giorgio Moroder, who won three Academy Awards and four Golden Globes, were influential in the development of electronic dance music. Italian pop is represented annually with the Sanremo Music Festival, which served as inspiration for the Eurovision Song Contest. Gigliola Cinquetti, Toto Cutugno, and Måneskin won Eurovision, in 1964, 1990, and 2021 respectively. Singers such as Domenico Modugno, Mina, Andrea Bocelli, Raffaella Carrà, Il Volo, Al Bano, Toto Cutugno, Nek, Umberto Tozzi, Giorgia, Grammy winner Laura Pausini, Eros Ramazzotti, Tiziano Ferro, Måneskin, and others have received international acclaim.

=== Cinema ===

Italian cinema began just after the Lumière brothers introduced motion picture exhibitions. The first Italian director is Vittorio Calcina, who filmed Pope Leo XIII in 1896. &quot;Cabiria&quot;, from 1914, is the most famous Italian silent film. The oldest European avant-garde cinema movement, Italian futurism, took place in the late 1910s.
After decline in the 1920s, the industry was revitalised in the 1930s with the arrival of sound. A popular Italian genre, the &quot;Telefoni Bianchi&quot;, consisted of comedies with glamorous backgrounds. &quot;Calligrafismo&quot; was a sharp contrast to the &quot;Telefoni Bianchi&quot;-American style comedies and is rather artistic, highly formalistic, expressive in complexity, and deals mainly with contemporary literary material. Cinema was used by Mussolini, who founded Rome&#x27;s renowned Cinecittà studio, for the production of Fascist propaganda.

After World War II, Italian film was widely recognised and exported until an artistic decline occurred in the 1980s. Italian film directors include Federico Fellini, Sergio Leone, Pier Paolo Pasolini, Duccio Tessari, Luchino Visconti, Vittorio De Sica, Michelangelo Antonioni, and Roberto Rossellini, recognised among the greatest of all time. The mid-1940s to the early 1950s was the heyday of Italian neorealism, reflecting the poor condition of post-war Italy.

As the country grew wealthier in the 1950s, a form of neorealism known as pink neorealism succeeded, and the &quot;commedia all&#x27;italiana&quot; genre and other film genres, such as sword-and-sandal and spaghetti Westerns, were popular in the 1960s and 70s. Actresses such as Sophia Loren achieved international stardom. Erotic Italian thrillers, or &quot;gialli&quot;, produced by directors such as Dario Argento in the 1970s, influenced horror. Recently, the Italian scene has received only occasional attention, with movies such as &quot;Life Is Beautiful&quot;, &quot;Cinema Paradiso&quot;, and &quot;Il Postino: The Postman&quot;.

Cinecittà studio is the largest film and television production facility in Europe, where many international box office hits were filmed. In the 1950s, the number of international productions made there led to Rome&#x27;s being dubbed &quot;Hollywood on the Tiber&quot;. More than 3,000 productions have been made on its lot, of which 90 received an Academy Award nomination, with 47 wins. Italy is the most awarded country at the Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film, with 14 wins, 3 Special Awards, and 31 nominations. , Italian films have won 12 Palmes d&#x27;Or, 11 Golden Lions, and 7 Golden Bears.

=== Sport ===

The most popular sport is football. Italy&#x27;s team is one of the most successful, with four World Cup victories (1934, 1938, 1982, and 2006) and two UEFA Euro victories (1968 and 2020). Italian clubs have won 48 major European trophies, making Italy the second most successful country in Europe, after Spain. Italy&#x27;s top league is Serie A and is followed by millions of fans around the world.

Other popular team sports include basketball, volleyball, and rugby. Italy&#x27;s male and female national volleyball teams are often featured among the world&#x27;s best. The men&#x27;s team won three consecutive World Championships (in 1990, 1994, and 1998). Italy men&#x27;s basketball team&#x27;s best results were gold at EuroBasket 1983 and 1999, and silver at the 2004 Olympics. Lega Basket Serie A is one of the most competitive in Europe. The Italy national rugby union team competes in the Six Nations Championship, and at the Rugby World Cup.

Among individual sports, bicycle racing is popular; Italians have won the UCI World Championships more than any other country, except Belgium. The Giro d&#x27;Italia is a cycling race held every May and one of the three Grand Tours. Alpine skiing is a widespread sport, and the country is a popular skiing destination. Italian skiers achieve good results in Winter Olympic Games and the Alpine Ski World Cup. Tennis has a significant following: it is the fourth most practised sport. The Rome Masters, founded in 1930, is one of the most prestigious tennis tournaments. Italian players won the Davis Cup in 1976 and the Fed Cup in 2006, 2009, 2010, and 2013.
Motorsports are popular. Italy has won, by far, the most MotoGP World Championships. Italian Scuderia Ferrari is the oldest surviving team in Grand Prix racing, competing since 1948, and the most successful Formula One team with 232 wins. The Italian Grand Prix of Formula One has been held since 1921 always at Autodromo Nazionale Monza (except 1980). Other successful Italian car manufacturers in motorsports are Alfa Romeo, Lancia, Maserati, and Fiat.

Italy has been successful in the Olympics, taking part from the first Olympiad and in 47 Games out of 48 (not 1904). Italians have won 618 medals at the Summer Olympic Games, and 141 at the Winter Olympics, with 259 golds, the sixth most successful for total medals. The country hosted Winter Olympics in 1956 and 2006, and will host another in 2026; and a Summer games in 1960.

=== Fashion and design ===

Italian fashion has a long tradition. &quot;Top Global Fashion Capital Rankings&quot; (2013), by Global Language Monitor, ranked Rome sixth and Milan twelfth. Major Italian fashion labels—such as Gucci, Armani, Prada, Versace, Valentino, Dolce &amp; Gabbana—are among the finest fashion houses in the world. Jewellers such as Bulgari, Damiani, and Buccellati were founded in Italy. The fashion magazine &quot;Vogue Italia&quot; is one of the most prestigious fashion magazines in the world.

Italy is prominent in the field of design, notably interior, architectural, industrial, and urban designs. Milan and Turin are the nation&#x27;s leaders in architectural and industrial design. The city of Milan hosts Fiera Milano, Europe&#x27;s largest design fair. Milan hosts major design- and architecture-related events and venues, such as the &quot;Fuori Salone&quot; and the Milan Furniture Fair, and has been home to the designers Bruno Munari, Lucio Fontana, Enrico Castellani, and Piero Manzoni.

=== Cuisine ===

Italian cuisine is heavily influenced by Etruscan, ancient Greek, ancient Roman, Byzantine, Arabic, and Jewish cuisines. Significant changes occurred with the discovery of the New World, with items such as potatoes, tomatoes, and maize becoming main ingredients from the 18th century. The Mediterranean diet forms the basis of Italian cuisine, which is rich in pasta, fish, fruits, and vegetables and characterised by its simplicity and variety, with many dishes having only four to eight ingredients. Italian cuisine is noted for its regional diversity, abundance of difference in taste, and as one of the most popular in the world, wielding strong influence abroad.

Italian cuisine relies heavily on traditional products; the country has a large number of traditional specialties protected under EU law. Italy is home to 395 Michelin star-rated restaurants. Cheese, cold cuts, and wine are central to Italian cuisine, with regional declinations and protected designation of origin or protected geographical indication labels, along with pizza and coffee forming part of gastronomic culture. Desserts have a long tradition of merging local flavours, such as citrus fruits, pistachio, and almonds, with sweet cheeses such as mascarpone and ricotta or exotic tastes such as cocoa, vanilla, and cinnamon. Gelato, tiramisu, and cassata are among the most famous examples of Italian desserts.

The Italian meal structure is typical of the Mediterranean region and differs from North, Central, and East European meal structures, although it still often consists of breakfast (&quot;colazione&quot;), lunch (&quot;pranzo&quot;), and dinner (&quot;cena&quot;). However, much less emphasis is placed on breakfast, which is often skipped or involves lighter portions than are seen in non-Mediterranean Western countries. Late-morning and mid-afternoon snacks, called &quot;merenda&quot; (: &quot;merende&quot;), are often included.

=== Public holidays, festivals and folklore ===

Public holidays include religious, national, and regional observances. Italy&#x27;s National Day, the &quot;Festa della Repubblica&quot; (&#x27;Republic Day&#x27;), is celebrated on 2 June, with the main celebration taking place in Rome, and commemorates the birth of the Italian Republic in 1946. The ceremony includes deposition of a wreath as a tribute to the Italian Unknown Soldier and a military parade along Via dei Fori Imperiali in Rome.

Saint Lucy&#x27;s Day, on 13 December, is popular among children in some Italian regions, where she plays a role similar to Santa Claus. The Epiphany is associated with the folklore figure of Befana, a broomstick-riding old woman who, on the night of 5 January, brings good children gifts, and bad ones charcoal or bags of ashes. The Assumption of Mary coincides with &quot;Ferragosto&quot; on 15 August, the summer vacation period. The Italian national patronal day, on 4 October, celebrates Saints Francis and Catherine. Each city or town also celebrates a public holiday on the festival of the local patron saint. Natale di Roma, historically known as &quot;Dies Romana&quot; and also referred to as Romaia, is the festival linked to the foundation of Rome, celebrated on 21 April.

Festivals and festivities include the Palio di Siena horse race, Holy Week rites, Saracen Joust of Arezzo, and the &quot;calcio storico fiorentino&quot;. In 2013, UNESCO included among the intangible cultural heritage Italian festivals and &quot;pasos&quot;, such as the Varia di Palmi, the Macchina di Santa Rosa in Viterbo, and &quot;faradda di li candareri&quot; in Sassari. Other festivals include carnivals in Venice, Viareggio, Satriano di Lucania, Mamoiada, and Ivrea. The Venice Film Festival, awarding the Golden Lion and held since 1932, is the oldest in the world and one of the &quot;Big Three&quot; European film festivals, alongside Cannes and Berlin.

== See also ==

* Outline of Italy

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* Hibberd, Matthew. &quot;The media in Italy&quot; (McGraw-Hill International, 2007)
* Sarti, Roland, ed. &quot;Italy: A reference guide from the Renaissance to the present&quot; (2004)
* Sassoon, Donald. &quot;Contemporary Italy: politics, economy and society since 1945&quot; (Routledge, 2014)


== External links ==
* Italy from BBC News
* Italy. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Italy from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Italy from the OECD
* Italy at the European Union
* 
* Key Development Forecasts for Italy from International Futures
* Government website 
* Italian tourism official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="0" end="5" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="22" end="38" title="Italy" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="56" end="64" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="69" end="76" title="Western Europe" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="100" end="111" title="Italian Peninsula" label="a peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="134" end="151" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="162" end="166" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422116" start="207" end="225" title="List of islands of Italy" label="nearly 800 islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="235" end="241" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="246" end="254" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="286" end="292" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="294" end="305" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="307" end="314" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="316" end="324" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="343" end="355" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="360" end="370" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q222938" start="382" end="421" title="List of European countries by area" label="tenth-largest country in Europe by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="462" end="496" title="member state of the European Union" label="member state of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q102310" start="559" end="571" title="List of cities in Italy" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="575" end="579" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="613" end="618" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="620" end="626" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="628" end="633" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="635" end="642" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="644" end="651" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="653" end="661" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="663" end="668" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="674" end="680" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q108810" start="726" end="740" title="List of ancient peoples of Italy" label="Italic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="764" end="778" title="ancient Romans" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="829" end="843" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="882" end="894" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="957" end="972" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="981" end="987" title="Papacy" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="989" end="1008" title="Barbarian invasions" label="Barbarian invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="1050" end="1082" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="1091" end="1105" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="1114" end="1131" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115680" start="1154" end="1173" title="Italian city-states" label="Italian city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="1178" end="1196" title="maritime republics" label="maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="1305" end="1324" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1469" end="1478" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="1523" end="1539" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="1680" end="1706" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="1725" end="1741" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="1853" end="1870" title="Italian Empire" label="a colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="1878" end="1887" title="Southern Italy" label="the south"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="1927" end="1953" title="Italian diaspora" label="a large immigrant diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136905" start="1996" end="2020" title="Military history of Italy during World War I" label="took part in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="2030" end="2037" title="Allies of World War I" label="Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="2050" end="2064" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="2079" end="2094" title="Italian fascism" label="Italian fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550755" start="2125" end="2144" title="Military history of Italy during World War II" label="During World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="2174" end="2178" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2206" end="2219" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="2280" end="2298" title="Italian resistance" label="Italian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="2307" end="2326" title="liberation of Italy" label="liberation of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q492173" start="2423" end="2440" title="Italian economic miracle" label="a strong recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="2445" end="2462" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q720060" start="2468" end="2487" title="Economy of Italy" label="an advanced economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="2503" end="2528" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="ninth-largest nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="2547" end="2584" title="List of countries by manufacturing output" label="second-largest manufacturing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="2600" end="2636" title="Regional power" label="plays a significant role in regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595344" start="2641" end="2659" title="Least of the great powers" label="to a lesser extent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369938" start="2731" end="2739" title="Inner Six" label="founding"/>
<link wikidata="Q712129" start="2744" end="2780" title="EU three" label="leading member of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054766" start="2786" end="2850" title="List of European countries by membership in international organisations" label="is part of numerous other international organizations and forums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345203" start="2857" end="2876" title="cultural superpower" label="cultural superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q938616" start="2923" end="2929" title="Italian art" label="of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679098" start="2931" end="2936" title="Music of Italy" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q74217" start="2938" end="2948" title="Italian literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="2950" end="2957" title="Italian cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859789" start="2959" end="2966" title="Italian fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118054" start="2968" end="2990" title="Science and technology in Italy" label="science and technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574906" start="3010" end="3045" title="List of Italian inventions and discoveries" label="multiple inventions and discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q945996" start="3058" end="3072" title="World Heritage Sites by country" label="highest number"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="3076" end="3095" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091573" start="3098" end="3100" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Italy" label="60"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976242" start="3113" end="3140" title="World Tourism rankings" label="fourth-most visited country"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3276" end="3289" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="3383" end="3391" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q263443" start="3472" end="3477" title="totem" label="totem"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3503" end="3508" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36957" start="3531" end="3538" title="Umbrian language" label="Umbrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36653" start="3559" end="3564" title="Oscan" label="Oscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722978" start="3650" end="3656" title="Italus" label="Italus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="3736" end="3744" title="calabria" label="Bruttium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="3768" end="3777" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13625" start="3782" end="3795" title="Vibo Valentia" label="Vibo Valentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q922562" start="3819" end="3827" title="Oenotria" label="Oenotria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131978" start="3901" end="3908" title="Lucania" label="Lucania"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="4015" end="4032" title="strait of Messina" label="strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q828574" start="4061" end="4077" title="gulf of Salerno" label="gulfs of Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q192738" start="4082" end="4089" title="gulf of Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="4207" end="4218" title="Magna Graecia" label="Greek Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="4372" end="4383" title="Roman Italy" label="Roman Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204058" start="4447" end="4455" title="Origines" label="Origines"/>
<link wikidata="Q115457" start="4562" end="4566" title="Arno" label="Arno"/>
<link wikidata="Q172572" start="4571" end="4578" title="Rubicon" label="Rubicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="4646" end="4660" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Cisalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="4856" end="4863" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="4877" end="4882" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="4906" end="4916" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155864" start="4986" end="5013" title="Italian geographical region" label="Italian geographical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="5151" end="5165" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="5256" end="5270" title="medieval Latin" label="medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="5335" end="5354" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="5366" end="5398" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q583038" start="5404" end="5423" title="Ostrogothic Kingdom" label="Ostrogothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="5456" end="5463" title="Lombards" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="5546" end="5563" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="successor kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="5575" end="5592" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="5643" end="5660" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055253" start="5724" end="5738" title="Monte Poggiolo" label="Monte Poggiolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="5780" end="5791" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="5860" end="5873" title="Early modern human" label="modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q555143" start="5909" end="5921" title="Riparo Mochi" label="Riparo Mochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108810" start="5928" end="5943" title="Ancient peoples of Italy" label="ancient peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="5968" end="5981" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="6000" end="6014" title="Italic peoples" label="Italic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q536187" start="6075" end="6092" title="pre-Indo-European languages" label="pre-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="6114" end="6123" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q931423" start="6129" end="6137" title="Elymians" label="Elymians"/>
<link wikidata="Q952123" start="6142" end="6148" title="Sicani" label="Sicani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="6180" end="6190" title="Sardinians" label="Sardinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421436" start="6214" end="6234" title="Nuragic civilisation" label="Nuragic civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q685035" start="6274" end="6289" title="Rhaetian people" label="Rhaetian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031802" start="6294" end="6301" title="Camunni" label="Camunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q945514" start="6319" end="6347" title="Rock Drawings in Valcamonica" label="rock drawings in Valcamonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q171291" start="6366" end="6370" title="Ötzi" label="Ötzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q697937" start="6414" end="6422" title="Similaun" label="Similaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="6471" end="6480" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655593" start="6500" end="6508" title="Emporium (antiquity)" label="emporium"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="6606" end="6620" title="Greek colonies" label="Greek colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189387" start="6691" end="6701" title="Pithecusae" label="Pithecusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="6813" end="6826" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="6828" end="6835" title="Ionians" label="Ionians"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="6837" end="6842" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="6854" end="6863" title="Syracusan" label="Syracusan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191962" start="6874" end="6882" title="Achaeans (tribe)" label="Achaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="6907" end="6925" title="Greek colonization of Italy" label="Greek colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="6937" end="6951" title="Italic peoples" label="Italic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="7100" end="7111" title="Tiber" label="River Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="7130" end="7137" title="Founding of Rome" label="founded"/>
<link wikidata="Q131306" start="7274" end="7278" title="SPQR" label="SPQR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931679" start="7281" end="7302" title="Overthrow of the Roman monarchy" label="expelled the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109251" start="7516" end="7535" title="Samnite Wars" label="other Italic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119190" start="7537" end="7546" title="Roman–Etruscan Wars" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417663" start="7548" end="7553" title="Roman–Gallic wars" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q596373" start="7559" end="7565" title="Pyrrhic War" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7715" end="7726" title="History of the Middle East#Greek and Roman Empire" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="7743" end="7756" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="7836" end="7843" title="Roman Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q765845" start="7862" end="7868" title="Mesopotamia (Roman province)" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="8027" end="8035" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855250" start="8100" end="8109" title="metropole" label="metropole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517330" start="8352" end="8358" title="Legacy of the Roman Empire" label="legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="8450" end="8467" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="8488" end="8504" title="Roman numerals" label="numerical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="8679" end="8711" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="8734" end="8756" title="Kingdom of Italy (476–493)" label="Odoacer&amp;#x27;s kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="8780" end="8790" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="8870" end="8879" title="Dark Ages (historiography)" label="Dark Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="8911" end="8925" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="9194" end="9201" title="Francia" label="Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="9205" end="9216" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="9301" end="9313" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="9387" end="9405" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="9464" end="9475" title="Ghibellines" label="Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="9497" end="9504" title="Guelphs" label="Guelphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814255" start="9581" end="9596" title="universal power" label="universal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q154764" start="9645" end="9668" title="Investiture Controversy" label="Investiture Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q623476" start="9799" end="9813" title="Lombard League" label="Lombard League"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="9858" end="9878" title="Frederick Barbarossa" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="9927" end="9932" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="9934" end="9942" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="9944" end="9950" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="10226" end="10240" title="Thalassocracy" label="thalassocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="10464" end="10469" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="10471" end="10475" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q686312" start="10481" end="10487" title="Duchy of Amalfi" label="Amalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="10925" end="10933" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608559" start="11075" end="11096" title="commercial revolution" label="commercial revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750892" start="11117" end="11146" title="Sack of Constantinople" label="sack Byzantine&amp;#x27;s capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="11159" end="11169" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="11269" end="11276" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="11365" end="11370" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="11375" end="11381" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="11442" end="11462" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Arab Islamic emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884809" start="11502" end="11515" title="Italo-Normans" label="Italo-Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="11685" end="11702" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="11707" end="11724" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="11730" end="11741" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="11901" end="11912" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="12344" end="12350" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="12385" end="12399" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="12415" end="12428" title="Pope Martin V" label="Pope Martin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="12445" end="12457" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q806191" start="12525" end="12536" title="Medici Bank" label="Medici Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q134588" start="12699" end="12714" title="Pope Nicholas V" label="Pope Nicholas V"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="12754" end="12768" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="12781" end="12789" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="12820" end="12834" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="Greek scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="12889" end="12897" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q435501" start="12923" end="12946" title="Federico da Montefeltro" label="Federico da Montefeltro"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="12951" end="12963" title="Pope Pius II" label="Pope Pius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656724" start="12984" end="12996" title="ideal city" label="ideal cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759" start="13007" end="13013" title="Urbino" label="Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q91341" start="13018" end="13024" title="Pienza" label="Pienza"/>
<link wikidata="Q182128" start="13026" end="13046" title="Pico della Mirandola" label="Pico della Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085760" start="13063" end="13092" title="Oration on the Dignity of Man" label="Oration on the Dignity of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="13265" end="13282" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="13284" end="13294" title="Botticelli" label="Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="13296" end="13308" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="13310" end="13317" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="13319" end="13325" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="13327" end="13336" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="13342" end="13348" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="13373" end="13393" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Filippo Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="13395" end="13410" title="Andrea Palladio" label="Andrea Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="13416" end="13431" title="Donato Bramante" label="Donato Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574733" start="13441" end="13450" title="List of Italian explorers" label="explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="13663" end="13679" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="13737" end="13757" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q85642" start="13810" end="13820" title="John Cabot" label="John Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="13876" end="13881" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47674" start="13887" end="13903" title="Amerigo Vespucci" label="Amerigo Vespucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q23467020" start="13931" end="13938" title="Naming of the Americas" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665335" start="13984" end="13997" title="Italic League" label="Italic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="14066" end="14111" title="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Lorenzo &amp;quot;the Magnificent&amp;quot; de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q695198" start="14190" end="14204" title="Siege of Otranto" label="abort invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="14282" end="14304" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="14361" end="14377" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="14393" end="14402" title="Pope Julius II" label="Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="14469" end="14477" title="Pope Paul III" label="Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="14606" end="14611" title="Pope Leo X" label="Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="14628" end="14639" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="14662" end="14684" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="14748" end="14760" title="Italian wars" label="Italian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="14841" end="14847" title="kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="14849" end="14855" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="14857" end="14865" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="14875" end="14889" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Duchy of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="15051" end="15070" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="15102" end="15118" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="15148" end="15166" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="15172" end="15192" title="Jesuit China mission" label="Jesuit China mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="15198" end="15221" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="15234" end="15256" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="15278" end="15295" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="15361" end="15390" title="war of the Spanish succession" label="war of the Spanish succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="15657" end="15672" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q472538" start="15718" end="15734" title="Sister Republics" label="Sister Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q223936" start="15762" end="15778" title="Kingdom of Italy (Napoleonic)" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="15810" end="15823" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="15869" end="15887" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="15959" end="15976" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="16029" end="16047" title="political upheaval" label="political upheaval"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876" start="16118" end="16135" title="Flag of Italy" label="Italian tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q463289" start="16161" end="16179" title="Cispadane Republic" label="Cispadane Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456971" start="16197" end="16213" title="Flags of Napoleonic Italy" label="Napoleonic Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="16273" end="16291" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743904" start="16321" end="16334" title="Tricolour Day" label="Tricolour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922436" start="16362" end="16391" title="birth of the Kingdom of Italy" label="birth of the Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="16471" end="16485" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="16540" end="16557" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093359" start="16591" end="16610" title="Italian nationalism" label="Italian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="16644" end="16662" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="16730" end="16742" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="16883" end="16899" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q938903" start="16935" end="16946" title="Young Italy" label="Young Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187" start="17084" end="17107" title="Il Canto degli Italiani" label="Il Canto degli Italiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="17229" end="17247" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="17372" end="17391" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="17421" end="17451" title="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour" label="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="17534" end="17558" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="1848 liberal revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q920894" start="17594" end="17627" title="First Italian War of Independence" label="First Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="17649" end="17656" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="17720" end="17731" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q540978" start="17776" end="17810" title="Second Italian War of Independence" label="Second Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="17868" end="17876" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q978331" start="17898" end="17918" title="Plombières Agreement" label="Plombières Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="17939" end="17944" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="17949" end="17953" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733015" start="17990" end="18003" title="Niçard exodus" label="Niçard exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58905" start="18082" end="18087" title="Teano" label="Teano"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="18143" end="18161" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="18264" end="18277" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922436" start="18426" end="18458" title="Proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy" label="declare a united Italian kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="18631" end="18638" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="18650" end="18669" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248722" start="18681" end="18714" title="Third Italian War of Independence" label="Third Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="18749" end="18756" title="Veneto" label="Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="18812" end="18831" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604547" start="18846" end="18871" title="Capture of Rome" label="captured the Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="19383" end="19413" title="Italian diaspora" label="large and influential diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="19419" end="19442" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="19602" end="19616" title="Italian Empire" label="colonial power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232988" start="19632" end="19639" title="Italian Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="19641" end="19648" title="Italian Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433694" start="19650" end="19662" title="Italian Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q666893" start="19668" end="19677" title="Italian Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19743" end="19754" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q297190" start="19779" end="19796" title="Giovanni Giolitti" label="Giovanni Giolitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788665" start="19847" end="19885" title="Italian entry into World War I" label="Italy entered into the First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="20065" end="20085" title="unification of Italy" label="unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="20116" end="20122" title="German Empire" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="20131" end="20147" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153867" start="20163" end="20178" title="Triple Alliance (1882)" label="Triple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="20199" end="20205" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="20235" end="20242" title="Treaty of London (1915)" label="promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q867469" start="20295" end="20309" title="Inner Carniola" label="Inner Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q306696" start="20322" end="20339" title="Austrian Littoral" label="Austrian Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="20345" end="20353" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="20379" end="20393" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813255" start="20487" end="20495" title="The Big Four (World War I)" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q662961" start="20670" end="20695" title="Battle of Vittorio Veneto" label="Battle of Vittorio Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253436" start="20822" end="20828" title="Armistice with Germany" label="ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="20996" end="21027" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q871407" start="21039" end="21056" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1920)" label="Treaty of Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="21090" end="21109" title="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol" label="Trentino Alto-Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="21115" end="21127" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="21129" end="21135" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="21141" end="21153" title="Kvarner Gulf" label="Kvarner Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="21181" end="21185" title="Zadar" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262485" start="21202" end="21216" title="Treaty of Rome (1924)" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="21245" end="21250" title="Fiume" label="Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557053" start="21376" end="21393" title="mutilated victory" label="mutilated victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="21404" end="21420" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="21447" end="21470" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="rise of Italian fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="21578" end="21597" title="Italian imperialism" label="Italian imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="21636" end="21653" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q391511" start="21726" end="21746" title="Biennio Rosso" label="socialist agitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="21811" end="21829" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="21981" end="22003" title="National Fascist Party" label="National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="22044" end="22055" title="Blackshirts" label="Blackshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="22098" end="22116" title="mass demonstration" label="mass demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="22131" end="22144" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="22151" end="22155" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="22162" end="22181" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="22464" end="22476" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="22481" end="22496" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="22499" end="22506" title="Fascism" label="Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q880363" start="22715" end="22745" title="interventionism (politics)" label="interventionist foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="22766" end="22782" title="Second Italo-Abyssinian War" label="invaded Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q328478" start="22795" end="22814" title="Italian East Africa" label="Italian East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="22901" end="22918" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q161859" start="22931" end="22955" title="Pact of Steel" label="allied with Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="22964" end="22979" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="23004" end="23020" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="23028" end="23045" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q714644" start="23062" end="23077" title="Italian invasion of Albania" label="annexed Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202078" start="23165" end="23183" title="Italian conquest of British Somaliland" label="British Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q698421" start="23185" end="23190" title="Italian invasion of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q162362" start="23196" end="23203" title="Balkan Campaign (World War II)" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q460025" start="23245" end="23274" title="Italian participation on the Eastern Front" label="defeated on the Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="23293" end="23305" title="East African campaign (World War II)" label="East African"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="23310" end="23323" title="North African campaign" label="North African"/>
<link wikidata="Q474884" start="23387" end="23405" title="Italian war crimes" label="Italian war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717573" start="23415" end="23436" title="extrajudicial killing" label="extrajudicial killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="23442" end="23458" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652001" start="23517" end="23544" title="List of Italian concentration camps" label="Italian concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="23560" end="23578" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294142" start="23686" end="23701" title="foibe massacres" label="foibe massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="23706" end="23731" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885257" start="23767" end="23797" title="Fall of the Fascist regime in Italy" label="collapse of the Fascist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="23916" end="23938" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="24197" end="24220" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="24235" end="24247" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="24252" end="24268" title="collaborationist" label="collaborationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q698778" start="24324" end="24331" title="Gran Sasso raid" label="rescued"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732906" start="24415" end="24442" title="Italian Co-belligerent Army" label="Italian Co-belligerent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732910" start="24571" end="24595" title="National Republican Army" label="National Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="24754" end="24772" title="Italian Resistance" label="Italian Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q714259" start="24813" end="24834" title="Operation Achse" label="Nazi German occupiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863238" start="25054" end="25072" title="Death of Benito Mussolini" label="summarily executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q668645" start="25124" end="25167" title="Surrender of Caserta" label="when the German forces in Italy surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="25542" end="25579" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="1946 Italian institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q802461" start="25628" end="25650" title="Festa della Repubblica" label="Festa della Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="25738" end="25748" title="Umberto II" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="25778" end="25801" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Republican Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="25834" end="25885" title="Treaty of Paris between Italy and the Allied Powers" label="Treaty of Paris between Italy and the Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="25905" end="25917" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="25934" end="25944" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="25963" end="25987" title="Istrian-Dalmatian exodus" label="Istrian-Dalmatian exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="26037" end="26044" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="26049" end="26067" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="26117" end="26131" title="Italian Empire" label="Italian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q632933" start="26181" end="26185" title="Italian general election, 1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="26196" end="26215" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q153832" start="26223" end="26240" title="Alcide De Gasperi" label="Alcide De Gasperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="26314" end="26318" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="26324" end="26337" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q492173" start="26416" end="26432" title="Italian economic miracle" label="Economic Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="26487" end="26507" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850939" start="26622" end="26635" title="Years of Lead (Italy)" label="Years of Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="26704" end="26719" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="26884" end="26886" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="27023" end="27037" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q921474" start="27209" end="27220" title="Mani pulite" label="Clean Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="27411" end="27428" title="social-democratic" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059248" start="27464" end="27476" title="Centre-right coalition (Italy)" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="27505" end="27522" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048178" start="27528" end="27539" title="Centre-left coalition (Italy)" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q38484" start="27569" end="27581" title="Romano Prodi" label="Romano Prodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="27626" end="27641" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210264" start="27654" end="27662" title="Resignation of Silvio Berlusconi" label="resigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q47904" start="27711" end="27722" title="Mario Monti" label="Mario Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47563" start="27733" end="27745" title="Matteo Renzi" label="Matteo Renzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="27753" end="27767" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022426" start="27846" end="27856" title="Italian constitutional referendum, 2016" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071031" start="27861" end="27876" title="Paolo Gentiloni" label="Paolo Gentiloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="27912" end="27935" title="European migrant crisis" label="European migrant crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970032" start="28248" end="28269" title="Italian general election, 2018" label="2018 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q53844829" start="28271" end="28285" title="Giuseppe Conte" label="Giuseppe Conte"/>
<link wikidata="Q54557459" start="28313" end="28331" title="Government of Change" label="populist coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="28422" end="28439" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q96175652" start="28469" end="28481" title="Economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic" label="economically"/>
<link wikidata="Q104830368" start="28509" end="28526" title="2021 Italian government crisis" label="government crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q294460" start="28544" end="28556" title="Mario Draghi" label="Mario Draghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="28582" end="28603" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460407" start="28614" end="28639" title="Draghi Cabinet" label="national unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q451791" start="28767" end="28781" title="Giorgia Meloni" label="Giorgia Meloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155864" start="28909" end="28938" title="Italy (geographical region)" label="eponymous geographical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255215" start="29036" end="29039" title="35th parallel north" label="35°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256610" start="29044" end="29049" title="47th parallel north" label="47° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703768" start="29066" end="29068" title="6th meridian east" label="6°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705853" start="29073" end="29078" title="19th meridian east" label="19° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="29203" end="29219" title="Alps" label="Alpine watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="29235" end="29244" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309448" start="29253" end="29267" title="Venetian Plain" label="Venetian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="29304" end="29321" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29348" end="29363" title="Mediterranean islands#By area" label="biggest islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422116" start="29391" end="29411" title="List of islands of Italy" label="many smaller islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="29518" end="29525" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="29662" end="29679" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42820" start="29685" end="29693" title="Ligurian Sea" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="29698" end="29708" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="29719" end="29729" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="29739" end="29751" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="29853" end="29863" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="29868" end="29880" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="29950" end="29965" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="29994" end="30002" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="30008" end="30016" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q244207" start="30037" end="30059" title="Campione d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Campione d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="30074" end="30081" title="Enclave and exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="30210" end="30228" title="Apennine Mountains" label="Apennine Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="30375" end="30385" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374" start="30457" end="30467" title="Matterhorn" label="Matterhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283" start="30525" end="30534" title="Dolomites" label="Dolomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115494" start="30570" end="30598" title="Volcanism of Italy" label="Italy are of volcanic origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161185" start="30653" end="30668" title="volcanic island" label="volcanic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="30699" end="30709" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q207323" start="30745" end="30752" title="Vulcano" label="Vulcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q131148" start="30754" end="30763" title="Stromboli" label="Stromboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="30769" end="30777" title="Vesuvius" label="Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233280" start="30785" end="30800" title="rivers of Italy" label="rivers of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="30863" end="30865" title="Po (river)" label="Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="30932" end="30943" title="Padan plain" label="Padan plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183361" start="31048" end="31056" title="upland and lowland" label="lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414" start="31101" end="31106" title="Lake Garda" label="Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q14379" start="31111" end="31119" title="Lake Maggiore" label="Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15523" start="31128" end="31132" title="Lake Como" label="Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="31573" end="31590" title="humid subtropical" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="31594" end="31611" title="humid continental" label="humid continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="31616" end="31623" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="31724" end="31731" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="31826" end="31855" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="32604" end="32608" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="32610" end="32619" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q917381" start="32669" end="32676" title="Garigue" label="Garigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q667552" start="32681" end="32697" title="Maquis shrubland" label="Maquis shrubland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="32909" end="32916" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="32988" end="32993" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="32995" end="33007" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740284" start="33193" end="33207" title="fauna of Italy" label="fauna of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="33223" end="33230" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455589" start="33265" end="33289" title="Sardinian long-eared bat" label="Sardinian long-eared bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q763725" start="33291" end="33309" title="Corsican red deer" label="Sardinian red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q917126" start="33311" end="33332" title="spectacled salamander" label="spectacled salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q675352" start="33334" end="33355" title="brown cave salamander" label="brown cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675166" start="33357" end="33369" title="Italian newt" label="Italian newt"/>
<link wikidata="Q631617" start="33371" end="33383" title="Italian stream frog" label="Italian frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q618192" start="33385" end="33413" title="Apennine yellow-bellied toad" label="Apennine yellow-bellied toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641251" start="33415" end="33434" title="Italian wall lizard" label="Italian wall lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188924" start="33440" end="33460" title="Sicilian pond turtle" label="Sicilian pond turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259206" start="33476" end="33491" title="List of mammals of Italy" label="mammals species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088973" start="33497" end="33509" title="List of birds of Italy" label="bird species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933815" start="33514" end="33529" title="List of reptiles of Italy" label="reptile species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616653" start="33534" end="33551" title="List of amphibians of Italy" label="amphibian species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746674" start="33645" end="33659" title="flora of Italy" label="flora of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="33712" end="33726" title="vascular plant" label="vascular plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q657812" start="33898" end="33910" title="Abies nebrodensis" label="Sicilian fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941255" start="33912" end="33933" title="Barbaricina columbine" label="Barbaricina columbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777868" start="33935" end="33947" title="Sea marigold" label="Sea marigold"/>
<link wikidata="Q15551520" start="33949" end="33964" title="Santolina pinnata" label="Lavender cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090905" start="33970" end="33984" title="Viola ucriana" label="Ucriana violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q375083" start="34014" end="34092" title="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats" label="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q759874" start="34101" end="34119" title="Habitats Directive" label="Habitats Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12781" start="34173" end="34187" title="Italian garden" label="Italian garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361707" start="34305" end="34325" title="history of gardening" label="history of gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q12774" start="34338" end="34344" title="French garden" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q12783" start="34349" end="34356" title="English garden" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460124" start="34403" end="34408" title="Roman garden" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244939" start="34413" end="34432" title="Italian Renaissance garden" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188023" start="34447" end="34459" title="Italian wolf" label="Italian wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q329046" start="34524" end="34539" title="Arbutus unedo" label="strawberry tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="34608" end="34626" title="Apennine Mountains" label="Apennine Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q937933" start="34910" end="34925" title="Italian sparrow" label="Italian sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622082" start="35344" end="35353" title="List of Marine Protected Areas of Italy" label="protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313102" start="35416" end="35432" title="renewable energy in Italy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="35494" end="35506" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="35537" end="35547" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="35719" end="35737" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931576" start="35742" end="35753" title="1987 Italian referendums" label="referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="35954" end="35980" title="Fukushima nuclear accident" label="Fukushima nuclear accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419355" start="36066" end="36105" title="List of countries by carbon dioxide emissions" label="twelfth-largest carbon dioxide producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="36334" end="36349" title="sulphur dioxide" label="sulphur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q22335" start="36548" end="36558" title="Vajont Dam" label="Vajont Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q81658" start="36575" end="36580" title="Sarno" label="Sarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612701" start="36595" end="36611" title="2009 Messina floods and mudslides" label="Messina mudslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="36656" end="36678" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="36709" end="36722" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="was abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="36728" end="36746" title="president of Italy" label="president of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956186" start="36748" end="36765" title="Sergio Mattarella" label="Sergio Mattarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="36870" end="36888" title="Italian Parliament" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="36958" end="36970" title="Constitution of Italy" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053185" start="36992" end="37012" title="Constituent Assembly of Italy" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="37046" end="37058" title="anti-fascist" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="37248" end="37260" title="proportional representation" label="proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="37321" end="37330" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="37384" end="37403" title="Chamber of Deputies of Italy" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q781417" start="37413" end="37433" title="Palazzo Montecitorio" label="Palazzo Montecitorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q633872" start="37443" end="37465" title="Senate of Italy" label="Senate of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755046" start="37469" end="37483" title="Palazzo Madama, Rome" label="Palazzo Madama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="37506" end="37524" title="Italian Parliament" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274327" start="37556" end="37572" title="Italian nationality law" label="Italian citizens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37655" end="37678" title="Parliament of Italy#Overseas constituency" label="overseas constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786200" start="37690" end="37707" title="senator for life" label="senators for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="37900" end="37923" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="prime minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="38301" end="38321" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q47729" start="38750" end="38766" title="Democratic Party (Italy)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055449" start="39026" end="39040" title="Matteo Salvini" label="Matteo Salvini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852636" start="39087" end="39100" title="Maurizio Lupi" label="Maurizio Lupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113563752" start="39108" end="39120" title="Us Moderates" label="Us Moderates"/>
<link wikidata="Q113168799" start="39243" end="39267" title="Greens and Left Alliance" label="Greens and Left Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069822" start="39269" end="39281" title="Aosta Valley (political coalition)" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q47090559" start="39283" end="39294" title="More Europe" label="More Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q113375810" start="39296" end="39312" title="Civic Commitment" label="Civic Commitment"/>
<link wikidata="Q114246565" start="39338" end="39358" title="Action – Italia Viva" label="Action – Italia Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q606620" start="39360" end="39394" title="South Tyrolean People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="South Tyrolean People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q114235818" start="39396" end="39413" title="South calls North" label="South calls North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811588" start="39423" end="39462" title="Associative Movement of Italians Abroad" label="Associative Movement of Italians Abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="39680" end="39700" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Constitution of 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q981005" start="39728" end="39757" title="Constitutional Court of Italy" label="Constitutional Court of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="39852" end="39861" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="39878" end="39893" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Napoleonic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135541" start="39918" end="39944" title="Court of Cassation (Italy)" label="Supreme Court of Cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286907" start="40056" end="40067" title="LGBT rights in Italy" label="LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q897817" start="40254" end="40270" title="Polizia di Stato" label="Polizia di Stato"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="40309" end="40320" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552861" start="40332" end="40350" title="Guardia di Finanza" label="Guardia di Finanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q831968" start="40403" end="40424" title="Polizia Penitenziaria" label="Polizia Penitenziaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552839" start="40481" end="40497" title="Guardia Costiera" label="Guardia Costiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q197617" start="40511" end="40529" title="Water police" label="Coast Guard Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q631533" start="40618" end="40628" title="provincial police" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431981" start="40633" end="40642" title="Municipal police (Italy)" label="municipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102072" start="40710" end="40733" title="Organized crime in Italy" label="Italian organised crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="41006" end="41006" title="Comune" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q425698" start="41116" end="41132" title="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta" label="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="41527" end="41554" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="41598" end="41602" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="41735" end="41739" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="41745" end="41783" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="41784" end="41808" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="41825" end="41877" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="41890" end="41907" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q392805" start="41917" end="41944" title="Central European Initiative" label="Central European Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="42028" end="42080" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="42090" end="42092" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q308905" start="42110" end="42120" title="Presidency of the Council of the European Union" label="EU Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141027" start="42151" end="42171" title="List of members of the United Nations Security Council" label="non-permanent member"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="42179" end="42198" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q460844" start="42487" end="42494" title="UNITAF" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q488011" start="42496" end="42506" title="United Nations Operation in Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665502" start="42512" end="42522" title="United Nations Integrated Mission in East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="42577" end="42583" title="IFOR" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="42585" end="42591" title="Kosovo Force" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883929" start="42597" end="42604" title="Operation Sunrise (Albania)" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="42666" end="42692" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42809" end="42828" title="Multi-National Force – Iraq#2006 withdrawals" label="military contingent"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="42912" end="42951" title="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon" label="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="42999" end="43020" title="Palestinian Authority" label="Palestinian Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166513" start="43085" end="43110" title="military history of Italy" label="military history of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108810" start="43192" end="43216" title="ancient peoples of Italy" label="ancient peoples of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="43278" end="43292" title="ancient Romans" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115680" start="43331" end="43342" title="Italian city-states" label="city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="43347" end="43365" title="maritime republics" label="maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435724" start="43420" end="43445" title="List of historical states of Italy" label="historical Italian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="43453" end="43465" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348385" start="43474" end="43492" title="wars of succession" label="wars of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="43524" end="43543" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="43566" end="43581" title="Italian Empire" label="colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="43591" end="43601" title="world wars" label="world wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="43639" end="43651" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="43682" end="43686" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="43692" end="43694" title="EU" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="43702" end="43704" title="UN" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="43711" end="43723" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q833040" start="43725" end="43729" title="Italian Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q381576" start="43731" end="43740" title="Italian Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="43746" end="43757" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687400" start="43827" end="43850" title="High Council of Defence (Italy)" label="High Council of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="43892" end="43913" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Constitution of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="43944" end="43954" title="Italian Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552861" start="44118" end="44136" title="Guardia di Finanza" label="Guardia di Finanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q594267" start="44376" end="44391" title="nuclear sharing" label="nuclear sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q795325" start="44420" end="44436" title="B61 nuclear bomb" label="B61 nuclear bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934972" start="44453" end="44458" title="Ghedi Air Base" label="Ghedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q790794" start="44463" end="44469" title="Aviano Air Base" label="Aviano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="44614" end="44632" title="Royal Italian Army" label="Royal Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q42405124" start="44679" end="44684" title="Dardo IFV" label="Dardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="44685" end="44710" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053528" start="44716" end="44727" title="B1 Centauro" label="B1 Centauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="44728" end="44742" title="tank destroyer" label="tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q660378" start="44752" end="44758" title="Ariete" label="Ariete"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="44759" end="44763" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q398999" start="44796" end="44804" title="Agusta A129 Mangusta" label="Mangusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q753058" start="44805" end="44822" title="attack helicopter" label="attack helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="44886" end="44895" title="Leopard 1" label="Leopard 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q462407" start="44900" end="44904" title="M113 armoured personnel carrier" label="M113"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622314" start="44947" end="44962" title="blue-water navy" label="blue-water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q855186" start="45023" end="45035" title="Regia Marina" label="Regia Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="45387" end="45404" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Regia Aeronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187536" start="45626" end="45633" title="Lockheed Martin C-130J Super Hercules" label="C-130Js"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161870" start="45638" end="45651" title="C-27J Spartan" label="C-27J Spartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003712" start="45693" end="45709" title="Frecce Tricolori" label="Frecce Tricolori"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="45810" end="45821" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="45826" end="45841" title="military police" label="military police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969510" start="45908" end="45940" title="Law enforcement in Italy" label="Italy&amp;#x27;s other police forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="46191" end="46198" title="Regions of Italy" label="regioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="46225" end="46250" title="Autonomous regions with special statute" label="special autonomous status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="46316" end="46323" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="46326" end="46338" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="46341" end="46347" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="46350" end="46360" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="46363" end="46371" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="46374" end="46382" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263" start="46385" end="46399" title="Emilia-Romagna" label="Emilia-Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="46402" end="46423" title="Friuli-Venezia Giulia" label="Friuli-Venezia Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="46426" end="46431" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="46434" end="46441" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="46444" end="46452" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="46455" end="46461" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443" start="46464" end="46470" title="Molise" label="Molise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="46473" end="46481" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="46484" end="46492" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="46495" end="46501" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="46504" end="46532" title="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol" label="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="46535" end="46542" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="46545" end="46551" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="46554" end="46560" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089" start="46614" end="46622" title="Provinces of Italy" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800793" start="46660" end="46679" title="Metropolitan cities of Italy" label="città metropolitane"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="46720" end="46726" title="Comune" label="comuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="46772" end="46785" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="46819" end="46827" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="46832" end="46844" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="13th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="46861" end="46884" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186690" start="46910" end="46939" title="List of countries by total wealth" label="ninth-largest national wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046879" start="46948" end="46987" title="List of countries by gold reserve holdings" label="third-largest central bank gold reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="47017" end="47019" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="47043" end="47047" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="47119" end="47138" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="47148" end="47165" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="47185" end="47208" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="47230" end="47245" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739390" start="47247" end="47257" title="Healthcare in Italy" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566274" start="47263" end="47272" title="Education Index" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597416" start="47401" end="47424" title="List of countries by wine production" label="largest wine production"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="47557" end="47592" title="List of countries by manufacturing output" label="sixth-largest manufacturing country"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="47734" end="47768" title="small and medium-sized enterprises" label="small and medium-sized enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="48121" end="48142" title="List of countries by exports" label="10th-largest exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826736" start="48301" end="48328" title="Automotive industry in Italy" label="Italian automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q984966" start="48531" end="48542" title="mass market" label="mass market"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="48567" end="48571" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240481" start="48576" end="48583" title="Premium product" label="premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="48596" end="48606" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35962" start="48611" end="48619" title="Maserati" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q815679" start="48630" end="48639" title="supercars" label="supercars"/>
<link wikidata="Q749239" start="48648" end="48654" title="Pagani (company)" label="Pagani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35886" start="48656" end="48667" title="Lamborghini" label="Lamborghini"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="48673" end="48680" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q46730" start="48687" end="48718" title="Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena" label="Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="48900" end="48911" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909040" start="49008" end="49023" title="Val&amp;#x27;d Agri oil field" label="Val d&amp;#x27;Agri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094545" start="49060" end="49067" title="Onshore (hydrocarbons)" label="onshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="49068" end="49085" title="hydrocarbon field" label="hydrocarbon field"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="49142" end="49151" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="49327" end="49333" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075870" start="49335" end="49344" title="pozzolana" label="pozzolana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="49350" end="49358" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40088" start="49424" end="49438" title="Carrara marble" label="Carrara marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="49560" end="49582" title="European single market" label="European single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="49784" end="49788" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="49833" end="49854" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="49883" end="49909" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="50200" end="50211" title="public debt" label="public debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850576" start="50320" end="50339" title="Italian government debt" label="Italian public debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164798" start="50433" end="50447" title="household debt" label="household debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414300" start="50495" end="50513" title="Southern question" label="north–south divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="50686" end="50708" title="South Tyrol" label="Alto Adige-South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224974" start="50933" end="50956" title="Youth unemployment in Italy" label="youth unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="51256" end="51261" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="51275" end="51283" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="51289" end="51295" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="51309" end="51319" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597416" start="51451" end="51472" title="List of wine-producing countries" label="largest wine producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="51500" end="51509" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125341" start="51714" end="51726" title="Italian wine" label="Italian wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q532538" start="51736" end="51742" title="Tuscany (wine)" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q750979" start="51743" end="51750" title="Chianti" label="Chianti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16590178" start="51759" end="51770" title="Piedmont (wine)" label="Piedmontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q808584" start="51771" end="51777" title="Barolo" label="Barolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q590461" start="51802" end="51812" title="Barbaresco" label="Barbaresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q391703" start="51814" end="51833" title="Barbera d&amp;#x27;Asti" label="Barbera d&amp;#x27;Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q26667" start="51835" end="51857" title="Brunello di Montalcino" label="Brunello di Montalcino"/>
<link wikidata="Q457946" start="51859" end="51867" title="Frascati DOC" label="Frascati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946117" start="51869" end="51897" title="Montepulciano d&amp;#x27;Abruzzo" label="Montepulciano d&amp;#x27;Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q926371" start="51899" end="51920" title="Morellino di Scansano" label="Morellino di Scansano"/>
<link wikidata="Q321263" start="51930" end="51944" title="sparkling wine" label="sparkling wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750896" start="51946" end="51958" title="Franciacorta DOCG" label="Franciacorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069954" start="51963" end="51971" title="Prosecco" label="Prosecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777623" start="52039" end="52055" title="List of Italian DOP cheeses" label="regional cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q654824" start="52112" end="52119" title="Denominazione di origine controllata" label="DOC/DOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="52126" end="52161" title="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union" label="geographical indication certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q300797" start="52233" end="52244" title="ersatz good" label="ersatz good"/>
<link wikidata="Q115943227" start="52326" end="52336" title="Autostrade of Italy" label="autostrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933674" start="52424" end="52438" title="roads in Italy" label="roads in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q756243" start="52502" end="52510" title="Atlantia (company)" label="Atlantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q970642" start="52626" end="52641" title="rail transport in Italy" label="railway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q83823" start="52671" end="52696" title="Ferrovie dello Stato" label="Rete Ferroviaria Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q286650" start="52846" end="52856" title="Trenitalia" label="Trenitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086760" start="52914" end="52926" title="Frecciarossa" label="Frecciarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752594" start="53019" end="53032" title="Frecciargento" label="Frecciargento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752593" start="53128" end="53141" title="Frecciabianca" label="Frecciabianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q60910" start="53528" end="53550" title="Milan Malpensa Airport" label="Milan Malpensa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19101" start="53555" end="53577" title="Rome Fiumicino Airport" label="Rome Fiumicino Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q108251249" start="53626" end="53637" title="ITA Airways" label="ITA Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q153975" start="53660" end="53668" title="Alitalia" label="Alitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="53720" end="53725" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908103" start="54242" end="54279" title="List of countries by electricity production from renewable sources" label="largest producers of renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024006" start="54358" end="54368" title="Wind power in Italy" label="Wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954839" start="54370" end="54386" title="Hydroelectricity in Italy" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558821" start="54392" end="54408" title="Geothermal power in Italy" label="geothermal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588974" start="54425" end="54462" title="Electricity sector in Italy" label="sources of electricity in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313102" start="54464" end="54481" title="Renewable energy in Italy" label="Renewable sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="54747" end="54750" title="Eni" label="Eni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330390" start="54805" end="54812" title="Big Oil" label="Big Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556773" start="54889" end="54901" title="Solar power in Italy" label="Solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q771715" start="55051" end="55096" title="Montalto di Castro Photovoltaic Power Station" label="Montalto di Castro Photovoltaic Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558821" start="55213" end="55230" title="Geothermal power in Italy" label="geothermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615540" start="55255" end="55277" title="Nuclear power in Italy" label="Nuclear power in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931576" start="55298" end="55314" title="1987 Italian referendums" label="1987 referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="55340" end="55358" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="55600" end="55615" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="55643" end="55664" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="55709" end="55732" title="observational astronomy" label="observational astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="55758" end="55775" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799482" start="55782" end="55817" title="Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso" label="Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3717376" start="55882" end="55889" title="ELETTRA" label="ELETTRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245390" start="55891" end="55905" title="Eurac Research" label="Eurac Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q175492" start="55907" end="55939" title="ESA Centre for Earth Observation" label="ESA Centre for Earth Observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650851" start="55941" end="55977" title="Institute for Scientific Interchange" label="Institute for Scientific Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049095" start="55979" end="56041" title="International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology" label="International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054211" start="56043" end="56091" title="Centre for Maritime Research and Experimentation" label="Centre for Maritime Research and Experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190606" start="56101" end="56145" title="International Centre for Theoretical Physics" label="International Centre for Theoretical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="56291" end="56314" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976594" start="56334" end="56349" title="technology park" label="technology park"/>
<link wikidata="Q668385" start="56432" end="56449" title="AREA Science Park" label="AREA Science Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q588140" start="56658" end="56672" title="science museum" label="science museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q947082" start="56686" end="56740" title="Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci" label="Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166497" start="56910" end="56941" title="Tourism in Italy" label="visit the peninsula for tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="56970" end="56980" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976242" start="57320" end="57347" title="World Tourism rankings" label="fourth most visited country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992919" start="57567" end="57574" title="Culture of Italy" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="57576" end="57583" title="Italian cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="57585" end="57592" title="History of Italy" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647939" start="57594" end="57606" title="Architecture of Italy" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q938616" start="57608" end="57611" title="Italian art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="57791" end="57800" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q127107" start="58027" end="58059" title="I Borghi più belli d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="I Borghi più belli d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="58342" end="58362" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091573" start="58392" end="58421" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Italy" label="53 are cultural and 6 natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q131696551" start="59010" end="59073" title="Internal migration in Italy" label="internal migration from the rural south to the industrial north"/>
<link wikidata="Q492173" start="59096" end="59120" title="Italian economic miracle" label="Italian economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="59239" end="59259" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187207" start="59836" end="59873" title="List of countries by median age" label="fourth oldest population in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="60264" end="60280" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="60637" end="60660" title="fall of the Berlin Wall" label="fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="60878" end="60889" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="61690" end="61708" title="illegal immigrants" label="illegal immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091237" start="61771" end="61779" title="Romanian diaspora" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098467" start="62098" end="62114" title="Regional Italian" label="regional dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12364715" start="62409" end="62419" title="Media of Italy" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="62521" end="62528" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36202" start="62600" end="62605" title="Ladin language" label="Ladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="62607" end="62614" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="62737" end="62748" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q36202" start="62754" end="62759" title="Ladin language" label="Ladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="62850" end="62857" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16293" start="62878" end="62885" title="Province of Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q16184" start="62887" end="62894" title="Province of Gorizia" label="Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16294" start="62900" end="62905" title="Province of Udine" label="Udine"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="63023" end="63074" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q214195" start="63240" end="63280" title="Italian National Institute of Statistics" label="Italian National Institute of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="63615" end="63623" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q665037" start="63629" end="63659" title="Diocese of Rome" label="episcopal jurisdiction of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="63688" end="63700" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="63719" end="63734" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="63758" end="63767" title="Sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q970825" start="63928" end="63948" title="Religion in Italy" label="religiosity in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201891" start="64022" end="64041" title="Catholic Church in Italy" label="Italian Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575835" start="64121" end="64154" title="Catholic Church by country" label="fifth-largest Catholic population"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="64339" end="64352" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="64509" end="64522" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q382870" start="64760" end="64778" title="eight per thousand" label="eight per thousand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65575" end="65580" title="Secondary education in Italy#Liceo" label="liceo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65687" end="65703" title="Secondary education in Italy#Istituto tecnico" label="istituto tecnico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65724" end="65746" title="Secondary education in Italy#Istituto professionale" label="istituto professionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="65860" end="65864" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q508696" start="66135" end="66154" title="List of universities in Italy" label="public universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953379" start="66212" end="66237" title="Superior Graduate Schools in Italy" label="superior graduate schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q672416" start="66251" end="66283" title="Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa" label="Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="66361" end="66379" title="University of Bologna" label="Bologna University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027998" start="66405" end="66422" title="List of oldest universities in continuous operation" label="oldest university"/>
<link wikidata="Q959524" start="66499" end="66517" title="Bocconi University" label="Bocconi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q229022" start="66523" end="66559" title="Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore" label="Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122851" start="66561" end="66566" title="Libera Università Internazionale degli Studi Sociali Guido Carli" label="LUISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q392897" start="66572" end="66603" title="Polytechnic University of Turin" label="Polytechnic University of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392904" start="66609" end="66640" title="Polytechnic University of Milan" label="Polytechnic University of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="66646" end="66673" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="Sapienza University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q46210" start="66683" end="66702" title="University of Milan" label="University of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="66852" end="66868" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="5th in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q47564" start="66988" end="67006" title="Mediterranean diet" label="Mediterranean diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="67038" end="67044" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="67101" end="67168" title="Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity" label="Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739390" start="67622" end="67650" title="Servizio Sanitario Nazionale" label="Servizio Sanitario Nazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="67919" end="67944" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="68166" end="68181" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345203" start="68188" end="68207" title="cultural superpower" label="cultural superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="68372" end="68415" title="Culture of Europe" label="cultural and historical heritage of Europe."/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="68593" end="68627" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance architectural movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="68683" end="68695" title="Palladianism" label="Palladianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="68737" end="68762" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="69229" end="69252" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071570" start="69442" end="69472" title="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Ambrogio" label="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Ambrogio"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="69771" end="69791" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Filippo Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="69983" end="70008" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="70022" end="70037" title="Donato Bramante" label="Donato Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="70175" end="70189" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque period"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834" start="70301" end="70333" title="Palazzina di caccia of Stupinigi" label="Palazzina di caccia of Stupinigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q359424" start="70344" end="70360" title="Luigi Vanvitelli" label="Luigi Vanvitelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q327983" start="70391" end="70414" title="Royal Palace of Caserta" label="Royal Palace of Caserta"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="70487" end="70513" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q933661" start="70677" end="70695" title="Novecento movement" label="Novecento movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382978" start="70757" end="70776" title="Marcello Piacentini" label="Marcello Piacentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756540" start="70949" end="70965" title="Western painting" label="Western painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354732" start="70967" end="70976" title="Roman art" label="Roman art"/>
<link wikidata="Q468930" start="71157" end="71174" title="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil" label="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233738" start="71265" end="71275" title="Golden Age (metaphor)" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5811" start="71407" end="71415" title="Masaccio" label="Masaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q205148" start="71417" end="71430" title="Filippo Lippi" label="Filippo Lippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9319" start="71432" end="71442" title="Tintoretto" label="Tintoretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="71444" end="71461" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Sandro Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="71463" end="71480" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="71482" end="71494" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="71496" end="71503" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="71509" end="71515" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="71567" end="71578" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q179900" start="71669" end="71674" title="David (Michelangelo)" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q235242" start="71688" end="71693" title="Pietà (Michelangelo)" label="Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989744" start="71711" end="71716" title="Moses (Michelangelo)" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="71761" end="71777" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="71815" end="71824" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5822" start="72051" end="72072" title="Piero della Francesca" label="Piero della Francesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q207929" start="72150" end="72158" title="Pontormo" label="Pontormo"/>
<link wikidata="Q301" start="72186" end="72194" title="El Greco" label="El Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581485" start="72248" end="72263" title="Italian Baroque" label="Italian Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="72268" end="72278" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q212657" start="72280" end="72301" title="Artemisia Gentileschi" label="Artemisia Gentileschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q938607" start="72303" end="72317" title="Carlo Saraceni" label="Carlo Saraceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q721166" start="72323" end="72342" title="Bartolomeo Manfredi" label="Bartolomeo Manfredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100657" start="72365" end="72379" title="Italian Rococo art" label="Italian Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72403" end="72416" title="French Rococo" label="French Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547" start="72463" end="72477" title="Antonio Canova" label="Antonio Canova"/>
<link wikidata="Q223725" start="72581" end="72596" title="Francesco Hayez" label="Francesco Hayez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441194" start="72601" end="72618" title="Francesco Podesti" label="Francesco Podesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="72620" end="72633" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q574985" start="72680" end="72691" title="Macchiaioli" label="Macchiaioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="72703" end="72710" title="Realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764856" start="72714" end="72729" title="Gioacchino Toma" label="Gioacchino Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528580" start="72734" end="72762" title="Giuseppe Pellizza da Volpedo" label="Giuseppe Pellizza da Volpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="72790" end="72798" title="futurism" label="futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156622" start="72935" end="72953" title="Giorgio de Chirico" label="Giorgio de Chirico"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="72987" end="72998" title="surrealists" label="surrealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="73229" end="73244" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="73246" end="73263" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="73265" end="73271" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="73273" end="73279" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="73281" end="73291" title="Propertius" label="Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="73293" end="73297" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="73303" end="73307" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="73414" end="73431" title="Francis of Assisi" label="Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q686091" start="73490" end="73509" title="Canticle of the Sun" label="Canticle of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="73533" end="73553" title="Emperor Frederick II" label="Emperor Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394847" start="73714" end="73732" title="Giacomo da Lentini" label="Giacomo da Lentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q80056" start="73750" end="73756" title="sonnet" label="sonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="73799" end="73807" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q366270" start="73810" end="73826" title="Guido Guinizelli" label="Guido Guinizelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q542036" start="73855" end="73870" title="Dolce Stil Novo" label="Dolce Stil Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="74032" end="74047" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="74123" end="74136" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="74192" end="74210" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q777574" start="74365" end="74378" title="Il Canzoniere" label="Il Canzoniere"/>
<link wikidata="Q16438" start="74433" end="74446" title="The Decameron" label="The Decameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="74539" end="74558" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131719" start="74572" end="74582" title="The Prince" label="The Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q387199" start="74716" end="74745" title="Giovanni Francesco Straparola" label="Giovanni Francesco Straparola"/>
<link wikidata="Q555291" start="74750" end="74769" title="Giambattista Basile" label="Giambattista Basile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527400" start="74787" end="74821" title="The Facetious Nights of Straparola" label="The Facetious Nights of Straparola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473417" start="74852" end="74863" title="Pentamerone" label="Pentamerone"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="75017" end="75024" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q338478" start="75051" end="75060" title="Academy of Arcadia" label="Arcadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="75225" end="75237" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q296244" start="75324" end="75340" title="Vittorio Alfieri" label="Vittorio Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q166234" start="75342" end="75353" title="Ugo Foscolo" label="Ugo Foscolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172599" start="75359" end="75375" title="Giacomo Leopardi" label="Giacomo Leopardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064" start="75386" end="75404" title="Alessandro Manzoni" label="Alessandro Manzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q215198" start="75633" end="75640" title="Verismo (literature)" label="verismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309786" start="75715" end="75729" title="Emilio Salgari" label="Emilio Salgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194437" start="75760" end="75772" title="swashbuckler" label="swashbuckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q831605" start="75828" end="75836" title="Sandokan" label="Sandokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199588" start="75860" end="75873" title="Carlo Collodi" label="Carlo Collodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065468" start="75890" end="75917" title="The Adventures of Pinocchio" label="The Adventures of Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119703" start="76031" end="76046" title="List of literary works by number of translations" label="most translated"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="76086" end="76094" title="futurism" label="futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216582" start="76144" end="76169" title="Filippo Tommaso Marinetti" label="Filippo Tommaso Marinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983009" start="76182" end="76203" title="Manifesto of Futurism" label="Manifesto of Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193236" start="76377" end="76401" title="Gabriele D&amp;#x27;Annunzio" label="Gabriele D&amp;#x27;Annunzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q43440" start="76420" end="76435" title="Giosuè Carducci" label="Giosuè Carducci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728" start="76472" end="76486" title="Grazia Deledda" label="Grazia Deledda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403" start="76524" end="76540" title="Luigi Pirandello" label="Luigi Pirandello"/>
<link wikidata="Q154756" start="76569" end="76582" title="Italo Calvino" label="Italo Calvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q83038" start="76598" end="76617" title="Salvatore Quasimodo" label="Salvatore Quasimodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83174" start="76630" end="76645" title="Eugenio Montale" label="Eugenio Montale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="76655" end="76666" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q765" start="76708" end="76716" title="Dario Fo" label="Dario Fo"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="76786" end="76804" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="76874" end="76894" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q860746" start="76900" end="76917" title="modern philosophy" label="modern philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="76964" end="76974" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681" start="77023" end="77030" title="Crotone" label="Crotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="77081" end="77091" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="77093" end="77103" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q132157" start="77109" end="77113" title="Zeno of Elea" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="77142" end="77148" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q47154" start="77150" end="77159" title="Lucretius" label="Lucretius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="77161" end="77179" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="77181" end="77189" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q183144" start="77191" end="77200" title="Epictetus" label="Epictetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="77202" end="77217" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="77223" end="77241" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="77326" end="77340" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129353" start="77367" end="77383" title="natural theology" label="natural theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="77402" end="77425" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="77477" end="77491" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q192374" start="77532" end="77547" title="Marsilio Ficino" label="Marsilio Ficino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="77577" end="77596" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="77618" end="77635" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q131719" start="77682" end="77692" title="The Prince" label="The Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="77783" end="77791" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q471183" start="77796" end="77803" title="Realism (international relations)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178709" start="77917" end="77934" title="Giambattista Vico" label="Giambattista Vico"/>
<link wikidata="Q223723" start="77936" end="77951" title="Cesare Beccaria" label="Cesare Beccaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q370463" start="78007" end="78032" title="Classical school (criminology)" label="classical criminal theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q818670" start="78037" end="78045" title="penology" label="penology"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="78111" end="78119" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q651205" start="78121" end="78128" title="sensism" label="sensism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="78134" end="78144" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335011" start="78246" end="78256" title="Ontologism" label="Ontologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751636" start="78258" end="78267" title="Anarchism in Italy" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83003" start="78335" end="78350" title="Antonio Gramsci" label="Antonio Gramsci"/>
<link wikidata="Q54427" start="78444" end="78461" title="cultural hegemony" label="cultural hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822939" start="78535" end="78552" title="liberal socialism" label="liberal socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030234" start="78611" end="78629" title="anti-authoritarian" label="anti-authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q127393" start="78678" end="78688" title="autonomism" label="autonomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109552" start="78693" end="78702" title="workerism" label="workerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442839" start="78705" end="78722" title="Feminism in Italy" label="Italian feminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q287741" start="78731" end="78746" title="Sibilla Aleramo" label="Sibilla Aleramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705611" start="78748" end="78772" title="Alaide Gualberta Beccari" label="Alaide Gualberta Beccari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809294" start="78778" end="78796" title="Anna Maria Mozzoni" label="Anna Maria Mozzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q131117" start="78900" end="78916" title="Maria Montessori" label="Maria Montessori"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="78929" end="78972" title="Montessori education" label="philosophy of education that bears her name"/>
<link wikidata="Q191029" start="78974" end="78988" title="Giuseppe Peano" label="Giuseppe Peano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041570" start="79104" end="79115" title="Carlo Penco" label="Carlo Penco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571439" start="79117" end="79130" title="Gloria Origgi" label="Gloria Origgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191755" start="79132" end="79149" title="Pieranna Garavaso" label="Pieranna Garavaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q214119" start="79155" end="79170" title="Luciano Floridi" label="Luciano Floridi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="79315" end="79328" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="79361" end="79375" title="Italic peoples" label="Italic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203607" start="79384" end="79407" title="theatre of ancient Rome" label="theatre of ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q186370" start="79650" end="79660" title="troubadour" label="troubadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="79856" end="79863" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="79972" end="79995" title="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="80010" end="80033" title="improvisational theatre" label="improvisational theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q194326" start="80151" end="80159" title="juggling" label="juggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q193036" start="80161" end="80171" title="acrobatics" label="acrobatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809589" start="80264" end="80269" title="lazzi" label="lazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229130" start="80462" end="80469" title="Costumes in commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839021" start="80707" end="80724" title="Lucrezia Di Siena" label="Lucrezia Di Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936473" start="80822" end="80837" title="Vincenza Armani" label="Vincenza Armani"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697532" start="80842" end="80858" title="Barbara Flaminia" label="Barbara Flaminia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693249" start="80872" end="80883" title="prima donna" label="prima donna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048249" start="80995" end="80999" title="Italian folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="81003" end="81012" title="European classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="81201" end="81209" title="symphony" label="symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="81225" end="81231" title="sonata" label="sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="81372" end="81382" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q53068" start="81384" end="81394" title="Claudio Monteverdi" label="Monteverdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192958" start="81400" end="81408" title="Carlo Gesualdo" label="Gesualdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="81414" end="81421" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q167837" start="81422" end="81431" title="Domenico Scarlatti" label="Scarlatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="81437" end="81444" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66075" start="81460" end="81468" title="Niccolò Paganini" label="Paganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="81474" end="81481" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="81500" end="81505" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311" start="81510" end="81517" title="Giacomo Puccini" label="Puccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q160058" start="81662" end="81678" title="Maurizio Pollini" label="Maurizio Pollini"/>
<link wikidata="Q37615" start="81689" end="81706" title="Luciano Pavarotti" label="Luciano Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q785522" start="81751" end="81764" title="Italian opera" label="Italian opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="81851" end="81855" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="81986" end="82002" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q917450" start="82054" end="82057" title="Premiata Forneria Marconi" label="PFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619432" start="82059" end="82083" title="Banco del Mutuo Soccorso" label="Banco del Mutuo Soccorso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810029" start="82085" end="82092" title="Le Orme" label="Le Orme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317474" start="82094" end="82100" title="Goblin (band)" label="Goblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242174" start="82106" end="82110" title="Pooh (band)" label="Pooh"/>
<link wikidata="Q903165" start="82155" end="82170" title="cinema of Italy" label="cinema of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728399" start="82176" end="82185" title="Cinecittà" label="Cinecittà"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="82239" end="82254" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q470611" start="82300" end="82315" title="Italian hip hop" label="Italian hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q505455" start="82327" end="82336" title="Jovanotti" label="Jovanotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q193174" start="82366" end="82382" title="Rhapsody of Fire" label="Rhapsody of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46573" start="82384" end="82395" title="Lacuna Coil" label="Lacuna Coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q852573" start="82397" end="82406" title="Elvenking (band)" label="Elvenking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437316" start="82408" end="82422" title="Forgotten Tomb" label="Forgotten Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428116" start="82428" end="82447" title="Fleshgod Apocalypse" label="Fleshgod Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="82490" end="82495" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="82500" end="82516" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q744417" start="82523" end="82534" title="Italo disco" label="Italo disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q312674" start="82683" end="82698" title="Giorgio Moroder" label="Giorgio Moroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q206959" start="82861" end="82883" title="Sanremo Music Festival" label="Sanremo Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="82921" end="82944" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q229295" start="82946" end="82964" title="Gigliola Cinquetti" label="Gigliola Cinquetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q487473" start="82966" end="82978" title="Toto Cutugno" label="Toto Cutugno"/>
<link wikidata="Q56884561" start="82984" end="82992" title="Måneskin" label="Måneskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203983" start="83012" end="83016" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q207538" start="83018" end="83022" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q50729731" start="83028" end="83032" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q201392" start="83063" end="83079" title="Domenico Modugno" label="Domenico Modugno"/>
<link wikidata="Q231156" start="83081" end="83085" title="Mina (Italian singer)" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q42402" start="83087" end="83101" title="Andrea Bocelli" label="Andrea Bocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q266640" start="83103" end="83118" title="Raffaella Carrà" label="Raffaella Carrà"/>
<link wikidata="Q177732" start="83120" end="83127" title="Il Volo" label="Il Volo"/>
<link wikidata="Q263621" start="83129" end="83136" title="Al Bano" label="Al Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q487473" start="83138" end="83150" title="Toto Cutugno" label="Toto Cutugno"/>
<link wikidata="Q45036" start="83152" end="83155" title="Nek" label="Nek"/>
<link wikidata="Q365060" start="83157" end="83170" title="Umberto Tozzi" label="Umberto Tozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q260947" start="83172" end="83179" title="Giorgia (singer)" label="Giorgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170697" start="83195" end="83208" title="Laura Pausini" label="Laura Pausini"/>
<link wikidata="Q153708" start="83210" end="83225" title="Eros Ramazzotti" label="Eros Ramazzotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q492029" start="83227" end="83240" title="Tiziano Ferro" label="Tiziano Ferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="83353" end="83369" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Lumière brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015313" start="83439" end="83455" title="Vittorio Calcina" label="Vittorio Calcina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="83468" end="83481" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024861" start="83497" end="83504" title="Cabiria" label="Cabiria"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="83550" end="83561" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="83583" end="83594" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606571" start="83612" end="83628" title="Italian Futurism (cinema)" label="Italian futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="83750" end="83755" title="sound film" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000178" start="83792" end="83808" title="Telefoni Bianchi" label="Telefoni Bianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16534755" start="83872" end="83885" title="Calligrafismo" label="Calligrafismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q728399" start="84160" end="84176" title="Cinecittà" label="Cinecittà studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250066" start="84200" end="84218" title="Propaganda in Fascist Italy" label="Fascist propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426455" start="84338" end="84360" title="List of Italian film directors" label="Italian film directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371" start="84369" end="84385" title="Federico Fellini" label="Federico Fellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q164562" start="84387" end="84399" title="Sergio Leone" label="Sergio Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25120" start="84401" end="84420" title="Pier Paolo Pasolini" label="Pier Paolo Pasolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q716460" start="84422" end="84436" title="Duccio Tessari" label="Duccio Tessari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13888" start="84438" end="84454" title="Luchino Visconti" label="Luchino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q53004" start="84456" end="84472" title="Vittorio De Sica" label="Vittorio De Sica"/>
<link wikidata="Q55433" start="84474" end="84496" title="Michelangelo Antonioni" label="Michelangelo Antonioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q53003" start="84502" end="84520" title="Roberto Rossellini" label="Roberto Rossellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q167776" start="84616" end="84634" title="Italian neorealism" label="Italian neorealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115187" start="84801" end="84827" title="commedia all&amp;#x27;italiana" label="commedia all&amp;#x27;italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="84850" end="84860" title="film genre" label="film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="84871" end="84887" title="sword-and-sandal" label="sword-and-sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="84892" end="84909" title="spaghetti Western" label="spaghetti Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252" start="84965" end="84977" title="Sophia Loren" label="Sophia Loren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332055" start="85045" end="85051" title="Giallo" label="gialli"/>
<link wikidata="Q53011" start="85089" end="85102" title="Dario Argento" label="Dario Argento"/>
<link wikidata="Q19355" start="85230" end="85247" title="Life Is Beautiful" label="Life Is Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q464032" start="85261" end="85276" title="Cinema Paradiso" label="Cinema Paradiso"/>
<link wikidata="" start="85294" end="85317" title="Il Postino: The Postman" label="Il Postino: The Postman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004690" start="85566" end="85588" title="Hollywood on the Tiber" label="Hollywood on the Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="85675" end="85688" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="85775" end="85801" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q727328" start="85819" end="85833" title="Academy Honorary Award" label="Special Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q94001" start="85842" end="85853" title="List of Italian submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="nominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q209459" start="85904" end="85915" title="Golden Lion" label="Golden Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="85924" end="85935" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q948174" start="85980" end="85988" title="Football in Italy" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="86003" end="86007" title="Italy national football team" label="team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="86049" end="86058" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="86070" end="86074" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q131591" start="86076" end="86080" title="1938 FIFA World Cup" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q46934" start="86082" end="86086" title="1982 FIFA World Cup" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="86092" end="86096" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="86106" end="86115" title="UEFA Euro" label="UEFA Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="86127" end="86131" title="UEFA Euro 1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="86136" end="86140" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="86293" end="86300" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467139" start="86532" end="86547" title="Italy men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="men&amp;#x27;s team"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669035" start="86570" end="86589" title="FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q734750" start="86617" end="86649" title="Italy men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Italy men&amp;#x27;s basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q27599" start="86683" end="86698" title="EuroBasket 1983" label="EuroBasket 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q810321" start="86703" end="86707" title="EuroBasket 1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q82035" start="86727" end="86740" title="Basketball at the 2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q929124" start="86742" end="86761" title="Lega Basket Serie A" label="Lega Basket Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="86808" end="86839" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="86856" end="86880" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Six Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="86893" end="86908" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q13603535" start="86985" end="87008" title="UCI Road World Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s road race" label="UCI World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87009" end="87036" title="UCI Road World Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s road race#Medalists by nation" label="more than any other country"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="87045" end="87052" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="87058" end="87076" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q866427" start="87131" end="87142" title="Grand Tour (cycling)" label="Grand Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="87269" end="87289" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q982" start="87298" end="87318" title="FIS Alpine Ski World Cup" label="Alpine Ski World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="87399" end="87411" title="Italian Open (tennis)" label="Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="87505" end="87514" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q206984" start="87531" end="87538" title="Fed Cup" label="Fed Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="87663" end="87679" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="87712" end="87722" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036" start="87813" end="87831" title="Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="87835" end="87846" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q171417" start="87882" end="87907" title="Monza Circuit" label="Autodromo Nazionale Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q171880" start="87916" end="87920" title="1980 Italian Grand Prix" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="87985" end="87995" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="87997" end="88003" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35962" start="88005" end="88013" title="Maserati" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="88019" end="88023" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080" start="88090" end="88104" title="1896 Summer Olympics" label="first Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8098" start="88136" end="88140" title="1904 Summer Olympics" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q833699" start="88143" end="88151" title="Italy at the Olympics" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="88179" end="88199" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9632" start="88331" end="88335" title="1956 Winter Olympics" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="88340" end="88344" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630399" start="88371" end="88375" title="2026 Winter Olympics" label="2026"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="88399" end="88403" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q889368" start="88531" end="88554" title="Global Language Monitor" label="Global Language Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178516" start="88630" end="88635" title="Gucci" label="Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q635484" start="88637" end="88643" title="Armani" label="Armani"/>
<link wikidata="Q193136" start="88645" end="88650" title="Prada" label="Prada"/>
<link wikidata="Q696376" start="88652" end="88659" title="Versace" label="Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q649646" start="88661" end="88670" title="Valentino SpA" label="Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q214480" start="88672" end="88691" title="Dolce &amp;amp; Gabbana" label="Dolce &amp;amp; Gabbana"/>
<link wikidata="Q752515" start="88760" end="88767" title="Bulgari" label="Bulgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q21493304" start="88769" end="88776" title="Damiani" label="Damiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994135" start="88782" end="88792" title="Buccellati" label="Buccellati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214381" start="88843" end="88855" title="Vogue Italia" label="Vogue Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524205" start="89143" end="89155" title="Fiera Milano" label="Fiera Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009164" start="89307" end="89327" title="Milan Furniture Fair" label="Milan Furniture Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q708028" start="89364" end="89376" title="Bruno Munari" label="Bruno Munari"/>
<link wikidata="Q312392" start="89378" end="89391" title="Lucio Fontana" label="Lucio Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q560134" start="89393" end="89410" title="Enrico Castellani" label="Enrico Castellani"/>
<link wikidata="Q472756" start="89416" end="89429" title="Piero Manzoni" label="Piero Manzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="89449" end="89464" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="89490" end="89498" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836985" start="89500" end="89513" title="Ancient Greek cuisine" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368949" start="89515" end="89528" title="Ancient Roman cuisine" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407911" start="89530" end="89539" title="Byzantine cuisine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q623970" start="89541" end="89547" title="Arab cuisine" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q284288" start="89553" end="89559" title="Jewish cuisine" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="89625" end="89634" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q47564" start="89738" end="89756" title="Mediterranean diet" label="Mediterranean diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="89810" end="89815" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="90248" end="90254" title="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union" label="EU law"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="90277" end="90290" title="Michelin star" label="Michelin star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230305" start="90310" end="90316" title="List of Italian cheeses" label="Cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194888" start="90318" end="90327" title="Salumi" label="cold cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125341" start="90333" end="90337" title="Italian wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="90401" end="90432" title="protected designation of origin" label="protected designation of origin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90436" end="90469" title="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union#Protected geographical indication (PGI)" label="protected geographical indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="90489" end="90494" title="pizza" label="pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q209889" start="90675" end="90685" title="mascarpone" label="mascarpone"/>
<link wikidata="Q216781" start="90690" end="90697" title="ricotta" label="ricotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362405" start="90753" end="90759" title="Gelato" label="Gelato"/>
<link wikidata="Q131582" start="90761" end="90769" title="tiramisu" label="tiramisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048282" start="90775" end="90782" title="cassata" label="cassata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803516" start="90844" end="90866" title="Italian meal structure" label="Italian meal structure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91027" end="91036" title="Italian meal structure#Breakfast (colazione)" label="colazione"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91058" end="91064" title="Italian meal structure#Lunch (pranzo)" label="pranzo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91091" end="91095" title="Italian meal structure#Supper (cena)" label="cena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91314" end="91321" title="Italian meal structure#Mid-afternoon snack (merenda)" label="merenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q802461" start="91531" end="91553" title="Festa della Repubblica" label="Festa della Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047436" start="91786" end="91809" title="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier (Italy)" label="Italian Unknown Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031951" start="91838" end="91860" title="Via dei Fori Imperiali" label="Via dei Fori Imperiali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91871" end="91892" title="Saint Lucy&amp;#x27;s Day#Italy" label="Saint Lucy&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="92012" end="92020" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747040" start="92044" end="92052" title="Italian folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q814168" start="92063" end="92069" title="Befana" label="Befana"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="92205" end="92223" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262719" start="92245" end="92255" title="Ferragosto" label="Ferragosto"/>
<link wikidata="Q150139" start="92325" end="92337" title="Patronal festival" label="patronal day"/>
<link wikidata="Q111946798" start="92364" end="92392" title="Feast of Saints Francis and Catherine" label="Saints Francis and Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870638" start="92488" end="92502" title="Natale di Roma" label="Natale di Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="92612" end="92630" title="foundation of Rome" label="foundation of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q940390" start="92695" end="92709" title="Palio di Siena" label="Palio di Siena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92722" end="92731" title="Holy Week#Italy" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053802" start="92739" end="92752" title="Saracen Joust" label="Saracen Joust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952113" start="92778" end="92803" title="calcio storico fiorentino" label="calcio storico fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="92820" end="92826" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="92846" end="92874" title="intangible cultural heritage" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q682454" start="92903" end="92908" title="Paso (float)" label="pasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008735" start="92928" end="92942" title="Varia di Palmi" label="Varia di Palmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882573" start="92948" end="92970" title="Macchina di Santa Rosa" label="Macchina di Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13395" start="92974" end="92981" title="Viterbo" label="Viterbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="93026" end="93033" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044110" start="93059" end="93068" title="Carnival in Italy" label="carnivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q642130" start="93080" end="93089" title="Carnival of Viareggio" label="Viareggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660448" start="93091" end="93110" title="Carnival of Satriano di Lucania" label="Satriano di Lucania"/>
<link wikidata="Q295260" start="93112" end="93120" title="Mamoiada" label="Mamoiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939684" start="93126" end="93131" title="Carnival of Ivrea" label="Ivrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="93137" end="93157" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q209459" start="93172" end="93183" title="Golden Lion" label="Golden Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="93304" end="93310" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="93315" end="93321" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112307" start="93342" end="93358" title="Outline of Italy" label="Outline of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="93743" end="93751" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="93767" end="93785" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="93793" end="93820" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="93886" end="93890" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="93967" end="93988" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14533" wikidata="Q668" url="?curid=14533" title="India">
<text>India, officially the Republic of India, is a country in South Asia. It is the seventh-largest country by area; the most populous country from June 2023 onwards; and since its independence in 1947, the world&#x27;s most populous democracy. Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west; China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the north; and Bangladesh and Myanmar to the east. In the Indian Ocean, India is near Sri Lanka and the Maldives; its Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Thailand, Myanmar, and Indonesia.

Modern humans arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa no later than 55,000 years ago. Their long occupation, predominantly in isolation as hunter-gatherers, has made the region highly diverse, second only to Africa in human genetic diversity. Settled life emerged on the subcontinent in the western margins of the Indus river basin 9,000 years ago, evolving gradually into the Indus Valley Civilisation of the third millennium BCE. By , an archaic form of Sanskrit, an Indo-European language, had diffused into India from the northwest. Its hymns recorded the dawning of Hinduism in India. India&#x27;s pre-existing Dravidian languages were supplanted in the northern regions. By , caste had emerged within Hinduism, and Buddhism and Jainism had arisen, proclaiming social orders unlinked to heredity. Early political consolidations gave rise to the loose-knit Maurya and Gupta Empires. Widespread creativity suffused this era, but the status of women declined, and untouchability became an organized belief. In South India, the Middle kingdoms exported Dravidian language scripts and religious cultures to the kingdoms of Southeast Asia.

In the early mediaeval era, Christianity, Islam, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism became established on India&#x27;s southern and western coasts. Muslim armies from Central Asia intermittently overran India&#x27;s northern plains. The resulting Delhi Sultanate drew northern India into the cosmopolitan networks of mediaeval Islam. In south India, the Vijayanagara Empire created a long-lasting composite Hindu culture. In the Punjab, Sikhism emerged, rejecting institutionalised religion. The Mughal Empire, in 1526, ushered in two centuries of relative peace, leaving a legacy of luminous architecture. Gradually expanding rule of the British East India Company followed. It turned India into a colonial economy but consolidated its sovereignty. British Crown rule began in 1858. The rights promised to Indians were granted slowly, but technological changes were introduced, and modern ideas of education and public life took root. A pioneering and influential nationalist movement emerged. Noted for nonviolent resistance it became the major factor in ending British rule. In 1947, the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two independent dominions, a Hindu-majority dominion of India and a Muslim-majority dominion of Pakistan. A large-scale loss of life and an unprecedented migration accompanied the partition.

India has been a federal republic since 1950, governed through a democratic parliamentary system. It is a pluralistic, multilingual and multi-ethnic society. India&#x27;s population grew from 361 million in 1951 to almost 1.4 billion in 2022.
During this time, its nominal per capita income increased from US$64 annually to US$2,601, and its literacy rate from 16.6% to 74%. A comparatively destitute country in 1951, India has become a fast-growing major economy and a hub for information technology services; it has an expanding middle class. Indian movies and music increasingly influence global culture. India has reduced its poverty rate, though at the cost of increasing economic inequality. It is a nuclear-weapon state that ranks high in military expenditure. It has disputes over Kashmir with its neighbours, Pakistan and China, unresolved since the mid-20th century. Among the socio-economic challenges India faces are gender inequality, child malnutrition, and rising levels of air pollution. India&#x27;s land is megadiverse with four biodiversity hotspots. India&#x27;s wildlife, which has traditionally been viewed with tolerance in its culture, is supported among these forests and elsewhere in protected habitats.

== Etymology ==

According to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (third edition 2009), the name &quot;India&quot; is derived from the Classical Latin &quot;India&quot;, a reference to South Asia and an uncertain region to its east. In turn the name &quot;India&quot; derived successively from Hellenistic Greek &quot;India&quot; (&quot; Ἰνδία&quot;), ancient Greek &quot;Indos&quot; (&quot; Ἰνδός&quot;), Old Persian &quot;Hindush&quot; (an eastern province of the Achaemenid Empire), and ultimately its cognate, the Sanskrit &quot;Sindhu&quot;, or &quot;river&quot;, specifically the Indus River and, by implication, its well-settled southern basin. The ancient Greeks referred to the Indians as &quot;Indoi&quot; (&quot;&quot;), which translates as &quot;The people of the Indus&quot;.

The term &quot;Bharat&quot; (; ), mentioned in both Indian epic poetry and the Constitution of India, is used in its variations by many Indian languages. A modern rendering of the historical name &quot;Bharatavarsha&quot;, which applied originally to North India, &quot;Bharat&quot; gained increased currency from the mid-19th century as a native name for India.

&quot;Hindustan&quot; () is a Middle Persian name for India that became popular by the 13th century, and was used widely since the era of the Mughal Empire. The meaning of &quot;Hindustan&quot; has varied, referring to a region encompassing the northern Indian subcontinent (present-day northern India and Pakistan) or to India in its near entirety.

== History ==
=== Ancient India ===

By 55,000 years ago, the first modern humans, or &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;, had arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa, where they had earlier evolved. The earliest known modern human remains in South Asia date to about 30,000 years ago. After , evidence for domestication of food crops and animals, construction of permanent structures, and storage of agricultural surplus appeared in Mehrgarh and other sites in Balochistan, Pakistan. These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation, the first urban culture in South Asia, which flourished during in Pakistan and western India. Centred around cities such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Dholavira, and Kalibangan, and relying on varied forms of subsistence, the civilisation engaged robustly in crafts production and wide-ranging trade.

During the period , many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic cultures to the Iron Age ones. The Vedas, the oldest scriptures associated with Hinduism, were composed during this period, and historians have analysed these to posit a Vedic culture in the Punjab region and the upper Gangetic Plain. Most historians also consider this period to have encompassed several waves of Indo-Aryan migration into the subcontinent from the north-west. The caste system, which created a hierarchy of priests, warriors, and free peasants, but which excluded indigenous peoples by labelling their occupations impure, arose during this period. On the Deccan Plateau, archaeological evidence from this period suggests the existence of a chiefdom stage of political organisation. In South India, a progression to sedentary life is indicated by the large number of megalithic monuments dating from this period, as well as by nearby traces of agriculture, irrigation tanks, and craft traditions.
In the late Vedic period, around the 6th century BCE, the small states and chiefdoms of the Ganges Plain and the north-western regions had consolidated into 16 major oligarchies and monarchies that were known as the &quot;mahajanapadas&quot;. The emerging urbanisation gave rise to non-Vedic religious movements, two of which became independent religions. Jainism came into prominence during the life of its exemplar, Mahavira. Buddhism, based on the teachings of Gautama Buddha, attracted followers from all social classes excepting the middle class; chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India. In an age of increasing urban wealth, both religions held up renunciation as an ideal, and both established long-lasting monastic traditions. Politically, by the 3rd century BCE, the kingdom of Magadha had annexed or reduced other states to emerge as the Maurya Empire. The empire was once thought to have controlled most of the subcontinent except the far south, but its core regions are now thought to have been separated by large autonomous areas. The Mauryan kings are known as much for their empire-building and determined management of public life as for Ashoka&#x27;s renunciation of militarism and far-flung advocacy of the Buddhist &quot;dhamma&quot;.

The Sangam literature of the Tamil language reveals that, between and , the southern peninsula was ruled by the Cheras, the Cholas, and the Pandyas, dynasties that traded extensively with the Roman Empire and with West and Southeast Asia. In North India, Hinduism asserted patriarchal control within the family, leading to increased subordination of women. By the 4th and 5th centuries, the Gupta Empire had created a complex system of administration and taxation in the greater Ganges Plain; this system became a model for later Indian kingdoms. Under the Guptas, a renewed Hinduism based on devotion, rather than the management of ritual, began to assert itself. This renewal was reflected in a flowering of sculpture and architecture, which found patrons among an urban elite. Classical Sanskrit literature flowered as well, and Indian science, astronomy, medicine, and mathematics made significant advances.

=== Medieval India ===
The Indian early medieval age, from , is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity. When Harsha of Kannauj, who ruled much of the Indo-Gangetic Plain from , attempted to expand southwards, he was defeated by the Chalukya ruler of the Deccan. When his successor attempted to expand eastwards, he was defeated by the Pala king of Bengal. When the Chalukyas attempted to expand southwards, they were defeated by the Pallavas from farther south, who in turn were opposed by the Pandyas and the Cholas from still farther south. No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistently control lands much beyond their core region. During this time, pastoral peoples, whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy, were accommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes. The caste system consequently began to show regional differences.

In the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were created in the Tamil language. They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent. Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised drew citizens in great numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well. Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation. By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in Southeast Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Brunei, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia. Indian merchants, scholars, and sometimes armies were involved in this transmission; Southeast Asians took the initiative as well, with many sojourning in Indian seminaries and translating Buddhist and Hindu texts into their languages.

After the 10th century, Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans, using swift-horse cavalry and raising vast armies united by ethnicity and religion, repeatedly overran South Asia&#x27;s north-western plains, leading eventually to the establishment of the Islamic Delhi Sultanate in 1206. The sultanate was to control much of North India and to make many forays into South India. Although at first disruptive for the Indian elites, the sultanate largely left its vast non-Muslim subject population to its own laws and customs. By repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century, the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia, setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers, learned men, mystics, traders, artists, and artisans from that region into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north. The sultanate&#x27;s raiding and weakening of the regional kingdoms of South India paved the way for the indigenous Vijayanagara Empire. Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate, the empire came to control much of peninsular India, and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards.

=== Early modern India ===
In the early 16th century, northern India, then under mainly Muslim rulers, fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors. The resulting Mughal Empire did not stamp out the local societies it came to rule. Instead, it balanced and pacified them through new administrative practices and diverse and inclusive ruling elites, leading to more systematic, centralised, and uniform rule. Eschewing tribal bonds and Islamic identity, especially under Akbar, the Mughals united their far-flung realms through loyalty, expressed through a Persianised culture, to an emperor who had near-divine status. The Mughal state&#x27;s economic policies, deriving most revenues from agriculture and mandating that taxes be paid in the well-regulated silver currency, caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets. The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India&#x27;s economic expansion, resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture. Newly coherent social groups in northern and western India, such as the Marathas, the Rajputs, and the Sikhs, gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule, which, through collaboration or adversity, gave them both recognition and military experience. Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India. As the empire disintegrated, many among these elites were able to seek and control their own affairs.

By the early 18th century, with the lines between commercial and political dominance being increasingly blurred, a number of European trading companies, including the English East India Company, had established coastal outposts. The East India Company&#x27;s control of the seas, greater resources, and more advanced military training and technology led it to increasingly assert its military strength and caused it to become attractive to a portion of the Indian elite; these factors were crucial in allowing the company to gain control over the Bengal region by 1765 and sideline the other European companies. Its further access to the riches of Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annex or subdue most of India by the 1820s. India was then no longer exporting manufactured goods as it long had, but was instead supplying the British Empire with raw materials. Many historians consider this to be the onset of India&#x27;s colonial period. By this time, with its economic power severely curtailed by the British parliament and having effectively been made an arm of British administration, the East India Company began more consciously to enter non-economic arenas, including education, social reform, and culture.

=== Modern India ===

Historians consider India&#x27;s modern age to have begun sometime between 1848 and 1885. The appointment in 1848 of Lord Dalhousie as Governor General of the East India Company set the stage for changes essential to a modern state. These included the consolidation and demarcation of sovereignty, the surveillance of the population, and the education of citizens. Technological changes—among them, railways, canals, and the telegraph—were introduced not long after their introduction in Europe. However, disaffection with the company also grew during this time and set off the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Fed by diverse resentments and perceptions, including invasive British-style social reforms, harsh land taxes, and summary treatment of some rich landowners and princes, the rebellion rocked many regions of northern and central India and shook the foundations of Company rule. Although the rebellion was suppressed by 1858, it led to the dissolution of the East India Company and the direct administration of India by the British government. Proclaiming a unitary state and a gradual but limited British-style parliamentary system, the new rulers also protected princes and landed gentry as a feudal safeguard against future unrest. In the decades following, public life gradually emerged all over India, leading eventually to the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885.

The rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacks, and many small farmers became dependent on the whims of far-away markets. There was an increase in the number of large-scale famines, and, despite the risks of infrastructure development borne by Indian taxpayers, little industrial employment was generated for Indians. There were also salutary effects: commercial cropping, especially in the newly canalled Punjab, led to increased food production for internal consumption. The railway network provided critical famine relief, notably reduced the cost of moving goods, and helped nascent Indian-owned industry.

After World War I, in which approximately one million Indians served, a new period began. It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislation, by more strident Indian calls for self-rule, and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non-co-operation, of which Mahatma Gandhi would become the leader and enduring symbol. During the 1930s, slow legislative reform was enacted by the British; the Indian National Congress won victories in the resulting elections. The next decade was beset with crises: Indian participation in World War II, the Congress&#x27;s final push for non-co-operation, and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism. All were capped by the advent of independence in 1947, but tempered by the partition of India into two states: India and Pakistan.

Vital to India&#x27;s self-image as an independent nation was its constitution, completed in 1950, which put in place a secular and democratic republic. Economic liberalisation, which began in the 1980s and the collaboration with Soviet Union for technical know-how, has created a large urban middle class, transformed India into one of the world&#x27;s fastest-growing economies, and increased its geopolitical clout. Yet, India is also shaped by seemingly unyielding poverty, both rural and urban; by religious and caste-related violence; by Maoist-inspired Naxalite insurgencies; and by separatism in Jammu and Kashmir and in Northeast India. It has unresolved territorial disputes with China and with Pakistan. India&#x27;s sustained democratic freedoms are unique among the world&#x27;s newer nations; however, in spite of its recent economic successes, freedom from want for its disadvantaged population remains a goal yet to be achieved.

== Geography ==

India accounts for the bulk of the Indian subcontinent, lying atop the Indian tectonic plate, a part of the Indo-Australian Plate. India&#x27;s defining geological processes began 75 million years ago when the Indian Plate, then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, began a north-eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south-west, and later, south and south-east. Simultaneously, the vast Tethyan oceanic crust, to its northeast, began to subduct under the Eurasian Plate. These dual processes, driven by convection in the Earth&#x27;s mantle, both created the Indian Ocean and caused the Indian continental crust eventually to under-thrust Eurasia and to uplift the Himalayas. Immediately south of the emerging Himalayas, plate movement created a vast crescent-shaped trough that rapidly filled with river-borne sediment and now constitutes the Indo-Gangetic Plain. The original Indian plate makes its first appearance above the sediment in the ancient Aravalli range, which extends from the Delhi Ridge in a southwesterly direction. To the west lies the Thar Desert, the eastern spread of which is checked by the Aravallis.

The remaining Indian Plate survives as peninsular India, the oldest and geologically most stable part of India. It extends as far north as the Satpura and Vindhya ranges in central India. These parallel chains run from the Arabian Sea coast in Gujarat in the west to the coal-rich Chota Nagpur Plateau in Jharkhand in the east. To the south, the remaining peninsular landmass, the Deccan Plateau, is flanked on the west and east by coastal ranges known as the Western and Eastern Ghats; the plateau contains the country&#x27;s oldest rock formations, some over one billion years old. Constituted in such fashion, India lies to the north of the equator between 6° 44′ and 35° 30′ north latitude and 68° 7′ and 97° 25′ east longitude.

India&#x27;s coastline measures in length; of this distance, belong to peninsular India and to the Andaman, Nicobar, and Lakshadweep island chains. According to the Indian naval hydrographic charts, the mainland coastline consists of the following: 43% sandy beaches; 11% rocky shores, including cliffs; and 46% mudflats or marshy shores.
Major Himalayan-origin rivers that substantially flow through India include the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, both of which drain into the Bay of Bengal.{{sfn|Dikshit|Schwartzberg|2023|p=15}} Important tributaries of the Ganges include the Yamuna and the Kosi; the latter&#x27;s extremely low gradient, caused by long-term silt deposition, leads to severe floods and course changes.{{sfn|Duff|1993|p = 353}}{{sfn|Basu|Xavier|2017|p=78}} Major peninsular rivers, whose steeper gradients prevent their waters from flooding, include the Godavari, the Mahanadi, the Kaveri, and the Krishna, which also drain into the Bay of Bengal;{{sfn|Dikshit|Schwartzberg|2023|p=16}} and the Narmada and the Tapti, which drain into the Arabian Sea.{{sfn|Dikshit|Schwartzberg|2023|p=17}} Coastal features include the marshy Rann of Kutch of western India and the alluvial Sundarbans delta of eastern India; the latter is shared with Bangladesh.{{sfn|Dikshit|Schwartzberg|2023|p=12}} India has two archipelagos: the Lakshadweep, coral atolls off India&#x27;s south-western coast; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea.{{sfn|Dikshit|Schwartzberg|2023|p=13}}

Indian climate is strongly influenced by the Himalayas and the Thar Desert, both of which drive the economically and culturally pivotal summer and winter monsoons.{{sfn|Chang|1967|pp = 391–394}} The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in, keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes.{{sfn|Posey|1994|p = 118}}{{sfn|Wolpert|2003|p = 4}} The Thar Desert plays a crucial role in attracting the moisture-laden south-west summer monsoon winds that, between June and October, provide the majority of India&#x27;s rainfall.{{sfn|Chang|1967|pp = 391–394}} Four major climatic groupings predominate in India: tropical wet, tropical dry, subtropical humid, and montane.{{sfn|Heitzman|Worden|1996|p=97}}

Temperatures in India have risen by {{convert|0.7|C-change|1|abbr=on}} between 1901 and 2018. Climate change in India is often thought to be the cause. The retreat of Himalayan glaciers has adversely affected the flow rate of the major Himalayan rivers, including the Ganges and the Brahmaputra. According to some current projections, the number and severity of droughts in India will have markedly increased by the end of the present century.

== Biodiversity ==
{{Main|Forestry in India|Wildlife of India}}

India is a megadiverse country, a term employed for 17 countries that display high biological diversity and contain many species exclusively indigenous, or endemic, to them. India is the habitat for 8.6% of all mammals, 13.7% of bird species, 7.9% of reptile species, 6% of amphibian species, 12.2% of fish species, and 6.0% of all flowering plant species. Fully a third of Indian plant species are endemic.{{sfn|Basak|1983|p = 24}} India also contains four of the world&#x27;s 34 biodiversity hotspots, or regions that display significant habitat loss in the presence of high endemism.{{efn|A biodiversity hotspot is a biogeographical region which has more than 1,500 vascular plant species, but less than 30% of its primary habitat.}}

India&#x27;s most dense forests, such as the tropical moist forest of the Andaman Islands, the Western Ghats, and Northeast India, occupy approximately 3% of its land area. &quot;Moderately dense forest&quot;, whose canopy density is between 40% and 70%, occupies 9.39% of India&#x27;s land area. It predominates in the temperate coniferous forest of the Himalayas, the moist deciduous &quot;sal&quot; forest of eastern India, and the dry deciduous teak forest of central and southern India.{{sfn|Tritsch|2001|pp=11–12}} India has two natural zones of thorn forest, one in the Deccan Plateau, immediately east of the Western Ghats, and the other in the western part of the Indo-Gangetic plain, now turned into rich agricultural land by irrigation, its features no longer visible.{{sfn|Tritsch|2001|p=12|ps=India has two natural zones of thorn forest, one in the rain shadow area of the Deccan Plateau east of the Western Ghats, and the other in the western part of the Indo-Gangetic plain. Growth is limited only by moisture availability in these areas, so with irrigation the fertile alluvial soil of Punjab and Haryana has been turned into India&#x27;s prime agricultural area. Much of the thorn forest covering the plains probably had savannah-like features now no longer visible.}}

Among the Indian subcontinent&#x27;s notable indigenous trees are the astringent &quot;Azadirachta indica&quot;, or &quot;neem&quot;, which is widely used in rural Indian herbal medicine, and the luxuriant &quot;Ficus religiosa&quot;, or &quot;peepul&quot;, which is displayed on the ancient seals of Mohenjo-daro, and under which the Buddha is recorded in the Pali canon to have sought enlightenment.

Many Indian species have descended from those of Gondwana, the southern supercontinent from which India separated more than 100 million years ago.{{sfn|Crame|Owen|2002|p = 142}} India&#x27;s subsequent collision with Eurasia set off a mass exchange of species. However, volcanism and climatic changes later caused the extinction of many endemic Indian forms.{{sfn|Karanth|2006}} Still later, mammals entered India from Asia through two zoogeographic passes flanking the Himalayas.{{sfn|Tritsch|2001|p=14}} This had the effect of lowering endemism among India&#x27;s mammals, which stands at 12.6%, contrasting with 45.8% among reptiles and 55.8% among amphibians. Among endemics are the vulnerable hooded leaf monkey and the threatened Beddome&#x27;s toad of the Western Ghats.
India contains 172 IUCN-designated threatened animal species, or 2.9% of endangered forms.{{sfn|Mace|1994|p = 4}} These include the endangered Bengal tiger and the Ganges river dolphin. Critically endangered species include the gharial, a crocodilian; the great Indian bustard; and the Indian white-rumped vulture, which has become nearly extinct by having ingested the carrion of diclofenac-treated cattle. Before they were extensively used for agriculture and cleared for human settlement, the thorn forests of Punjab were mingled at intervals with open grasslands that were grazed by large herds of blackbuck preyed on by the Asiatic cheetah; the blackbuck, no longer extant in Punjab, is now severely endangered in India, and the cheetah is extinct.{{sfn|Tritsch|2001|p=15|ps=Before it was so heavily settled and intensively exploited, the Punjab was dominated by thorn forest interspersed by rolling grasslands which were grazed on by millions of Blackbuck, accompanied by their dominant predator, the Cheetah. Always keen hunters, the Moghul princes kept tame cheetahs which were used to chase and bring down the Blackbuck. Today the Cheetah is extinct in India and the severely endangered Blackbuck no longer exists in the Punjab.}} The pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered Indian wildlife. In response, the system of national parks and protected areas, first established in 1935, was expanded substantially. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act{{sfn|Ministry of Environment and Forests 1972}} and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial wilderness; the Forest Conservation Act was enacted in 1980 and amendments added in 1988.{{sfn|Department of Environment and Forests|1988}} India hosts more than five hundred wildlife sanctuaries and eighteen{{Nbsp}}biosphere reserves, four of which are part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves; seventy-five wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention.

== Politics and government ==

=== Politics ===
{{Main|Politics of India}}
{{multiple image
| perrow = 1
| total_width = 220
| image_style = border:none;
| align = right
| image1 = Rajagopal speaking to 25,000 people, Janadesh 2007, India.jpg
| caption1 = As part of Janadesh 2007, 25,000 pro-land reform landless people in Madhya Pradesh listen to Rajagopal P. V.
| direction = 
| alt1 = 

A parliamentary republic with a multi-party system,{{sfn|Burnell|Calvert|1999|p = 125}} India has six{{Nbsp}}recognised national parties, including the Indian National Congress (INC) and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and more than 50{{Nbsp}}regional parties.{{sfn|Election Commission of India}} The Congress is considered center in Indian political culture, and the BJP right-wing.{{sfn|Malik|Singh|1992|pp=318–336}}{{sfn|Banerjee|2005|p=3118}} For most of the period between 1950—when India first became a republic—and the late 1980s, the Congress held a majority in the Parliament. Since then, however, it has increasingly shared the political stage with the BJP,{{sfn|Sarkar|2007|p=84}} as well as with powerful regional parties which have often forced the creation of multi-party coalition governments at the center.{{sfn|Chander|2004|p=117}}

In the Republic of India&#x27;s first three general elections, in 1951, 1957, and 1962, the Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru-led Congress won easy victories. On Nehru&#x27;s death in 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri briefly became prime minister; he was succeeded, after his own unexpected death in 1966, by Nehru&#x27;s daughter Indira Gandhi, who went on to lead the Congress to election victories in 1967 and 1971. Following public discontent with the state of emergency she declared in 1975, the Congress was voted out of power in 1977; the then-new Janata Party, which had opposed the emergency, was voted in. Its government lasted just over two years. There were two prime ministers during this period; Morarji Desai and Charan Singh. Voted back into power in 1980, the Congress saw a change in leadership in 1984, when Indira Gandhi was assassinated; she was succeeded by her son Rajiv Gandhi, who won an easy victory in the general elections later that year. The Congress was voted out again in 1989 when a National Front coalition, led by the newly formed Janata Dal in alliance with the Left Front, won the elections; that government too proved relatively short-lived, lasting just under two years. There were two prime ministers during this period; V.P. Singh and Chandra Shekhar.{{sfn|Bhambhri|1992|pp=118, 143}} Elections were held again in 1991; no party won an absolute majority. The Congress, as the largest single party, was able to form a minority government led by P. V. Narasimha Rao.

{{multiple image
| perrow = 1
| total_width = 220
| image_style = border:none;
| align = left
| image1 = Barack Obama at Parliament of India in New Delhi addressing Joint session of both houses 2010.jpg
| caption1 = US president Barack Obama addresses the members of the Parliament of India in New Delhi in November 2010.

A two-year period of political turmoil followed the general election of 1996. Several short-lived alliances shared power at the centre. The BJP formed a government briefly in 1996; it was followed by two comparatively long-lasting United Front coalitions, which depended on external support. There were two prime ministers during this period; H.D. Deve Gowda and I.K. Gujral. In 1998, the BJP was able to form a successful coalition, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA). Led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the NDA became the first non-Congress, coalition government to complete a five-year term.{{sfn|Dunleavy|Diwakar|Dunleavy|2007}} Again in the 2004 Indian general elections, no party won an absolute majority, but the Congress emerged as the largest single party, forming another successful coalition: the United Progressive Alliance (UPA). It had the support of left-leaning parties and MPs who opposed the BJP. The UPA returned to power in the 2009 general election with increased numbers, and it no longer required external support from India&#x27;s communist parties.{{sfn|Kulke|Rothermund|2004|p = 384}} That year, Manmohan Singh became the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru in 1957 and 1962 to be re-elected to a consecutive five-year term.{{sfn|Business Standard|2009}} In the 2014 general election, the BJP became the first political party since 1984 to win a majority and govern without the support of other parties. In the 2019 general election, the BJP was victorious again with majority. In the 2024 general election, the BJP failed to achieve majority and the BJP-led NDA coalition formed the government. Narendra Modi, a former chief minister of Gujarat, is serving as the 14th Prime Minister of India in his third term since May 26, 2014.

=== Government ===
{{Main|Government of India|Constitution of India}}
{{multiple image|perrow=1|total_width=220|image_style = border:none;| align = right|image1=Rashtrapati Bhavan Wide New Delhi India.jpg|caption1=Rashtrapati Bhavan, the official residence of the President of India, was designed by British architects Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker for the Viceroy of India, and constructed between 1911 and 1931 during the British Raj.}}

India is a federation with a parliamentary system governed under the Constitution of India—the country&#x27;s supreme legal document. It is a constitutional republic. Federalism in India defines the power distribution between the union and the states. The Constitution of India, which came into effect on 26 January 1950,{{sfn|Pylee|2003a|p = 4}} originally stated India to be a &quot;sovereign, democratic republic;&quot; this characterisation was amended in 1971 to &quot;a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic&quot;.{{sfn|Dutt|1998|p = 421}} India&#x27;s form of government, traditionally described as &quot;quasi-federal&quot; with a strong centre and weak states,{{sfn|Wheare|1980|p = 28}} has grown increasingly federal since the late 1990s as a result of political, economic, and social changes.{{sfn|Echeverri-Gent|2002|pp = 19–20}}{{sfn|Sinha|2004|p = 25}}

The Government of India comprises three branches: the Executive, Legislature, and Judiciary. The President of India is the ceremonial head of state,{{sfn|Sharma|2007|p = 31}} who is elected indirectly for a five-year term by an electoral college comprising members of national and state legislatures.{{sfn|Sharma|2007|p = 138}}{{sfn|Gledhill|1970|p = 112}} The Prime Minister of India is the head of government and exercises most executive power.{{sfn|Sharma|1950}} Appointed by the president,{{sfn|Sharma|2007|p = 162}} the prime minister is by convention supported by the party or political alliance having a majority of seats in the lower house of parliament.{{sfn|Sharma|1950}} The executive of the Indian government consists of the president, the vice-president, and the Union Council of Ministers—with the cabinet being its executive committee—headed by the prime minister. Any minister holding a portfolio must be a member of one of the houses of parliament.{{sfn|Sharma|2007|p = 31}} In the Indian parliamentary system, the executive is subordinate to the legislature; the prime minister and their council are directly responsible to the lower house of the parliament. Civil servants act as permanent executives and all decisions of the executive are implemented by them.{{sfn|Mathew|2003|p = 524}}

The legislature of India is the bicameral parliament. Operating under a Westminster-style parliamentary system, it comprises an upper house called the Rajya Sabha (Council of States) and a lower house called the Lok Sabha (House of the People).{{sfn|Gledhill|1970|p = 127}} The Rajya Sabha is a permanent body of 245{{Nbsp}}members who serve staggered six-year terms with elections every 2 years.{{sfn|Sharma|2007|p = 161}} Most are elected indirectly by the state and union territorial legislatures in numbers proportional to their state&#x27;s share of the national population.{{sfn|Sharma|2007|p = 162}} The Lok Sabha&#x27;s 543{{Nbsp}}members are elected directly by popular vote among citizens aged at least 18;{{sfn|Madhavan|2024|pp=17-18}} they represent single-member constituencies for five-year{{Nbsp}}terms.{{sfn|Sharma|2007|p = 143}} The Indian constitution historically allowed for the nomination of Anglo-Indians to two seats in the Lok Sabha; this provision was removed in 2019.{{sfn|Madhavan|2024|pp=17-18}} A number of seats from each state are reserved for candidates from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population within that state.{{sfn|Madhavan|2024|pp=17-18}}

India has a three-tier{{Nbsp}}unitary independent judiciary{{sfn|Neuborne|2003|p = 478}} comprising the supreme court, headed by the Chief Justice of India, 25{{Nbsp}}high courts, and a large number of trial courts.{{sfn|Neuborne|2003|p = 478}} The supreme court has original jurisdiction over cases involving fundamental rights and over disputes between states and the centre and has appellate jurisdiction over the high courts.{{sfn|Sharma|2007|pp = 238, 255}} It has the power to both strike down union or state laws which contravene the constitution{{sfn|Sripati|1998|pp=423–424}} and invalidate any government action it deems unconstitutional.{{sfn|Pylee|2003b|p = 314}}

=== Administrative divisions ===
{{Main|Administrative divisions of India}}
{{See also|Political integration of India}}

India is a federal union comprising 28 states and 8 union territories.{{sfn|Library of Congress|2004}} All states, as well as the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Puducherry and the National Capital Territory of Delhi, have elected legislatures and governments following the Westminster system of governance. The remaining five union territories are directly ruled by the central government through appointed administrators. In 1956, under the States Reorganisation Act, states were reorganised on a linguistic basis.{{sfn|Sharma|2007|p = 49}} There are over a quarter of a million local government bodies at city, town, block, district and village levels.
{{Indian states and territories image map|image-width=330}}
==== States ====
{{columns-list |colwidth=18em|
# Andhra Pradesh
# Arunachal Pradesh
# Assam
# Bihar
# Chhattisgarh
# Goa
# Gujarat
# Haryana
# Himachal Pradesh
# Jharkhand
# Karnataka
# Kerala
# Madhya Pradesh
# Maharashtra
# Manipur
# Meghalaya
# Mizoram
# Nagaland
# Odisha
# Punjab
# Rajasthan
# Sikkim
# Tamil Nadu
# Telangana
# Tripura
# Uttar Pradesh
# Uttarakhand
# West Bengal

==== Union territories ====
{{columns-list |colwidth=18em|
{{ordered list |type=upper-alpha
| Andaman and Nicobar Islands
| Chandigarh
| Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu
| Jammu and Kashmir
| Ladakh
| Lakshadweep
| National Capital Territory of Delhi
| Puducherry
}}

== Foreign, economic, and strategic relations ==
{{Main|Foreign relations of India|Indian Armed Forces}}
{{multiple image|perrow=1|total_width=220
|image_style = border:none;
|align = right
|image1=Jawaharlal Nehru, Nasser and Tito at the Conference of Non-Aligned Nations held in Belgrade.jpg|caption1=During the 1950s and 60s, India played a pivotal role in the Non-Aligned Movement. From left to right: Gamal Abdel Nasser of United Arab Republic (now Egypt), Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia and Jawaharlal Nehru in Belgrade, September 1961.
In the 1950s, India strongly supported decolonisation in Africa and Asia and played a leading role in the Non-Aligned Movement.{{sfn|Rothermund|2000|pp = 48, 227}} After initially cordial relations with neighbouring China, India went to war with China in 1962 and was widely thought to have been humiliated. This was followed by another military conflict in 1967 in which India successfully repelled Chinese attack. India has had tense relations with neighbouring Pakistan; the two nations have gone to war four times: in 1947, 1965, 1971, and 1999. Three of these wars were fought over the disputed territory of Kashmir, while the third, the 1971 war, followed from India&#x27;s support for the independence of Bangladesh.{{sfn|Gilbert|2002|pp = 486–487}} In the late 1980s, the Indian military twice intervened abroad at the invitation of the host country: a peace-keeping operation in Sri Lanka between 1987 and 1990; and an armed intervention to prevent a 1988 coup d&#x27;état attempt in the Maldives. After the 1965 war with Pakistan, India began to pursue close military and economic ties with the Soviet Union; by the late 1960s, the Soviet Union was its largest arms supplier.{{sfn|Sharma|1999|p=56}}

Aside from its ongoing special relationship with Russia, India has wide-ranging defence relations with Israel and France. In recent years, it has played key roles in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and the World Trade Organization. The nation has provided 100,000 military and police personnel to serve in 35 UN peacekeeping operations across four continents. It participates in the East Asia Summit, the G8+5, and other multilateral forums.{{sfn|Alford|2008}} India has close economic ties with countries in South America, Asia, and Africa; it pursues a &quot;Look East&quot; policy that seeks to strengthen partnerships with the ASEAN nations, Japan, and South Korea that revolve around many issues, but especially those involving economic investment and regional security.{{sfn|Ghosh|2009|pp = 282–289}}{{sfn|Sisodia|Naidu|2005|pp = 1–8}}

{{multiple image|perrow = 1|total_width = 220|upright =
| align = left
| image_style = border:none;
| image1 = Indian Air Force contingent as a part of the Bastille Day Parade of France, in Paris on July 14, 2009.jpg
| caption1 = The Indian Air Force contingent marching at the 221st Bastille Day military parade in Paris, on 14 July 2009. The parade at which India was the foreign guest was led by India&#x27;s oldest regiment, the Maratha Light Infantry, founded in 1768.

China&#x27;s nuclear test of 1964, as well as its repeated threats to intervene in support of Pakistan in the 1965 war, convinced India to develop nuclear weapons.{{sfn|Perkovich|2001|pp = 60–86, 106–125}} India conducted its first nuclear weapons test in 1974 and carried out additional underground testing in 1998. Despite criticism and military sanctions, India has signed neither the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty nor the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, considering both to be flawed and discriminatory.{{sfn|Kumar|2010}} India maintains a &quot;no first use&quot; nuclear policy and is developing a nuclear triad capability as a part of its &quot;Minimum Credible Deterrence&quot; doctrine.{{sfn|Nair|2007}}{{sfn|Pandit|2009}} It is developing a ballistic missile defence shield and, a fifth-generation fighter jet.{{sfn|Pandit|2015}} Other indigenous military projects involve the design and implementation of &quot;Vikrant&quot;-class aircraft carriers and &quot;Arihant&quot;-class nuclear submarines. 

India is estimated to possess up to 172 nuclear warheads, and is considered to be producing both highly enriched uranium (HEU) and weapons-grade plutonium, with its HEU production assumed to be focused on its growing number of nuclear-powered vessels&#x27; and submarines&#x27; fuels. Kristensen &quot;et al.&quot; of Nuclear Information Project with the Federation of American Scientists estimate that India is operating eight nuclear-capable systems as of 2024, including aircraft, land-based and sea-based ballistic missile systems, with most of its programs in development thought to be nearing &quot;completion and to be fielded with the armed forces soon&quot;.

Since the end of the Cold War, India has increased its economic, strategic, and military co-operation with the United States and the European Union.{{sfn|European Union 2008}} In 2008, a civilian nuclear agreement was signed between India and the United States. Although India possessed nuclear weapons at the time and was not a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, it received waivers from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Suppliers Group, ending earlier restrictions on India&#x27;s nuclear technology and commerce. As a consequence, India became the sixth de facto nuclear weapons state.{{sfn|The Times of India 2008}} India subsequently signed co-operation agreements involving civilian nuclear energy with Russia,{{sfn|British Broadcasting Corporation 2009}} France,{{sfn|Rediff 2008 a}} the United Kingdom,{{sfn|Reuters|2010}} and Canada.{{sfn|Curry|2010}}

{{multiple image|perrow=1|total_width=220
|image_style = border:none;
|align = right
||image1=Modi Nieto Mexico June 2016.jpg|caption1=Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India (left, background) in talks with President Enrique Peña Nieto of Mexico during a visit to Mexico, 2016
The President of India is the supreme commander of the nation&#x27;s armed forces; with 1.45 million active troops, they compose the world&#x27;s second-largest military. It comprises the Indian Army, the Indian Navy, the Indian Air Force, and the Indian Coast Guard.{{sfn|Central Intelligence Agency}} The official Indian defence budget for 2011 was US$36.03 billion, or 1.83% of GDP.{{sfn|Behera|2011}} Defence expenditure was pegged at US$70.12 billion for fiscal year 2022–23 and, increased 9.8% than previous fiscal year.{{sfn|Pandit|2022}} India is the world&#x27;s second-largest arms importer; between 2016 and 2020, it accounted for 9.5% of the total global arms imports.{{sfn|Pandit|2021}} Much of the military expenditure was focused on defence against Pakistan and countering growing Chinese influence in the Indian Ocean.{{sfn|Miglani|2011}} In May 2017, the Indian Space Research Organisation launched the South Asia Satellite, a gift from India to its neighbouring SAARC countries. In October 2018, India signed a US$5.43 billion (over {{INR|link=yes}}400 billion) agreement with Russia to procure four S-400 Triumf surface-to-air missile defence systems, Russia&#x27;s most advanced long-range missile defence system.

== Economy ==
{{Main article|Economy of India}}

{{multiple image|direction= vertical|width= 220
| align = right
| image_style = border:none;
| image1 = Plowing the land in India - modern and traditional.jpg
| caption1 = A farmer in northwestern Karnataka ploughs his field with a tractor even as another in a field beyond does the same with a pair of oxen. In 2019, 43% of India&#x27;s total workforce was employed in agriculture.
| image3 = Women at work, Gujarat (cropped).jpg
| caption3 = Women tend to a recently planted rice field in Junagadh district in Gujarat. 55% of India&#x27;s female workforce was employed in agriculture in 2019.
| image2 = ILRI, Stevie Mann - Villager and calf share milk from cow in Rajasthan, India.jpg
| caption2 = India is the world&#x27;s largest producer of milk, with the largest population of cattle. In 2018, nearly 80% of India&#x27;s milk was sourced from small farms with herd size between one and two, the milk harvested by hand milking.

According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Indian economy in 2024 was nominally worth $3.94 trillion; it was the fifth-largest economy by market exchange rates and is, at around $15.0 trillion, the third-largest by purchasing power parity (PPP). With its average annual GDP growth rate of 5.8% over the past two decades, and reaching 6.1% during 2011–2012,{{sfn|International Monetary Fund 2011|p = 2}} India is one of the world&#x27;s fastest-growing economies.{{sfn|Nayak|Goldar|Agrawal|2010|p = xxv}} However, due to its low GDP per capita—which ranks 136th in the world in nominal per capita income and 125th in per capita income adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP)—the vast majority of Indians fall into the low-income group.{{sfn|International Monetary Fund}} Until 1991, all Indian governments followed protectionist policies that were influenced by socialist economics. Widespread state intervention and regulation largely walled the economy off from the outside world. An acute balance of payments crisis in 1991 forced the nation to liberalise its economy;{{sfn|Wolpert|2003|p = xiv}} since then, it has moved increasingly towards a free-market system{{sfn|Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2007}}{{sfn|Gargan|1992}} by emphasising both foreign trade and direct investment inflows.{{sfn|Alamgir|2008|pp = 23, 97}} India has been a member of World Trade Organization since 1 January 1995.{{sfn|World Trade Organization 1995}}

The 522-million-worker Indian labour force is the world&#x27;s second largest, {{As of|2017|lc=y}}.{{sfn|Central Intelligence Agency}} The service sector makes up 55.6% of GDP, the industrial sector 26.3% and the agricultural sector 18.1%. India&#x27;s foreign exchange remittances of US$100 billion in 2022, highest in the world, were contributed to its economy by 32 million Indians working in foreign countries. Major agricultural products include rice, wheat, oilseed, cotton, jute, tea, sugarcane, and potatoes.{{sfn|Library of Congress|2004}} Major industries include textiles, telecommunications, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, food processing, steel, transport equipment, cement, mining, petroleum, machinery, and software.{{sfn|Library of Congress|2004}} In 2006, the share of external trade in India&#x27;s GDP stood at 24%, up from 6% in 1985.{{sfn|Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2007}} In 2008, India&#x27;s share of world trade was 1.7%; In 2021, India was the world&#x27;s ninth-largest importer and the sixteenth-largest exporter. Major exports include petroleum products, textile goods, jewellery, software, engineering goods, chemicals, and manufactured leather goods.{{sfn|Library of Congress|2004}} Major imports include crude oil, machinery, gems, fertiliser, and chemicals.{{sfn|Library of Congress|2004}} Between 2001 and 2011, the contribution of petrochemical and engineering goods to total exports grew from 14% to 42%.{{sfn|Economist 2011}} India was the world&#x27;s second-largest textile exporter after China in the 2013 calendar year.{{sfn|Economic Times 2014}}

Averaging an economic growth rate of 7.5% for several years prior to 2007,{{sfn|Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2007}} India has more than doubled its hourly wage rates during the first decade of the 21st century.{{sfn|Bonner|2010}} Some 431 million Indians have left poverty since 1985; India&#x27;s middle classes are projected to number around 580 million by 2030.{{sfn|Farrell|Beinhocker|2007}} Though ranking 68th in global competitiveness, {{As of|2010|lc=y}}, India ranks 17th in financial market sophistication, 24th in the banking sector, 44th in business sophistication, and 39th in innovation, ahead of several advanced economies.{{sfn|Schwab|2010}} With seven of the world&#x27;s top 15 information technology outsourcing companies based in India, {{As of|2009|lc=y}}, the country is viewed as the second-most favourable outsourcing destination after the United States.{{sfn|Sheth|2009}} India is ranked 39th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024. In 2023, India&#x27;s consumer market was the world&#x27;s fifth largest.

Driven by growth, India&#x27;s nominal GDP per capita increased steadily from US$308 in 1991, when economic liberalisation began, to US$1,380 in 2010, to an estimated US$2,731 in 2024. It is expected to grow to US$3,264 by 2026. However, it has remained lower than those of other Asian developing countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, and is expected to remain so in the near future.

{{multiple image
| perrow = 1
| total_width = 500
| align = left
| image_style = border:none;
| image1 = Bangalore Panorama edit1.jpg
| caption1 = A panorama of Bengaluru, the centre of India&#x27;s software development economy. In the 1980s, when the first multinational corporations began to set up centres in India, they chose Bengaluru (then called Bangalore) because of the large pool of skilled graduates in the area, in turn due to the many science and engineering colleges in the surrounding region.

According to a 2011 PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) report, India&#x27;s GDP at purchasing power parity could overtake that of the United States by 2045.{{sfn|Hawksworth|Tiwari|2011}} During the next four decades, Indian GDP is expected to grow at an annualised average of 8%, making it potentially the world&#x27;s fastest-growing major economy until 2050.{{sfn|Hawksworth|Tiwari|2011}} The report highlights key growth factors: a young and rapidly growing working-age population; growth in the manufacturing sector because of rising education and engineering skill levels; and sustained growth of the consumer market driven by a rapidly growing middle-class.{{sfn|Hawksworth|Tiwari|2011}} The World Bank cautions that, for India to achieve its economic potential, it must continue to focus on public sector reform, transport infrastructure, agricultural and rural development, removal of labour regulations, education, energy security, and public health and nutrition.

According to the Worldwide Cost of Living Report 2017 released by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) which was created by comparing more than 400 individual prices across 160 products and services, four of the cheapest cities were in India: Bengaluru (3rd), Mumbai (5th), Chennai (5th) and New Delhi (8th).{{sfn|Economist 2017}}

=== Industries ===
{{multiple image
| perrow = 1
| total_width = 220
| image_style = border:none;
| align = right
| image1 = Cherry Resort inside Temi Tea Garden, Namchi, Sikkim.jpg
| caption1 = A tea garden in Sikkim. India, the world&#x27;s second-largest producer of tea, is a nation of one billion tea drinkers, who consume 70% of India&#x27;s tea output.


India&#x27;s telecommunication industry is the second-largest in the world with over 1.2 billion subscribers. It contributes 6.5% to India&#x27;s GDP. After the third quarter of 2017, India surpassed the US to become the second-largest smartphone market in the world after China.

The Indian automotive industry, the world&#x27;s second-fastest growing, increased domestic sales by 26% during 2009–2010,{{sfn|Business Line 2010}} and exports by 36% during 2008–2009.{{sfn|Express India 2009}} In 2022, India became the world&#x27;s third-largest vehicle market after China and the United States, surpassing Japan. At the end of 2011, the Indian IT industry employed 2.8 million professionals, generated revenues close to US$100 billion equalling 7.5% of Indian GDP, and contributed 26% of India&#x27;s merchandise exports.{{sfn|Nasscom 2011–2012}}

The pharmaceutical industry in India emerged as a global player. As of 2021, with 3000 pharmaceutical companies and 10,500 manufacturing units, India is the world&#x27;s third-largest pharmaceutical producer, largest producer of generic medicines and supply up to 50–60% of global vaccines demand, these all contribute up to {{USD}}24.44 billions in exports and India&#x27;s local pharmaceutical market is estimated up to {{USD}}42 billion. India is among the top 12 biotech destinations in the world.{{sfn|Yep|2011}} The Indian biotech industry grew by 15.1% in 2012–2013, increasing its revenues from {{INR}}204.4 billion (Indian rupees) to {{INR}}235.24 billion (US$3.94 billion at June 2013 exchange rates).

=== Energy ===
{{Main|Energy in India|Energy policy of India}}
India&#x27;s capacity to generate electrical power is 300 gigawatts, of which 42 gigawatts is renewable. The country&#x27;s usage of coal is a major cause of greenhouse gas emissions by India but its renewable energy is competing strongly. India emits about 7% of global greenhouse gas emissions. This equates to about 2.5 tons of carbon dioxide per person per year, which is half the world average. Increasing access to electricity and clean cooking with liquefied petroleum gas have been priorities for energy in India.

=== Socio-economic challenges ===
{{multiple image
| perrow = 1
| total_width = 220
| align = right
| image_style = border:none;
| image1 = Female health workers in India (34332433890).jpg
| caption1= Health workers about to begin another day of immunisation against infectious diseases in 2006. Eight years later, and three years after India&#x27;s last case of polio, the World Health Organization declared India to be polio-free.
| direction =
| alt1 =
Despite economic growth during recent decades, India continues to face socio-economic challenges. In 2006, India contained the largest number of people living below the World Bank&#x27;s international poverty line of US$1.25 per day. The proportion decreased from 60% in 1981 to 42% in 2005. Under the World Bank&#x27;s later revised poverty line, it was 21% in 2011.{{efn|In 2015, the World Bank raised its international poverty line to $1.90 per day.}} 30.7% of India&#x27;s children under the age of five are underweight. According to a Food and Agriculture Organization report in 2015, 15% of the population is undernourished. The Midday Meal Scheme attempts to lower these rates.{{sfn|Drèze|Goyal|2008|p = 46}}

A 2018 Walk Free Foundation report estimated that nearly 8 million people in India were living in different forms of modern slavery, such as bonded labour, child labour, human trafficking, and forced begging, among others. According to the 2011 census, there were 10.1 million child labourers in the country, a decline of 2.6 million from 12.6 million in 2001.

Since 1991, economic inequality between India&#x27;s states has consistently grown: the per-capita net state domestic product of the richest states in 2007 was 3.2 times that of the poorest.{{sfn|Pal|Ghosh|2007}} Corruption in India is perceived to have decreased. According to the Corruption Perceptions Index, India ranked 78th out of 180 countries in 2018 with a score of 41 out of 100, an improvement from 85th in 2014.

== Demographics, languages, and religion ==
{{Main|Demographics of India|Languages of India|Religion in India}}
{{See also|South Asian ethnic groups}}
{{multiple image|perrow = 1|total_width = 220
| align = right
| title = India by language
| image1 = South Asian Language Families.jpg|caption1 = The language families of South Asia

With an estimated 1,428,627,663 residents in 2023, India is the world&#x27;s most populous country. 1,210,193,422 residents were reported in the 2011 provisional census report.{{sfn|Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India|p=160}} Its population grew by 17.64% from 2001 to 2011,{{sfn|Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India|p=165}} compared to 21.54% growth in the previous decade (1991–2001).{{sfn|Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India|p=165}} The human sex ratio, according to the 2011 census, is 940 females per 1,000 males.{{sfn|Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India|p=160}} The median age was 28.7 in 2020.{{sfn|Central Intelligence Agency}} The first post-colonial census, conducted in 1951, counted 361 million people. Medical advances made in the last 50 years as well as increased agricultural productivity brought about by the &quot;Green Revolution&quot; have caused India&#x27;s population to grow rapidly.{{sfn|Rorabacher|2010|pp = 35–39}}

The life expectancy in India is at 70 years—71.5 years for women, 68.7 years for men.{{sfn|Central Intelligence Agency}} There are around 93 physicians per 100,000 people. Migration from rural to urban areas has been an important dynamic in India&#x27;s recent history. The number of people living in urban areas grew by 31.2% between 1991 and 2001.{{sfn|Garg|2005}} Yet, in 2001, over 70% still lived in rural areas.{{sfn|Dyson|Visaria|2005|pp = 115–129}}{{sfn|Ratna|2007|pp = 271–272}} The level of urbanisation increased further from 27.81% in the 2001 Census to 31.16% in the 2011 Census. The slowing down of the overall population growth rate was due to the sharp decline in the growth rate in rural areas since 1991.{{sfn|Chandramouli|2011}} According to the 2011 census, there are 53 million-plus urban agglomerations in India; among them Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad, in decreasing order by population. The literacy rate in 2011 was 74.04%: 65.46% among females and 82.14% among males.{{sfn|Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India|p=163}} The rural-urban literacy gap, which was 21.2 percentage points in 2001, dropped to 16.1 percentage points in 2011. The improvement in the rural literacy rate is twice that of urban areas.{{sfn|Chandramouli|2011}} Kerala is the most literate state with 93.91% literacy; while Bihar the least with 63.82%.{{sfn|Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India|p=163}}

{{multiple image|perrow=1|total_width=220|image_style = border:none;| align = left |image1=Interior of San Thome Basilica.jpg|caption1=The interior of San Thome Basilica, Chennai, Tamil Nadu. Christianity is believed to have been introduced to India by the late 2nd century by Syriac-speaking Christians.}}

Among speakers of the Indian languages, 74% speak Indo-Aryan languages, the easternmost branch of the Indo-European languages; 24% speak Dravidian languages, indigenous to South Asia and spoken widely before the spread of Indo-Aryan languages and 2% speak Austroasiatic languages or the Sino-Tibetan languages. India has no national language.{{sfn|Dharwadker|2010|pp = 168–194, 186}} Hindi, with the largest number of speakers, is the official language of the government.{{sfn|Ottenheimer|2008|p = 303}}{{sfn|Mallikarjun|2004}} English is used extensively in business and administration and has the status of a &quot;subsidiary official language&quot;;{{sfn|Ministry of Home Affairs 1960}} it is important in education, especially as a medium of higher education. Each state and union territory has one or more official languages, and the constitution recognises in particular 22 &quot;scheduled languages&quot;.

The 2011 census reported the religion in India with the largest number of followers was Hinduism (79.80% of the population), followed by Islam (14.23%); the remaining were Christianity (2.30%), Sikhism (1.72%), Buddhism (0.70%), Jainism (0.36%) and others{{efn|name=remaining religions}} (0.9%). India has the third-largest Muslim population—the largest for a non-Muslim majority country.

== Culture ==
{{Main|Culture of India}}
{{multiple image|perrow=1|total_width=220|image_style = border:none;|align = right |image1=Sikh pilgrim at the Golden Temple (Harmandir Sahib) in Amritsar, India.jpg|caption1=A Sikh pilgrim at the Harmandir Sahib, or Golden Temple, in Amritsar, Punjab }}
Indian cultural history spans more than {{nowrap|4,500 years}}.{{sfn|Kuiper|2010|p = 15}} During the Vedic period ({{Circa|{{BCE|1700}}|{{BCE|500}}}}), the foundations of Hindu philosophy, mythology, theology and literature were laid, and many beliefs and practices which still exist today, such as &quot;dhárma&quot;, &quot;kárma&quot;, &quot;yóga&quot;, and &quot;mokṣa&quot;, were established.{{sfn|Kuiper|2010|p = 86}} India is notable for its religious diversity, with Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Islam, Christianity, and Jainism among the nation&#x27;s major religions.{{sfn|Heehs|2002|pp = 2–5}} The predominant religion, Hinduism, has been shaped by various historical schools of thought, including those of the &quot;Upanishads&quot;,{{sfn|Deutsch|1969|pp = 3, 78}} the &quot;Yoga Sutras&quot;, the &quot;Bhakti&quot; movement,{{sfn|Heehs|2002|pp = 2–5}} and by Buddhist philosophy.{{sfn|Nakamura|1999}}

=== Visual art ===
{{Main|Indian art}}
India has a very ancient tradition of art, which has exchanged many influences with the rest of Eurasia, especially in the first millennium, when Buddhist art spread with Indian religions to Central, East and Southeast Asia, the last also greatly influenced by Hindu art. Thousands of seals from the Indus Valley Civilization of the third millennium BCE have been found, usually carved with animals, but a few with human figures. The &quot;Pashupati&quot; seal, excavated in Mohenjo-daro, Pakistan, in 1928–29, is the best known.{{Sfn|Craven|1997|pp=14–16}}{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=17–18}} After this there is a long period with virtually nothing surviving.{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=17–18}}{{Sfn|Rowland|1970|pp=46–47}} Almost all surviving ancient Indian art thereafter is in various forms of religious sculpture in durable materials, or coins. There was probably originally far more in wood, which is lost. In north India Mauryan art is the first imperial movement.{{Sfn|Craven|1997|pp=35–46}}{{Sfn|Rowland|1970|pp=67–70}}{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=22–24}} In the first millennium CE, Buddhist art spread with Indian religions to Central, East and Southeast Asia, the last also greatly influenced by Hindu art.{{Sfn|Rowland|1970|pp=185–198, 252, 385–466}} Over the following centuries a distinctly Indian style of sculpting the human figure developed, with less interest in articulating precise anatomy than ancient Greek sculpture but showing smoothly flowing forms expressing &quot;prana&quot; (&quot;breath&quot; or life-force).{{Sfn|Craven|1997|pp=22, 88}}{{Sfn|Rowland|1970|pp=35, 99–100}} This is often complicated by the need to give figures multiple arms or heads, or represent different genders on the left and right of figures, as with the Ardhanarishvara form of Shiva and Parvati.{{Sfn|Craven|1997|pp=18–19}}{{Sfn|Blurton|1993|p=151}}

Most of the earliest large sculpture is Buddhist, either excavated from Buddhist stupas such as Sanchi, Sarnath and Amaravati,{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=32–38}} or is rock cut reliefs at sites such as Ajanta, Karla and Ellora. Hindu and Jain sites appear rather later.{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=43–55}}{{Sfn|Rowland|1970|pp=113–119}} In spite of this complex mixture of religious traditions, generally, the prevailing artistic style at any time and place has been shared by the major religious groups, and sculptors probably usually served all communities.{{Sfn|Blurton|1993|pp=10–11}} Gupta art, at its peak {{circa|{{CE|300}}|{{CE|500}}}}, is often regarded as a classical period whose influence lingered for many centuries after; it saw a new dominance of Hindu sculpture, as at the Elephanta Caves.{{Sfn|Craven|1997|pp=111–121}}{{Sfn|Michell|2000|pp=44–70}} Across the north, this became rather stiff and formulaic after {{circa|{{CE|800}}}}, though rich with finely carved detail in the surrounds of statues.{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=212–216}} But in the South, under the Pallava and Chola dynasties, sculpture in both stone and bronze had a sustained period of great achievement; the large bronzes with Shiva as Nataraja have become an iconic symbol of India.{{Sfn|Craven|1997|pp=152–160}}{{Sfn|Blurton|1993|pp=225–227}}

Ancient painting has only survived at a few sites, of which the crowded scenes of court life in the Ajanta Caves are by far the most important, but it was evidently highly developed, and is mentioned as a courtly accomplishment in Gupta times.{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=356–361}}{{Sfn|Rowland|1970|pp=242–251}} Painted manuscripts of religious texts survive from Eastern India about the 10th century onwards, most of the earliest being Buddhist and later Jain. No doubt the style of these was used in larger paintings.{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=361–370}} The Persian-derived Deccan painting, starting just before the Mughal miniature, between them give the first large body of secular painting, with an emphasis on portraits, and the recording of princely pleasures and wars.{{Sfn|Craven|1997|pp=202–208}}{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=372–382, 400–406}} The style spread to Hindu courts, especially among the Rajputs, and developed a variety of styles, with the smaller courts often the most innovative, with figures such as Nihâl Chand and Nainsukh.{{Sfn|Craven|1997|pp=222–243}}{{Sfn|Harle|1994|pp=384–397, 407–420}} As a market developed among European residents, it was supplied by Company painting by Indian artists with considerable Western influence.{{Sfn|Craven|1997|p=243}}{{Sfn|Michell|2000|p=210}} In the 19th century, cheap Kalighat paintings of gods and everyday life, done on paper, were urban folk art from Calcutta, which later saw the Bengal School of Art, reflecting the art colleges founded by the British, the first movement in modern Indian painting.{{Sfn|Michell|2000|pp=210–211}}{{Sfn|Blurton|1993|p=211}}

=== Architecture ===
{{Main|Architecture of India}}
{{multiple image
| perrow = 1
| total_width = 250
| image_style = border:none;
| align = left
| image1 = Aks The Reflection Taj Mahal.jpg
| caption1 = The Taj Mahal from across the Yamuna river showing two outlying red sandstone buildings, a mosque on the right (west) and a &quot;jawab&quot; (response) thought to have been built for architectural balance

Much of Indian architecture, including the Taj Mahal, other works of Indo-Islamic Mughal architecture, and South Indian architecture, blends ancient local traditions with imported styles.{{sfn|Kuiper|2010|pp = 296–329}} Vernacular architecture is also regional in its flavours. &quot;Vastu shastra&quot;, literally &quot;science of construction&quot; or &quot;architecture&quot; and ascribed to Mamuni Mayan,{{sfn|Silverman|2007|p = 20}} explores how the laws of nature affect human dwellings;{{sfn|Kumar|2000|p=5}} it employs precise geometry and directional alignments to reflect perceived cosmic constructs.{{sfn|Roberts|2004|p=73}} As applied in Hindu temple architecture, it is influenced by the &quot;Shilpa Shastras&quot;, a series of foundational texts whose basic mythological form is the &quot;Vastu-Purusha mandala&quot;, a square that embodied the &quot;absolute&quot;.{{sfn|Lang|Moleski|2010|pp = 151–152}} The Taj Mahal, built in Agra between 1631 and 1648 by orders of Mughal emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife, has been described in the UNESCO World Heritage List as &quot;the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world&#x27;s heritage&quot;.{{sfn|United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation}} Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture, developed by the British in the late 19th century, drew on Indo-Islamic architecture.{{sfn|Chopra|2011|p = 46}}

=== Literature ===
{{Main|Indian literature}}
The earliest literature in India, composed between {{BCE|1500}} and {{CE|1200}}, was in the Sanskrit language.{{sfn|Hoiberg|Ramchandani|2000}} Major works of Sanskrit literature include the &quot;Rigveda&quot; ({{circa|{{BCE|1500}}|{{BCE|1200}}}}), the epics: &quot;Mahābhārata&quot; ({{circa|{{BCE|400}}|{{CE|400}}}}) and the &quot;Ramayana&quot; ({{circa|{{BCE|300}}}} and later); &quot;Abhijñānaśākuntalam&quot; (&quot;The Recognition of Śakuntalā&quot;, and other dramas of Kālidāsa ({{circa|{{CE|5th century}}}}) and &quot;Mahākāvya&quot; poetry.{{sfn|Johnson|2008}}{{sfn|MacDonell|2004|pp=1–40}}{{sfn|Kālidāsa|Johnson|2001}} In Tamil literature, the Sangam literature ({{circa|{{BCE|600}}|{{BCE|300}}}}) consisting of 2,381 poems, composed by 473 poets, is the earliest work.{{sfn|Zvelebil|1997|p = 12}}{{sfn|Hart|1975}}{{sfn|Ramanujan|1985|pp=ix–x}} From the 14th to the 18th centuries, India&#x27;s literary traditions went through a period of drastic change because of the emergence of devotional poets like Kabīr, Tulsīdās, and Guru Nānak. This period was characterised by a varied and wide spectrum of thought and expression; as a consequence, medieval Indian literary works differed significantly from classical traditions.{{sfn|Das|2005}} In the 19th century, Indian writers took a new interest in social questions and psychological descriptions. In the 20th century, Indian literature was influenced by the works of the Bengali poet, author and philosopher Rabindranath Tagore,{{sfn|Datta|2006}} who was a recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature.

=== Performing arts and media ===
{{Main|Music of India|Dance in India|Cinema of India|Television in India}}
{{multiple image|perrow=1|total_width=180|image_style = border:none;| align = right |image1=Kuchipudi Performer DS.jpg|caption1=India&#x27;s National Academy of Performance Arts has recognised eight Indian dance styles to be &quot;classical&quot;. One such is Kuchipudi shown here. }}

Indian music ranges over various traditions and regional styles. Classical music encompasses two genres and their various folk offshoots: the northern Hindustani and the southern Carnatic schools.{{sfn|Massey|Massey|1998}} Regionalised popular forms include filmi and folk music; the syncretic tradition of the &quot;bauls&quot; is a well-known form of the latter. Indian dance also features diverse folk and classical forms. Among the better-known folk dances are: &quot;bhangra&quot; of Punjab, &quot;bihu&quot; of Assam, &quot;Jhumair&quot; and &quot;chhau&quot; of Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal, &quot;garba&quot; and &quot;dandiya&quot; of Gujarat, &quot;ghoomar&quot; of Rajasthan, and &quot;lavani&quot; of Maharashtra. Eight dance forms, many with narrative forms and mythological elements, have been accorded classical dance status by India&#x27;s National Academy of Music, Dance, and Drama. These are: &quot;bharatanatyam&quot; of the state of Tamil Nadu, &quot;kathak&quot; of Uttar Pradesh, &quot;kathakali&quot; and &quot;mohiniyattam&quot; of Kerala, &quot;kuchipudi&quot; of Andhra Pradesh, &quot;manipuri&quot; of Manipur, &quot;odissi&quot; of Odisha, and the &quot;sattriya&quot; of Assam.

Theatre in India melds music, dance, and improvised or written dialogue.{{sfn|Lal|2004|pp = 23, 30, 235}} Often based on Hindu mythology, but also borrowing from medieval romances or social and political events, Indian theatre includes: the &quot;bhavai&quot; of Gujarat, the &quot;jatra&quot; of West Bengal, the &quot;nautanki&quot; and &quot;ramlila&quot; of North India, &quot;tamasha&quot; of Maharashtra, &quot;burrakatha&quot; of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, &quot;terukkuttu&quot; of Tamil Nadu, and the &quot;yakshagana&quot; of Karnataka.{{sfn|Karanth|2002|p = 26}} India has a theatre training institute the National School of Drama (NSD) that is situated at New Delhi. It is an autonomous organisation under the Ministry of culture, Government of India.

The Indian film industry produces the world&#x27;s most-watched cinema.{{sfn|Dissanayake|Gokulsing|2004}} Established regional cinematic traditions exist in the Assamese, Bengali, Bhojpuri, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Punjabi, Gujarati, Marathi, Odia, Tamil, and Telugu languages.{{sfn|Rajadhyaksha|Willemen|1999|page = 652}} The Hindi language film industry (&quot;Bollywood&quot;) is the largest sector representing 43% of box office revenue, followed by the South Indian Telugu and Tamil film industries which represent 36% combined.

Television broadcasting began in India in 1959 as a state-run medium of communication and expanded slowly for more than two decades.{{sfn|Narayan|2013|pp=66–67}}{{sfn|Kaminsky|Long|2011|pp = 684–692}} The state monopoly on television broadcast ended in the 1990s. Since then, satellite channels have increasingly shaped the popular culture of Indian society.{{sfn|Mehta|2008|pp = 1–10}} Today, television is the most penetrative media in India; industry estimates indicate that {{As of|2012|lc=y}} there are over 554 million TV consumers, 462 million with satellite or cable connections compared to other forms of mass media such as the press (350 million), radio (156 million) or internet (37 million).{{sfn|Hansa Research|2012}}

=== Society ===
{{multiple image|perrow=1|total_width=220|image_style = border:none;| align = left |image1=Muslims praying in mosque in Srinagar, Kashmir.jpg|caption1=Muslims offer &quot;namaz&quot; at a mosque in Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir.}}
Traditional Indian society is sometimes defined by social hierarchy. The Indian caste system embodies much of the social stratification and many of the social restrictions found on the Indian subcontinent. Social classes are defined by thousands of endogamous hereditary groups, often termed as &quot;jātis&quot;, or &quot;castes&quot;.{{sfn|Schwartzberg|2011}} India abolished untouchability in 1950 with the adoption of the constitution and has since enacted other anti-discriminatory laws and social welfare initiatives.

Family values are important in the Indian tradition, and multi-generational patrilineal joint families have been the norm in India, though nuclear families are becoming common in urban areas.{{sfn|Makar|2007}} An overwhelming majority of Indians, with their consent, have their marriages arranged by their parents or other family elders.{{sfn|Medora|2003}} Marriage is thought to be for life,{{sfn|Medora|2003}} and the divorce rate is extremely low,{{sfn|Jones|Ramdas|2005|p = 111}} with less than one in a thousand marriages ending in divorce. Child marriages are common, especially in rural areas; many women wed before reaching 18, which is their legal marriageable age.{{sfn|Cullen-Dupont|2009|p = 96}} Female infanticide in India, and lately female foeticide, have created skewed gender ratios; the number of missing women in the country quadrupled from 15 million to 63 million in the 50-year period ending in 2014, faster than the population growth during the same period, and constituting 20 percent of India&#x27;s female electorate. According to an Indian government study, an additional 21 million girls are unwanted and do not receive adequate care. Despite a government ban on sex-selective foeticide, the practice remains commonplace in India, the result of a preference for boys in a patriarchal society. The payment of dowry, although illegal, remains widespread across class lines. Deaths resulting from dowry, mostly from bride burning, are on the rise, despite stringent anti-dowry laws.

Many Indian festivals are religious in origin. The best known include Diwali, Ganesh Chaturthi, Thai Pongal, Holi, Durga Puja, Eid ul-Fitr, Bakr-Id, Christmas, and Vaisakhi.

=== Education ===
{{Main|Education in India|Literacy in India|History of education in the Indian subcontinent}}

In the 2011 census, about 73% of the population was literate, with 81% for men and 65% for women. This compares to 1981 when the respective rates were 41%, 53% and 29%. In 1951 the rates were 18%, 27% and 9%. In 1921 the rates 7%, 12% and 2%. In 1891 they were 5%, 9% and 1%, According to Latika Chaudhary, in 1911 there were under three primary schools for every ten villages. Statistically, more caste and religious diversity reduced private spending. Primary schools taught literacy, so local diversity limited its growth.

The education system of India is the world&#x27;s second-largest. India has over 900 universities, 40,000 colleges and 1.5 million schools. In India&#x27;s higher education system, a significant number of seats are reserved under affirmative action policies for the historically disadvantaged. In recent decades India&#x27;s improved education system is often cited as one of the main contributors to its economic development.

=== Clothing ===
{{Main|Clothing in India}}
{{multiple image|perrow = 2|total_width = 360
| align = right
| image_style = border:none;
| image1 = India School.jpg
| caption1 = Women in sari at an adult literacy class in Tamil Nadu
| image2 = Water pump, Varanasi (15563170660) Cropped.jpg
| caption2 = A man in dhoti and wearing a woollen shawl, in Varanasi
From ancient times until the advent of the modern, the most widely worn traditional dress in India was draped. For women it took the form of a sari, a single piece of cloth many yards long. The sari was traditionally wrapped around the lower body and the shoulder. In its modern form, it is combined with an underskirt, or Indian petticoat, and tucked in the waist band for more secure fastening. It is also commonly worn with an Indian blouse, or choli, which serves as the primary upper-body garment, the sari&#x27;s end—passing over the shoulder—serving to cover the midriff and obscure the upper body&#x27;s contours. For men, a similar but shorter length of cloth, the dhoti, has served as a lower-body garment.

The use of stitched clothes became widespread after Muslim rule was established at first by the Delhi sultanate ({{Circa|1300 CE}}) and then continued by the Mughal Empire ({{Circa|1525 CE}}). Among the garments introduced during this time and still commonly worn are: the shalwars and pyjamas, both styles of trousers, and the tunics kurta and kameez. In southern India, the traditional draped garments were to see much longer continuous use.

{{multiple image
| perrow = 1
| total_width = 180
| align = left
| image_style = border:none;
| image1 = Strolling Shoppers in Paltan Bazaar.jpg
| caption1 = Women (from left to right) in churidars and kameez (with back to the camera), jeans and sweater, and pink shalwar kameez

Salwars are atypically wide at the waist but narrow to a cuffed bottom. They are held up by a drawstring, which causes them to become pleated around the waist. The pants can be wide and baggy, or they can be cut quite narrow, on the bias, in which case they are called churidars. When they are ordinarily wide at the waist and their bottoms are hemmed but not cuffed, they are called pyjamas. The kameez is a long shirt or tunic, its side seams left open below the waistline. The kurta is traditionally collarless and made of cotton or silk; it is worn plain or with embroidered decoration, such as chikan; and typically falls to either just above or just below the wearer&#x27;s knees.

In the last 50 years, fashions have changed a great deal in India. Increasingly, in urban northern India, the sari is no longer the apparel of everyday wear, though they remain popular on formal occasions. The traditional shalwar kameez is rarely worn by younger urban women, who favour churidars or jeans. In white-collar office settings, ubiquitous air conditioning allows men to wear sports jackets year-round. For weddings and formal occasions, men in the middle- and upper classes often wear bandgala, or short Nehru jackets, with pants, with the groom and his groomsmen sporting sherwanis and churidars. The dhoti, once the universal garment of Hindu males, the wearing of which in the homespun and handwoven khadi allowed Gandhi to bring Indian nationalism to the millions,
is seldom seen in the cities.

=== Cuisine ===
{{Main|Indian cuisine}}
{{multiple image|perrow = 1/2|total_width = 180
| align = right
| image_style = border:none;
| image2 = Odia Mutton Curry (Mansha Tarkari) Rotated.jpg
| caption2 = Railway mutton curry from Odisha
| image1 = South Indian Thali Cropped.jpg
| caption1 = South Indian vegetarian thali, or platter
The foundation of a typical Indian meal is a cereal cooked in a plain fashion and complemented with flavourful savoury dishes. The cooked cereal could be steamed rice; chapati, a thin unleavened bread made from wheat flour, or occasionally cornmeal, and griddle-cooked dry; the idli, a steamed breakfast cake, or dosa, a griddled pancake, both leavened and made from a batter of rice- and gram meal. The savoury dishes might include lentils, pulses and vegetables commonly spiced with ginger and garlic, but also with a combination of spices that may include coriander, cumin, turmeric, cinnamon, cardamon and others as informed by culinary conventions. They might also include poultry, fish, or meat dishes. In some instances, the ingredients might be mixed during the process of cooking.

A platter, or thali, used for eating usually has a central place reserved for the cooked cereal, and peripheral ones for the flavourful accompaniments, which are often served in small bowls. The cereal and its accompaniments are eaten simultaneously rather than a piecemeal manner. This is accomplished by mixing—for example of rice and lentils—or folding, wrapping, scooping or dipping—such as chapati and cooked vegetables or lentils.
India has distinctive vegetarian cuisines, each a feature of the geographical and cultural histories of its adherents. The appearance of &quot;ahimsa&quot;, or the avoidance of violence toward all forms of life in many religious orders early in Indian history, especially Upanishadic Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism, is thought to have contributed to the predominance of vegetarianism among a large segment of India&#x27;s Hindu population, especially in southern India, Gujarat, the Hindi-speaking belt of north-central India, as well as among Jains. Although meat is eaten widely in India, the proportional consumption of meat in the overall diet is low. Unlike China, which has increased its per capita meat consumption substantially in its years of increased economic growth, in India the strong dietary traditions have contributed to dairy, rather than meat, becoming the preferred form of animal protein consumption.

The most significant import of cooking techniques into India during the last millennium occurred during the Mughal Empire. Dishes such as the pilaf,{{sfn|Roger|2000}} developed in the Abbasid caliphate, and cooking techniques such as the marinating of meat in yogurt, spread into northern India from regions to its northwest. To the simple yogurt marinade of Persia, onions, garlic, almonds, and spices began to be added in India. Rice was partially cooked and layered alternately with the sauteed meat, the pot sealed tightly, and slow cooked according to another Persian cooking technique, to produce what has today become the Indian biryani, a feature of festive dining in many parts of India. In the food served in Indian restaurants worldwide the diversity of Indian food has been partially concealed by the dominance of Punjabi cuisine. The popularity of tandoori chicken—cooked in the tandoor oven, which had traditionally been used for baking bread in the rural Punjab and the Delhi region, especially among Muslims, but which is originally from Central Asia—dates to the 1950s, and was caused in large part by an entrepreneurial response among people from the Punjab who had been displaced by the 1947 partition of India.
=== Sports and recreation ===
{{Main|Sport in India}}
{{See also|Indian physical culture}}{{multiple image
| perrow = 1
| total_width = 220
| image_style = border:none;
| align = right
| image1 = Filles jouant à la marelle, Jaura, Inde.jpg
| caption1 = Girls play hopscotch in Jaora, Madhya Pradesh. Hopscotch has been commonly played by girls in rural India.
| direction = 
| alt1 = 
Several traditional indigenous sports—such as &quot;kabaddi&quot;, &quot;kho kho&quot;, pehlwani, &quot;gilli-danda,&quot; hopscotch and martial arts such as &quot;Kalarippayattu&quot; and &quot;marma adi—&quot;remain popular. Chess is commonly held to have originated in India as &quot;chaturaṅga&quot;;{{sfn|Wolpert|2003|p=2}} in recent years, there has been a rise in the number of Indian grandmasters,{{sfn|Rediff 2008 b}} and world champions. Parcheesi is derived from &quot;Pachisi&quot;, another traditional Indian pastime, which in early modern times was played on a giant marble court by Mughal emperor Akbar the Great.{{sfn|Binmore|2007|p=98}}

Cricket is the most popular sport in India. India has won two Cricket World Cups, the 1983 edition and the 2011 edition. India has won eight field hockey gold medals in the summer olympics.
India has participated in shooting sports and has won several medals at the Olympics, the World Shooting Championships, and the Commonwealth Games.{{sfn|Commonwealth Games 2010}}{{sfn|Cyriac|2010}} Other sports in which Indians have succeeded internationally include badminton,{{sfn|British Broadcasting Corporation 2010 a}} boxing,{{sfn|Mint 2010}} and wrestling.{{sfn|Xavier|2010}} Football is popular in West Bengal, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and the north-eastern states. The major domestic league is the Indian Premier League. Professional leagues in other sports include the Indian Super League (football) and the Pro Kabaddi League.

== See also ==
* Administrative divisions of India
* Outline of India
{{Portal bar|India|Countries|Asia}}

== Notes ==
{{notelist|refs={{efn|name=remaining religions|Besides specific religions, the last two categories in the 2011 Census were &quot;Other religions and persuasions&quot; (0.65%) and &quot;Religion not stated&quot; (0.23%).}}|33em}}

== References ==
{{Reflist|22em}}

== Bibliography ==
===Overview===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|title=India|work=The World Factbook|publisher=Central Intelligence Agency|url=https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/india/|access-date=10 July 2021|ref={{sfnRef|Central Intelligence Agency}}}}
* {{citation|date=December 2004|title=Country Profile: India|edition=5th|work=Library of Congress Country Studies|publisher=Library of Congress Federal Research Division|url=https://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/profiles/India.pdf|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110927131058/https://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/profiles/India.pdf|archive-date=27 September 2011|access-date=30 September 2011|url-status=dead|ref={{sfnRef|Library of Congress|2004}}}}
* {{citation|last1=Heitzman|first1=James|last2=Worden|first2=Robert L.|year=1996|title=India: A Country Study|series=Area Handbook Series|publisher=Library of Congress|place=Washington, D.C.|isbn=978-0-8444-0833-0|url=https://archive.org/details/indiacountrystud0000unse}}
* {{citation|title=India|publisher=International Monetary Fund|url=https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2011/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2009&amp;ey=2016&amp;scsm=1&amp;ssd=1&amp;sort=country&amp;ds=.&amp;br=1&amp;c=534&amp;s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&amp;grp=0&amp;a=&amp;pr1.x=88&amp;pr1.y=9|access-date=14 October 2011|ref={{sfnRef|International Monetary Fund}}}}
* {{citation|title=Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India|publisher=Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner|url=https://censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov-results/prov_results_paper1_india.html|ref={{sfnRef|Provisional Population Totals Paper 1 of 2011 India}}|access-date=18 October 2021}}
* Robinson, Francis, ed. &quot;The Cambridge Encyclopedia of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and the Maldives&quot; (1989)
* {{citation|date=24 January 1950|title=Constituent Assembly of India – Volume XII|publisher=National Informatics Centre, Government of India|url=https://parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/debates/vol12p1.htm |access-date=17 July 2011|ref={{sfnRef|Constituent Assembly of India|1950}}|url-status=dead|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110721173243/https://parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/debates/vol12p1.htm|archive-date=21 July 2011}}
{{refend}}

===Etymology===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{cite journal |last=Barrow |first=Ian J. |title=From Hindustan to India: Naming change in changing names |journal=South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies |volume=26 |pages=37–49 |number=1 |year=2003 |doi=10.1080/085640032000063977|s2cid=144039519}}
* {{cite journal |last=Clémentin-Ojha |first=Catherine |title=&#x27;India, that is Bharat...&#x27;: One Country, Two Names |journal=South Asia Multidisciplinary Academic Journal |volume=10 |year=2014 |url=https://journals.openedition.org/samaj/3717 |archive-date=28 September 2015 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20150928035644/https://samaj.revues.org/3717}}
* {{cite book |last=Thieme |first=P. |chapter=Sanskrit &quot;sindu-/Sindhu-&quot; and Old Iranian &quot;hindu-/Hindu-&quot; |editor1=Mary Boyce |editor2=Ilya Gershevitch |year=1970 |title=W. B. Henning Memorial Volume |publisher=Lund Humphries |isbn=978-0-85331-255-0 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=e3UBAAAAMAAJ}}
{{refend}}

===History===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|last1=Asher|first1=C. B.|last2=Talbot|first2=C.|year=2006|title=India Before Europe |publisher=Cambridge University Press|isbn=978-0-521-80904-7|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=ZvaGuaJIJgoC}}
* {{citation|last1=Asher|first1=C. B.|last2=Talbot|first2=C.|year=2008|title=India Before Europe t|publisher=Cambridge University Press|isbn=978-0-521-51750-8}}
* {{citation|last=Brown|first=J. M.|author-link=Judith M. Brown|year=1994|title=Modern India: The Origins of an Asian Democracy|edition=2nd|series=The Short Oxford History of the Modern World|publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-19-873113-9|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=PaKdsF8WzbcC}}
* {{citation|last1=Coningham|first1=Robin|last2=Young|first2=Ruth|title=The Archaeology of South Asia: From the Indus to Asoka, c. 6500 BCE – 200 CE|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=hB5TCgAAQBAJ|year=2015|publisher=Cambridge University Press|isbn=978-0-521-84697-4}}
* {{citation|last=Copland|first=I.|year=2001|title=India 1885–1947: The Unmaking of an Empire|publisher=Longman|isbn=978-0-582-38173-5|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=Dw1uAAAAMAAJ}}
* {{citation |last=Doniger |first=Wendy |title=On Hinduism |pages=xviii, 10 |year=2014 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=fUnaAgAAQBAJ&amp;pg=PR18 |publisher=Oxford University Press |isbn=978-0-19-936009-3}}
* {{citation|last1=Kulke|first1=H.|last2=Rothermund|first2=D.|author1-link=Hermann Kulke|year=2004|title=A History of India|series=4th|publisher=Routledge|isbn=978-0-415-32920-0|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=V73N8js5ZgAC}}
* {{Citation |last=Lowe |first=John J. |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=L07CBwAAQBAJ&amp;pg=PA2 |title=Participles in Rigvedic Sanskrit: The Syntax and Semantics of Adjectival Verb Forms |publisher=Oxford University Press |year=2015 |isbn=978-0-19-100505-3 |pages= |quote=}}
* {{citation|last=Ludden|first=D.|year=2002|title=India and South Asia: A Short History|publisher=Oneworld Publications|isbn=978-1-85168-237-9}}
* {{citation|last=Ludden|first=D.|year=2014|title=India and South Asia: A Short History|publisher=Oneworld Publications|isbn=978-1-85168-936-1|edition=2nd, revised|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=pBq9DwAAQBAJ}}
* {{citation|last1=Metcalf|first1=Barbara D.|last2=Metcalf|first2=Thomas R.|author1-link=Barbara Metcalf |author2-link=Thomas R. Metcalf|year=2006|title=A Concise History of Modern India|edition=2nd|publisher=Cambridge University Press |isbn=978-0-521-68225-1|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=iuESgYNYPl0C}}
* {{citation|last1=Metcalf|first1=Barbara D.|last2=Metcalf|first2=Thomas R.|year=2012|title=A Concise History of Modern India|publisher=Cambridge University Press |isbn=978-1-107-02649-0 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=mjIfqyY7jlsC}}
* {{citation|last=Peers|first=D. M.|year=2006|title=India under Colonial Rule: 1700–1885 |publisher=Pearson Longman|isbn=978-0-582-31738-3|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=6iNuAAAAMAAJ}}
* {{citation|last=Peers|first=D. M.|year=2013|title=India Under Colonial Rule: 1700–1885|publisher=Routledge|isbn=978-1-317-88286-2|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=dyQuAgAAQBAJ|access-date=13 August 2019}}
* {{citation|last1=Petraglia|first1=Michael D. |last2=Allchin|first2=Bridget |author-link2=Bridget Allchin|editor=Michael Petraglia |editor2=Bridget Allchin|title=The Evolution and History of Human Populations in South Asia: Inter-disciplinary Studies in Archaeology, Biological Anthropology, Linguistics and Genetics|chapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=Qm9GfjNlnRwC&amp;pg=PA6|year=2007|publisher=Springer Publishing|isbn=978-1-4020-5562-1| chapter=Human evolution and culture change in the Indian subcontinent}}
* {{citation|last=Possehl|first=G.|author-link=Gregory Possehl|title=The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective|year=2003|publisher=Rowman Altamira|isbn=978-0-7591-0172-2 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=pmAuAsi4ePIC}}
* {{citation|last=Robb|first=P.|title=A History of India|year=2001|publisher=Palgrave |isbn=978-0-333-69129-8|url-access=registration|url=https://archive.org/details/historyofindia00pete}}
* {{citation|last=Robb|first=P.|title=A History of India|year=2011|publisher=Palgrave Macmillan |isbn=978-0-230-34549-2|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=GQ-2VH1LO_EC}}
* {{citation|last=Sarkar|first=S.|year=1983|title=Modern India: 1885–1947|place=Delhi|publisher=Macmillan|isbn=978-0-333-90425-1|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=rVxuAAAAMAAJ}}
* {{citation|last=Singh|first=Upinder|author-link=Upinder Singh|title=A History of Ancient and Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century|year=2009|publisher=Longman|location=Delhi|isbn=978-81-317-1677-9 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=H3lUIIYxWkEC}}
* {{citation|last=Singh|first=Upinder|title=Political Violence in Ancient India|year=2017|publisher=Harvard University Press|isbn=978-0-674-98128-7|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=dYM4DwAAQBAJ}}
* {{citation|last=Sripati|first=V.|year=1998|title=Toward Fifty Years of Constitutionalism and Fundamental Rights in India: Looking Back to See Ahead (1950–2000)|journal=American University International Law Review |volume=14 |issue=2|pages=413–496}}
* {{citation|last=Stein|first=B.|author-link=Burton Stein|year=1998|title=A History of India |publisher=Wiley-Blackwell|place=Oxford|isbn=978-0-631-20546-3 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=SXdVS0SzQSAC}}
* {{citation|last=Stein|first=B.|author-link=Burton Stein|editor-last=Arnold|editor-first=D.|year=2010 |title=A History of India|edition=2nd|publisher=Wiley-Blackwell|place=Oxford|isbn=978-1-4051-9509-6 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=QY4zdTDwMAQC}}
* {{citation|last=Witzel|first=Michael|author-link=Michael Witzel|editor=Gavin D. Flood|title=The Blackwell companion to Hinduism|chapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=qSfneQ0YYY8C|access-date=15 March 2012 |year=2003 |publisher=John Wiley &amp; Sons|isbn=978-0-631-21535-6|chapter=Vedas and Upanișads}}
* {{citation|last=Wolpert|first=S.|author-link=Stanley Wolpert|year=2003|title=A New History of India|edition=7th|publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-19-516678-1}}
{{refend}}

===Geography===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|last1=Ali|first1=J. R.|last2=Aitchison|first2=J. C.|year=2005|title=Greater India|journal=Earth-Science Reviews|volume=72|issue=3–4|pages=170–173|doi=10.1016/j.earscirev.2005.07.005|bibcode=2005ESRv...72..169A}}
* {{citation|last1=Basu|first1=Mahua|last2=Xavier|first2=Savarimuthu|year=2017|title=Fundamentals of Environmental Studies |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=nXmLDgAAQBAJ&amp;pg=PA78 |publisher=Cambridge University Press |isbn=978-1-316-87051-8}}
* {{citation|last=Chang|first=J. H.|year=1967|title=The Indian Summer Monsoon|periodical=Geographical Review|volume=57|issue=3|pages=373–396|doi=10.2307/212640|jstor=212640|publisher=American Geographical Society, Wiley|bibcode=1967GeoRv..57..373C }}
* {{citation|year=1988 |title=Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 with Amendments Made in 1988 |publisher=Department of Environment and Forests, Government of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands |url=https://forest.and.nic.in/fca1980.pdf |access-date=25 July 2011 |ref={{sfnRef|Department of Environment and Forests|1988}} |url-status=dead |archive-date=21 July 2011 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110721163118/https://forest.and.nic.in/fca1980.pdf}}
* {{citation|last1=Dikshit|first1=K. R.|last2=Schwartzberg|first2=Joseph E.|author2-link=Joseph E. Schwartzberg|title=India: Land|url=https://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/285248/India|encyclopedia=Encyclopædia Britannica|date=2023 |pages=1–29}}
* {{citation|last=Duff|first=D.|author-link = Donald Duff (geologist and author)|year=1993|title=Holmes Principles of Physical Geology|edition=4th|publisher=Routledge|isbn=978-0-7487-4381-0|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=E6vknq9SfIIC&amp;pg=PT353}}
* {{citation|last=Kaul|first=R. N.|editor-last=Kaul|editor-first=R. N.|year=1970|chapter=The Indian Subcontinent: Indo-Pakistan|title=Afforestation in Arid Zones|isbn=978-94-010-3352-7|location=The Hague|publisher=Dr. W. Junk, N.V., Publishers}}
* {{citation|last1=Kumar|first1=V. Sanil|last2=Pathak|first2=K. C.|last3=Pednekar|first3=P.|last4=Raju |first4=N. S. N.|last5=Gowthaman|first5=R.|year=2006|title=Coastal processes along the Indian coastline |periodical=Current Science|volume=91|issue=4|pages=530–536 |url=https://drs.nio.org/drs/bitstream/2264/350/1/Curr_Sci_91_530.pdf|url-status=dead|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20090908141613/https://drs.nio.org/drs/bitstream/2264/350/1/Curr_Sci_91_530.pdf|archive-date=8 September 2009}}
* {{citation|last1=Mcgrail|first1=Sean|last2=Blue|first2=Lucy|last3=Kentley|first3=Eric|last4=Palmer |first4=Colin|year=2003|title=Boats of South Asia|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=v1eBAgAAQBAJ |publisher=Routledge |isbn=978-1-134-43130-4}}
* {{citation|year=2007|title=India Yearbook 2007|publisher=Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India|place=New Delhi|isbn=978-81-230-1423-4|ref={{sfnRef|Ministry of Information and Broadcasting|2007}}}}
* {{citation|last=Posey|first=C. A.|year= 1994|title=The Living Earth Book of Wind and Weather|publisher=Reader&#x27;s Digest|isbn=978-0-89577-625-9 |url=https://archive.org/details/livingearthbooko00pose}}
* {{citation|last1=Prakash|first1=B.|last2=Kumar|first2=S.|last3=Rao|first3=M. S.|last4=Giri|first4=S. C.|year=2000|title=Holocene Tectonic Movements and Stress Field in the Western Gangetic Plains|journal=Current Science |volume=79|issue=4|pages=438–449|url=https://www.ias.ac.in/currsci/aug252000/prakash.pdf|ref={{sfnRef|Prakash et al.|2000}}}}
* {{citation|last=Prasad|first=Ishwar|editor-last=Mani|editor-first=M. S.|year=1974|chapter=The Ecology of Vertebrates of the Indian Desert|title=Ecology and Biogeography in India|location=The Hague|publisher=Dr. W. Junk bv Publishers|isbn=978-94-010-2333-7}}
{{refend}}

===Biodiversity===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|last=Basak|first=R. K.|year=1983|title=Botanical Survey of India: Account of Its Establishment, Development, and Activities|publisher=India. Department of Environment|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=yXAVcgAACAAJ|access-date=20 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Crame|first1=J. A.|last2=Owen|first2=A. W.|year= 2002|title=Palaeobiogeography and Biodiversity Change: The Ordovician and Mesozoic–Cenozoic Radiations|series=Geological Society Special Publication|issue=194|publisher=Geological Society of London|isbn=978-1-86239-106-2|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=YswVy5YolYsC&amp;pg=PA142|access-date=8 December 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Karanth|first1=K. Ullas|last2=Gopal|first2=Rajesh |editor=Rosie Woodroffe |editor2=Simon Thirgood |editor3=Alan Rabinowitz |year=2005 |title=People and Wildlife, Conflict Or Co-existence? |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=6vNzRzcjntAC|publisher=Cambridge University Press |isbn=978-0-521-53203-7|chapter=An ecology-based policy framework for human-tiger coexistence in India}}
* {{citation|last=Karanth|first=K. P.|year=2006|title=Out-of-India Gondwanan Origin of Some Tropical Asian Biota|journal=Current Science|volume=90|issue=6|pages=789–792 |url=https://www.iisc.ernet.in/currsci/mar252006/789.pdf|access-date=18 May 2011|archive-date=11 April 2019 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20190411223533/https://www.iisc.ernet.in/currsci/mar252006/789.pdf |url-status=dead}}
* {{citation|last=Mace|first=G. M.|date= 1994|title=1994 IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals |work=World Conservation Monitoring Centre|publisher=International Union for Conservation of Nature |isbn=978-2-8317-0194-3 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=dyy0HilL9ecC&amp;pg=PR4}}
* {{citation|last=Tritsch|first=M. F.|year=2001|title=Wildlife of India|publisher=HarperCollins|place=London|isbn=978-0-00-711062-9|url=https://archive.org/details/wildlifeofindia0000trit}}
* {{citation|date=9 September 1972|title=Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972|publisher=Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India |url=https://envfor.nic.in/legis/wildlife/wildlife1.html|access-date=25 July 2011|ref={{sfnRef|Ministry of Environment and Forests 1972}}}}
{{refend}}

===Politics===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{cite journal|last1=Banerjee|first1=Sumanta|title=Civilising the BJP|journal=Economic &amp; Political Weekly|date=22 July 2005|volume=40|issue=29|pages=3116–3119|jstor=4416896}}
* {{citation|last=Bhambhri|first=C. P.|year=1992|title=Politics in India, 1991–1992|publisher=Shipra |isbn=978-81-85402-17-8|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=pf5HAAAAMAAJ|access-date=20 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Burnell|first1=P. J.|last2=Calvert|first2=P.|year=1999|title=The Resilience of Democracy: Persistent Practice, Durable Idea|publisher=Taylor &amp; Francis|isbn=978-0-7146-8026-2 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=hv6TkML5_HAC&amp;pg=PA271|access-date=20 July 2011}}
* {{citation|agency=Press Trust of India|date=16 May 2009|title=Second UPA Win, A Crowning Glory for Sonia&#x27;s Ascendancy|url=https://www.business-standard.com/india/news/second-upa-wincrowning-glory-for-sonia%5Cs-ascendancy/61892/on |access-date=13 June 2009 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20160305072031/http://www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/second-upa-win-a-crowning-glory-for-sonia-s-ascendancy-109051600183_1.html |archive-date=5 March 2016 |ref={{sfnRef|Business Standard|2009}}|newspaper=Business Standard India|last1=India |first1=Press Trust of }}
* {{citation|last=Chander|first=N. J.|year=2004|title=Coalition Politics: The Indian Experience|publisher=Concept Publishing Company|isbn=978-81-8069-092-1|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=G_QtMGIczhMC&amp;pg=PA117|access-date=20 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Dunleavy|first1=P.|last2=Diwakar|first2=R.|last3=Dunleavy|first3=C.|year=2007|title=The Effective Space of Party Competition|issue=5|publisher=London School of Economics and Political Science |url=https://www2.lse.ac.uk/government/research/resgroups/PSPE/pdf/PSPE_WP5_07.pdf|access-date=27 September 2011|archive-date=28 October 2007|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20071028005708/https://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/government/PSPE/pdf/PSPE_WP5_07.pdf|url-status=dead}}
* {{citation|last=Dutt|first=S.|year=1998|title=Identities and the Indian State: An Overview|journal=Third World Quarterly|volume=19|issue=3|pages=411–434|doi=10.1080/01436599814325}}
* {{citation|last=Echeverri-Gent|first=J.|editor-last=Ayres|editor-first=A.|editor2-last=Oldenburg|editor2-first=P.|date=January 2002|title=Quickening the Pace of Change|chapter=Politics in India&#x27;s Decentred Polity|series=India Briefing|publisher=M. E. Sharpe|place=London|pages=19–53|isbn=978-0-7656-0812-3|chapter-url=https://archive.org/details/indiabriefingqui0000unse/page/19}}
* {{citation|date=14 March 2009|title=Current Recognised Parties|work=Election Commission of India|url=https://eci.nic.in/eci_main/ElectoralLaws/OrdersNotifications/Symbols_Sep_2009.pdf|access-date=5 July 2010|ref={{sfnRef|Election Commission of India}}}}
* {{citation | editor-last1=Ganguly | editor-first1=Sumit | editor-last2=Sridharan | editor-first2=Eshwaran | title = The Lok Sabha | last=Madhavan | first = M. R. | encyclopedia=The Oxford Handbook of Indian Politics | publisher=Oxford University Press | year=2024 | isbn=978-0-19-889428-5 | url=https://books.google.com/books?id=DHoVEQAAQBAJ}}
* {{citation|last=Gledhill|first=A.|year=1970|title=The Republic of India: The Development of its Laws and Constitution|publisher=Greenwood|isbn=978-0-8371-2813-9|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=cHAjPQAACAAJ|access-date=21 July 2011}}
* {{cite journal|last1=Malik|first1=Yogendra K.|last2=Singh|first2=V. B.|title=Bharatiya Janata Party: An Alternative to the Congress (I)?|journal=Asian Survey|date=April 1992|volume=32|issue=4|pages=318–336 |jstor=2645149 |doi=10.2307/2645149}}
* {{citation|last=Mathew|first=K. M.|year=2003|title=Manorama Yearbook|publisher=Malayala Manorama |isbn=978-81-900461-8-3|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=jDaLQwAACAAJ|access-date=21 July 2011}}
* {{citation|title=National Symbols|work=Know India|publisher=National Informatics Centre, Government of India|url=https://www.india.gov.in/india-glance/national-symbols|access-date=18 April 2021|ref={{sfnRef|National Informatics Centre|2005}}|url-status=live|archive-date=18 April 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210418054958/https://www.india.gov.in/india-glance/national-symbols}}
* {{citation|last=Neuborne|first=Burt|year=2003|title=The Supreme Court of India|journal=International Journal of Constitutional Law|volume=1|issue=3|pages=476–510|doi=10.1093/icon/1.3.476|doi-access=free}}
* {{citation|last=Pylee|first=M. V.|year=2003a|title=Constitutional Government in India|chapter=The Longest Constitutional Document|edition=2nd|publisher=S. Chand|isbn=978-81-219-2203-6|chapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=veDUJCjr5U4C}}
* {{citation|last=Pylee|first=M. V.|year=2003b|title=Constitutional Government in India|chapter=The Union Judiciary: The Supreme Court|edition=2nd|publisher=S. Chand|isbn=978-81-219-2203-6|chapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=veDUJCjr5U4C&amp;pg=PA314|access-date=2 November 2007}}
* {{citation|last=Sarkar|first=N. I.|title=Sonia Gandhi: Tryst with India|year=2007|publisher=Atlantic|isbn=978-81-269-0744-1|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=26flsWUf8fkC|access-date=20 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Sharma|first=R.|year=1950|title=Cabinet Government in India|journal=Parliamentary Affairs|volume=4|issue=1|pages=116–126|doi=10.1093/oxfordjournals.pa.a052755}}
* {{citation|last=Sharma|first=B. K.|year= 2007|title=Introduction to the Constitution of India|edition=4th|publisher=Prentice Hall|isbn=978-81-203-3246-1|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=srDytmFE3KMC&amp;pg=PA161}}
* {{citation|last=Sinha|first=A.|year=2004|title=The Changing Political Economy of Federalism in India|journal=India Review|volume=3|issue=1|pages=25–63|doi=10.1080/14736480490443085|s2cid=154543286}}
* {{citation|last=Wheare|first=K. C.|year= 1980|title=Federal Government|edition=4th|publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-313-22702-8|url=https://archive.org/details/federalgovernmen00whearich}}
{{refend}}

===Foreign relations and military===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|last=Alford|first=P.|date=7 July 2008|title=G8 Plus 5 Equals Power Shift|work=The Australian|url=https://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/g8-plus-5-equals-power-shift/story-e6frg6t6-1111116838759|access-date=21 November 2009}}
* {{citation|last=Behera|first=L. K.|date=7 March 2011|title=Budgeting for India&#x27;s Defence: An Analysis of Defence Budget 2011–2012|publisher=Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses|url=https://www.idsa.in/idsacomments/BudgetingforIndiasDefence2010-11_lkbehera_030310.html|access-date=4 April 2011}}
* {{citation|date=11 February 2009|title=Russia Agrees India Nuclear Deal|work=BBC News|publisher=BBC|url=https://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/7883223.stm|access-date=22 August 2010|ref={{sfnRef|British Broadcasting Corporation 2009}}}}
* {{citation|last=Curry|first=B.|date=27 June 2010|title=Canada Signs Nuclear Deal with India|work=The Globe and Mail|url=https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/g8-g20/news/canada-signs-nuclear-deal-with-india/article1620801/|access-date=13 May 2011|archive-date=25 May 2017|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20170525115702/https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/g8-g20/news/canada-signs-nuclear-deal-with-india/article1620801/|url-status=dead}}
* {{citation|date=8 April 2008|title=EU-India Strategic Partnership|work=Europa: Summaries of EU Legislation|url=https://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/external_relations/relations_with_third_countries/asia/r14100_en.htm|access-date=14 January 2011|publisher=European Union|ref={{sfnRef|European Union 2008}}|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110503194700/https://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/external_relations/relations_with_third_countries/asia/r14100_en.htm|archive-date=3 May 2011|url-status=dead}}
* {{citation|last=Ghosh|first=A.|title=India&#x27;s Foreign Policy|year= 2009|publisher=Pearson|isbn=978-81-317-1025-8|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=Y32u4JMroQgC}}
* {{citation|last=Gilbert|first=M.|year=2002|title=A History of the Twentieth Century|publisher=William Morrow|isbn=978-0-06-050594-3|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=jhwY1j8Ao3kC&amp;pg=PA486|access-date=22 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Kumar|first=A. V.|date=1 May 2010|title=Reforming the NPT to Include India|work=Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists|url=https://thebulletin.org/reforming-npt-include-india|access-date=1 November 2010|archive-date=7 April 2014|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20140407061019/http://thebulletin.org/reforming-npt-include-india|url-status=dead}}
* {{citation|last=Miglani|first=S.|date=28 February 2011|title=With An Eye on China, India Steps Up Defence Spending|work=Reuters|url=https://www.reuters.com/article/india-budget-military-idUSSGE71R02Y20110228|access-date=6 July 2011|archive-date=2 May 2011|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110502153348/https://www.reuters.com/article/2011/02/28/india-budget-military-idUSSGE71R02Y20110228|url-status=live}}
* {{citation|last=Nair|first=V. K.|year=2007|title=No More Ambiguity: India&#x27;s Nuclear Policy|website=afsa.org|url=https://www.afsa.org/fsj/oct02/nair.pdf|access-date=7 June 2007|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20070927041401/https://www.afsa.org/fsj/oct02/nair.pdf|archive-date=27 September 2007}}
* {{citation|last=Pandit|first=Rajat|date=27 July 2009|title=N-Submarine to Give India Crucial Third Leg of Nuke Triad|newspaper=The Times of India|url=https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/N-submarine-to-give-India-crucial-third-leg-of-nuke-triad/articleshow/4823578.cms|access-date=10 March 2010|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110811144548/https://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2009-07-27/india/28212143_1_nuclear-powered-submarine-ins-arihant-nuclear-submarine|url-status=live|archive-date=11 August 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Pandit|first=Rajat|date=8 January 2015|title=Make-in-India: Plan to develop 5th-generation fighter aircraft|newspaper=The Times of India|url=https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Make-in-India-Plan-to-develop-5th-generation-fighter-aircraft/articleshow/45802270.cms|access-date=17 October 2021|url-status=live|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20150311162056/https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Make-in-India-Plan-to-develop-5th-generation-fighter-aircraft/articleshow/45802270.cms|archive-date=11 March 2015}}
* {{cite news|last=Pandit|first=Rajat|date=16 March 2021|title=India&#x27;s weapon imports fell by 33% in last five years but remains world&#x27;s second-largest arms importer|newspaper=The Times of India|url=https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/indias-weapon-imports-fell-by-33-in-last-five-years-but-remains-worlds-second-largest-arms-importer/articleshow/81516403.cms|access-date=3 February 2022}}
* {{cite news|last=Pandit|first=Rajat|date=1 February 2022|title=Strong push for indigenous weapons amidst modest hike in defence budget|newspaper=The Times of India|url=https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/strong-push-for-indigenous-weapons-amidst-modest-hike-in-defence-budget/articleshow/89275344.cms|access-date=3 February 2022}}
* {{citation|last=Perkovich|first=G.|year=2001|title=India&#x27;s Nuclear Bomb: The Impact on Global Proliferation|publisher=University of California Press|isbn=978-0-520-23210-5|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=UDA9dUryS8EC|access-date=22 July 2011}}
* {{citation|date=25 January 2008|title=India, France Agree on Civil Nuclear Cooperation|publisher=Rediff|url=https://www.rediff.com/news/2008/jan/25france.htm|access-date=22 August 2010|ref={{sfnRef|Rediff 2008 a}}}}
* {{citation|date=13 February 2010|title=UK, India Sign Civil Nuclear Accord|work=Reuters|url=https://www.reuters.com/article/us-india-britain-nuclear-idUSTRE61C21E20100213?type=politicsNews|access-date=22 August 2010|ref={{sfnRef|Reuters|2010}}|archive-date=12 May 2012|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20120512181522/https://www.reuters.com/article/2010/02/13/us-india-britain-nuclear-idUSTRE61C21E20100213?type=politicsNews|url-status=live}}
* {{citation|last=Rothermund|first=D.|year= 2000|title=The Routledge Companion to Decolonization|series=Routledge Companions to History|publisher=Routledge|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=ez37H0UPt_YC|isbn=978-0-415-35632-9}}
* {{citation|last=Sharma|first=S. R.|year=1999|title=India–USSR Relations 1947–1971: From Ambivalence to Steadfastness|volume=1|publisher=Discovery|isbn=978-81-7141-486-4|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=vTEge1JWK8oC}}
* {{citation|last1=Sisodia|first1=N. S.|last2=Naidu|first2=G. V. C.|year=2005|title=Changing Security Dynamic in Eastern Asia: Focus on Japan|publisher=Promilla|isbn=978-81-86019-52-8|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=jSgfLG3Ib9wC}}
* {{citation|date=11 October 2008|title=India, US Sign 123 Agreement|newspaper=The Times of India|url=https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/India-US-sign-landmark-123-Agreement/articleshow/3582223.cms|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20111107021602/https://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2008-10-11/india/27905286_1_indian-nuclear-market-sign-landmark-civil-nuclear-field|url-status=live|archive-date=7 November 2011|access-date=21 July 2011|ref={{sfnRef|The Times of India 2008}}}}
{{refend}}

===Economy===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|last=Alamgir|first=J.|year=2008|title=India&#x27;s Open-Economy Policy: Globalism, Rivalry, Continuity|publisher=Taylor &amp; Francis|isbn=978-0-415-77684-4|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=JL7QfWJ5Yk0C|access-date=23 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Bonner|first=B|date=20 March 2010|title=Make Way, World. India Is on the Move|journal=The Christian Science Monitor|url=https://www.csmonitor.com/Business/The-Daily-Reckoning/2010/0320/Make-way-world.-India-is-on-the-move|access-date=23 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Farrell|first1=D.|last2=Beinhocker|first2=E.|date=19 May 2007|title=Next Big Spenders: India&#x27;s Middle Class|publisher=McKinsey &amp; Company|url=https://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/In_the_news/Next_big_spenders_Indian_middle_class|access-date=17 September 2011|archive-date=5 December 2011|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20111205035707/https://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/In_the_news/Next_big_spenders_Indian_middle_class|url-status=dead}}
* {{citation|last=Gargan|first=E. A.|date=15 August 1992|title=India Stumbles in Rush to a Free Market Economy|newspaper=The New York Times|url=https://www.nytimes.com/1992/08/15/world/india-stumbles-in-rush-to-a-free-market-economy.html|access-date=22 July 2011}}
* {{citation|date=January 2011|title=The World in 2050: The Accelerating Shift of Global Economic Power: Challenges and Opportunities|first1=John|last1=Hawksworth|first2=Anmol|last2=Tiwari|publisher=PricewaterhouseCoopers|url=https://www.pwc.com/en_GX/gx/psrc/pdf/world_in_2050_jan2011.pdf|access-date=23 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Nayak|first1=P. B.|last2=Goldar|first2=B.|last3=Agrawal|first3=P.|year=2010|title=India&#x27;s Economy and Growth: Essays in Honour of V. K. R. V. Rao|publisher=SAGE Publications|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=N1Ho2SGXUHwC|isbn=978-81-321-0452-0}}
* {{citation|last1=Pal|first1=P.|last2=Ghosh|first2=J|title=Inequality in India: A Survey of Recent Trends |work=DESA Working Paper No. 45 |date=July 2007 |publisher=United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs |url=https://www.un.org/esa/desa/papers/2007/wp45_2007.pdf|access-date=23 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Schwab|first=K.|year=2010|title=The Global Competitiveness Report 2010–2011|publisher=World Economic Forum|url=https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalCompetitivenessReport_2010-11.pdf |access-date=10 May 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Sheth|first=N.|date=28 May 2009|title=Outlook for Outsourcing Spending Brightens|work=The Wall Street Journal |url=https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB124344190542659025#articleTabs_comments%3D%26articleTabs%3Darticle |access-date=3 October 2010}}
* {{citation|last=Yep|first=E.|date=27 September 2011|title=ReNew Wind Power Gets $201 Million Goldman Investment|url=https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052970204422404576595972728958728|access-date=27 September 2011|newspaper=The Wall Street Journal}}
* {{citation|date=10 April 2010|title=India Second Fastest Growing Auto Market After China|work=Business Line|url=https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/todays-paper/article988689.ece|access-date=23 July 2011|ref={{sfnRef|Business Line 2010}}}}
* {{cite web|title=India world&#x27;s second largest textiles exporter: UN Comtrade|work=The Economic Times |date=2 June 2014|ref={{sfnref|Economic Times 2014}} |url=https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/garments-/-textiles/india-worlds-second-largest-textiles-exporter-un-comtrade/articleshow/35958852.cms?from=mdr|access-date=17 October 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20140605121831/https://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-06-02/news/50272849_1_textiles-exports-india-calender-year|archive-date=5 June 2014|url-status=live}}
* {{citation|date=8 October 2011|title=India&#x27;s Economy: Not Just Rubies and Polyester Shirts|newspaper=The Economist|url=https://www.economist.com/node/21531527|access-date=9 October 2011|ref={{sfnRef|Economist 2011}}}}
* {{citation|date=13 October 2009|title=Indian Car Exports Surge 36%|work=Express India |url-status=dead|url=https://expressindia.indianexpress.com/karnatakapoll08/story_page.php?id=528633|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20160428102326/https://expressindia.indianexpress.com/karnatakapoll08/story_page.php?id=528633|archive-date=28 April 2016|access-date=5 April 2016|ref={{sfnRef|Express India 2009}}}}
* {{citation|date=21 March 2017|title=Measuring the cost of living worldwide|newspaper=The Economist |url=https://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2017/03/daily-chart-13|access-date=25 May 2017|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20170525140627/https://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2017/03/daily-chart-13|archive-date=25 May 2017|url-status=live|ref={{sfnref|Economist 2017}}}}
* {{citation |date=October 2007 |title=Economic Survey of India 2007: Policy Brief |publisher=Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development |url=https://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/17/52/39452196.pdf |access-date=22 July 2011 |ref={{sfnRef|Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2007}} |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110606112149/https://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/17/52/39452196.pdf |archive-date=6 June 2011 }}
* {{citation|title=India: Undernourished Children – A Call for Reform and Action|publisher=World Bank|url=https://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/SOUTHASIAEXT/0,contentMDK:20916955~pagePK:146736~piPK:146830~theSitePK:223547,00.html|access-date=23 July 2011|url-status=dead|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20120507071806/https://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/SOUTHASIAEXT/0,contentMDK:20916955~pagePK:146736~piPK:146830~theSitePK:223547,00.html|archive-date=7 May 2012}}
* {{citation|year=2011–2012|title=Indian IT-BPO Industry|publisher=NASSCOM |url=https://www.nasscom.org/indian-itbpo-industry|access-date=22 June 2012|ref={{sfnRef|Nasscom 2011–2012}} |url-status=dead|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20120509061653/https://nasscom.org/indian-itbpo-industry|archive-date=9 May 2012}}
* {{citation |year=1995 |title=Understanding the WTO: The Organization Members and Observers |publisher=World Trade Organization |url=https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org6_e.htm |access-date=23 June 2012 |ref={{sfnRef|World Trade Organization 1995}} |archive-date=29 December 2009|archive-url= https://web.archive.org/web/20091229021759/https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org6_e.htm}}
* {{citation|date=June 2011|title=World Economic Outlook Update|publisher=International Monetary Fund|url=https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2011/01/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2009&amp;ey=2016&amp;scsm=1&amp;ssd=1&amp;sort=country&amp;ds=.&amp;br=1&amp;c=512%2C548%2C558%2C564%2C566%2C524%2C578%2C534%2C536&amp;s=NGDPDPC&amp;grp=0&amp;a=&amp;pr.x=60&amp;pr.y=17|access-date=22 July 2011|ref={{sfnRef|International Monetary Fund 2011}}}}
{{refend}}

===Demographics===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|last=Chandramouli|first=C.|date=15 July 2011|title=Rural Urban Distribution of Population|publisher=Ministry of Home Affairs (India)|url=https://censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov-results/paper2/data_files/india/Rural_Urban_2011.pdf|access-date=24 January 2015}}
* {{citation|last=Dharwadker|first=A.|editor1-last=Canning|editor1-first=C. M.|editor2-last=Postlewait|editor2-first=T.|year=2010|title=Representing the Past: Essays in Performance Historiography|chapter=Representing India&#x27;s Pasts: Time, Culture, and Problems of Performance Historiography|publisher=University of Iowa Press|isbn=978-1-58729-905-6|chapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=Rgf0gbml2ocC|access-date=24 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Drèze|first1=J.|last2=Goyal|first2=A.|editor-last=Baru|editor-first=R. V.|year=2009|title=School Health Services in India: The Social and Economic Contexts|chapter=The Future of Mid-Day Meals|publisher=SAGE Publications|isbn=978-81-7829-873-3|chapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=aQ39RO9OET4C&amp;pg=PA46|ref={{sfnRef|Drèze|Goyal|2008}}}}
* {{citation|last1=Dyson|first1=T.|last2=Visaria|first2=P.|editor-last=Dyson|editor-first=T.|editor2-last=Casses|editor2-first=R.|editor3-last=Visaria|editor3-first=L.|year=2005|title=Twenty-First Century India: Population, Economy, Human Development, and the Environment|chapter=Migration and Urbanisation: Retrospect and Prospects|publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-19-928382-8|chapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=bqU9T5c0wlYC |url-access=registration|url=https://archive.org/details/twentyfirstcentu0000unse_v0c4}}
* {{citation|last=Dyson|first=Tim|title=A Population History of India: From the First Modern People to the Present Day|year=2018|publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-19-882905-8 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=3TRtDwAAQBAJ}}
* {{citation|last=Fisher|first=Michael H.|year=2018|title=An Environmental History of India: From Earliest Times to the Twenty-First Century|location=Cambridge and New York|publisher=Cambridge University Press |isbn=978-1-107-11162-2 |lccn=2018021693|doi=10.1017/9781316276044|s2cid=134229667 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=kZVuDwAAQBAJ|doi-access=free}}
* {{citation|last=Garg|first=S. C.|date=19 April 2005|title=Mobilizing Urban Infrastructure Finance in India|publisher=World Bank|url=https://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMF/Resources/339747-1105651852282/Garg.pdf|access-date=27 January 2010|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20090824063911/https://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMF/Resources/339747-1105651852282/Garg.pdf|archive-date=24 August 2009|url-status=dead}}
* {{citation|last=Mallikarjun|first=B|date=November 2004|title=Fifty Years of Language Planning for Modern Hindi – The Official Language of India|journal=Language in India|volume=4|issue=11|issn=1930-2940 |url=https://www.languageinindia.com/nov2004/mallikarjunmalaysiapaper1.html|access-date=24 July 2011|archive-date=10 January 2018|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20180110230215/http://www.languageinindia.com/nov2004/mallikarjunmalaysiapaper1.html|url-status=dead}}
* {{citation|last=Ottenheimer|first=H. J.|year=2008|title=The Anthropology of Language: An Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology|publisher=Cengage|isbn=978-0-495-50884-7|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=d4QHsORbZs4C}}
* {{citation|last=Ratna|first=U.|editor-last=Dutt|editor-first=A. K.|editor2-last=Thakur|editor2-first=B. |year=2007|title=City, Society, and Planning|chapter=Interface Between Urban and Rural Development in India |volume=1|publisher=Concept|isbn=978-81-8069-459-2|chapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=QDmZeW1H37IC}}
* {{citation|last=Rorabacher|first=J. A.|year=2010|title=Hunger and Poverty in South Asia|publisher=Gyan|isbn=978-81-212-1027-0|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=u6hriMcSsE4C}}
* {{citation|date=27 April 1960 |title=Notification No. 2/8/60-O.L |publisher=Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India |url=https://rajbhasha.nic.in/UI/pagecontent.aspx?pc=Mzc%3d |access-date=13 May 2011 |ref={{sfnRef|Ministry of Home Affairs 1960}} |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20141001005409/https://www.rajbhasha.nic.in/UI/pagecontent.aspx?pc=Mzc%3D |archive-date=1 October 2014}}
* {{citation|title=Census Data 2001|work=Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner|publisher=Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India|date=2010–2011|url=https://www.censusindia.gov.in/Census_Data_2001/National_Summary/National_Summary_DataPage.aspx|access-date=22 July 2011}}
{{refend}}

===Art===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|last=Blurton|first=T. Richard|title=Hindu Art|year=1993|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=xJ-lzU_nj_MC&amp;q=Hindu+Art,+1994,+British+Museum+Press|publisher=Harvard University Press|isbn=978-0-674-39189-5}}
* {{citation|last=Craven|first=Roy C|title=Indian art: a concise history|year=1997|url=https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/37895110|location=New York City|publisher=Thames &amp; Hudson|isbn=978-0-500-20302-6|oclc=37895110|author-link=Roy C. Craven}}
* {{citation|last=Harle|first=James C.|title=The Art and Architecture of the Indian Subcontinent|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=LwcBVvdqyBkC|year=1994|publisher=Yale University Press|isbn=978-0-300-06217-5}}
* {{citation|last=Michell|first=George|title=Hindu Art and Architecture|year=2000|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=YVl2QgAACAAJ|publisher=Thames &amp; Hudson|isbn=978-0-500-20337-8}}
* {{citation|last=Rowland|first=Benjamin|title=The Art and Architecture of India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain|year=1970|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=6L2fAAAAMAAJ&amp;q=The+Art+and+Architecture+of+India:+Buddhist,+Hindu,+Jain|publisher=Penguin Books}}
{{refend}}

===Culture===
{{refbegin|33em}}
* {{citation|last=Binmore|first=K. G.|year= 2007|title=Playing for Real: A Text on Game Theory|publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-19-530057-4|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=eY0YhSk9ujsC&amp;pg=PA98}}
* {{citation|last=Chopra|first=P.|year= 2011|title=A Joint Enterprise: Indian Elites and the Making of British Bombay|publisher=University of Minnesota Press|isbn=978-0-8166-7037-6|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=jhTiCnh6RqAC&amp;pg=PA46}}
* {{citation|last=Cullen-Dupont|first=K.|date=July 2009|title=Human Trafficking|publisher=Infobase Publishing|isbn=978-0-8160-7545-4|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=B2GeSNXy5CoC}}
* {{citation|last=Cyriac|first=B. B.|date=9 August 2010|title=Sawant Shoots Historic Gold at World Championships|newspaper=The Times of India|url=https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/sports/more-sports/shooting/Sawant-shoots-historic-gold-at-World-Championships/articleshow/6274795.cms?referral=PM |access-date=25 May 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Das|first=S. K.|year=2005|title=A History of Indian Literature, 500–1399: From Courtly to the Popular|publisher=Sahitya Akademi|isbn=978-81-260-2171-0}}
* {{citation|last=Datta|first=A.|year=2006|title=The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature|volume=2|publisher=Sahitya Akademi|isbn=978-81-260-1194-0}}
* {{citation|last=Dehejia|first=R. S.|date=7 November 2011|title=Indian Grand Prix Vs. Encephalitis?|work=The Wall Street Journal|url=https://blogs.wsj.com/indiarealtime/2011/11/07/economics-journal-indian-grand-prix-vs-encephalitis/|access-date=20 December 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Deutsch|first=E.|year=1969|title=Advaita Vedānta: A Philosophical Reconstruction|publisher=University of Hawaiʻi Press|isbn=978-0-8248-0271-4 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=63gdKwhHeV0C}}
* {{citation|last1=Dissanayake|first1=W. K.|last2=Gokulsing|first2=M.|date=May 2004|title=Indian Popular Cinema: A Narrative of Cultural Change|edition=2nd|publisher=Trentham Books|isbn=978-1-85856-329-9 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=_plssuFIar8C}}
* {{citation|last1=Futterman|first1=M|last2=Sharma|first2=A|date=11 September 2009|title=India Aims for Center Court|work=The Wall Street Journal |url=https://www.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052970203440104574406704026883502 |access-date=29 September 2010}}
* {{cite web|author=Hansa Research |url=https://mruc.net/irs2012q1-topline-findings.pdf |work=Indian Readership Survey 2012 Q1 : Topline Findings |title=Growth: Literacy &amp; Media Consumption |publisher=Media Research Users Council |access-date=12 September 2012 |year=2012 |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20140407092737/https://mruc.net/irs2012q1-topline-findings.pdf |archive-date=7 April 2014 }}
* {{citation|last=Hart|first=G. L.|year= 1975|title=Poems of Ancient Tamil: Their Milieu and Their Sanskrit Counterparts|publisher=University of California Press|isbn=978-0-520-02672-8 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=a5KwQwAACAAJ}}
* {{citation|editor-last=Heehs|editor-first=P.|year= 2002|title=Indian Religions: A Historical Reader of Spiritual Expression and Experience|publisher=New York University Press|isbn=978-0-8147-3650-0 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=Jgsu-aIm3ncC|access-date=24 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Hoiberg|first1=D.|last2=Ramchandani|first2=I.|year=2000|title=Students&#x27; Britannica India: Select Essays|publisher=Popular Prakashan|isbn=978-0-85229-762-9}}
* {{citation|editor-last=Johnson|editor-first=W. J.|title=The Sauptikaparvan of the Mahabharata: The Massacre at Night|year= 2008|edition=2nd|series=Oxford World&#x27;s Classics|publisher=Oxford University Press |isbn=978-0-19-282361-8}}
* {{citation|last1=Jones|first1=G.|last2=Ramdas|first2=K.|year=2005|title=(Un)tying the Knot: Ideal and Reality in Asian Marriage|publisher=National University of Singapore Press|isbn=978-981-05-1428-0 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=IttiQ3QdJ6YC}}
* {{citation|last1=Kālidāsa|last2=Johnson|first2=W. J.|author-link=Kālidāsa|year= 2001|title=The Recognition of Śakuntalā: A Play in Seven Acts|publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-19-283911-4|url-access=registration|url=https://archive.org/details/recognitionofsak0000kali}}
* {{citation|last1=Kaminsky|first1=Arnold P.|last2=Long|first2=Roger D. |title=India Today: An Encyclopedia of Life in the Republic: An Encyclopedia of Life in the Republic|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=wWDnTWrz4O8C|access-date=12 September 2012|year= 2011|publisher=ABC-CLIO|isbn=978-0-313-37462-3}}
* {{citation|last=Karanth|first=S. K.|author-link=Shivarama Karanth|date=2002|title=Yakṣagāna|publisher=Abhinav Publications|isbn=978-81-7017-357-1}}
* {{citation|editor1-last=Kiple|editor1-first=K. F.|editor2-last=Ornelas|editor2-first=K. C.|title=The Cambridge World History of Food|volume=2|year=2000|place=Cambridge and New York|publisher=Cambridge University Press |isbn=978-0-521-40215-6}}
* {{citation|editor-last=Kuiper|editor-first=K.|year=2010|title=The Culture of India|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=LiqloV4JnNUC|access-date=24 July 2011|publisher=Britannica Educational Publishing|isbn=978-1-61530-203-1}}
* {{citation|last=Kumar|first=V.|title=Vastushastra|edition=2nd|series=All You Wanted to Know About Series|date= 2000|publisher=Sterling Publishing|isbn=978-81-207-2199-9}}
* {{citation|last=Lal|first=A.|title=The Oxford Companion to Indian Theatre|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=DftkAAAAMAAJ|access-date=24 July 2011|year=2004|publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-19-564446-3}}
* {{citation|last1=Lang|first1=J.|last2=Moleski|first2=W.|date=1 December 2010|title=Functionalism Revisited|publisher=Ashgate Publishing|isbn=978-1-4094-0701-0|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=rOCaSn8-ZboC&amp;pg=PA151}}
* {{citation|last=MacDonell|first=A. A.|author-link=Arthur Anthony Macdonell|title=A History of Sanskrit Literature|year=2004|publisher=Kessinger Publishing|isbn=978-1-4179-0619-2|title-link=s:A History of Sanskrit Literature}}
* {{citation|last1=Majumdar|first1=B.|last2=Bandyopadhyay|first2=K.|title=A Social History of Indian Football: Striving To Score|year=2006|publisher=Routledge|isbn=978-0-415-34835-5}}
* {{citation|last=Makar|first=E. M.|year=2007|title=An American&#x27;s Guide to Doing Business in India|publisher=Adams|isbn=978-1-59869-211-2|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=ujYmdNVIr7QC}}
* {{citation|last1=Massey|first1=R.|last2=Massey|first2=J|year=1998|title=The Music of India |publisher=Abhinav Publications|isbn=978-81-7017-332-8|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=yySNDP9XVggC}}
* {{citation|last=Medora|first=N.|editor1-last=Hamon|editor1-first=R. R.|editor2-last=Ingoldsby|editor2-first=B. B.|year=2003|title=Mate Selection Across Cultures|chapter=Mate Selection in Contemporary India: Love Marriages Versus Arranged Marriages|publisher=SAGE Publications|pages=209–230|isbn=978-0-7619-2592-7}}
* {{citation|last=Mehta|first=Nalin|title=Television in India: Satellites, Politics and Cultural Change |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=R-BsSzSjnTYC|access-date=12 September 2012|year=2008 |publisher=Taylor &amp; Francis US|isbn=978-0-415-44759-1}}
* {{citation|last=Narayan |first=Sunetra Sen |year=2013|chapter=Context of Broadcasting in India |title=Globalization and Television: A Study of the Indian Experience, 1990–2010 |pages=55–69 |publisher=Oxford University Press|isbn=978-0-19-809236-0 |doi=10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198092360.003.0004}}
* {{citation|last=Sengupta|first=R.|date=24 September 2010|title=Is Boxing the New Cricket?|work=Mint|url=https://www.livemint.com/Leisure/1jxksEgRhUYXq0ezp1iixM/Is-boxing-the-new-cricket.html|access-date=5 October 2010|ref={{sfnRef|Mint 2010}}}}
* {{citation|last=Nakamura|first=H.|year=1999|title=Indian Buddhism: A Survey with Bibliographical Notes|edition=12th|series=Buddhist Tradition Series|publisher=Motilal Banarsidass|isbn=978-81-208-0272-8 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=w0A7y4TCeVQC}}
* {{citation|editor1-last=Rajadhyaksha|editor1-first=A.|editor2-last=Willemen|editor2-first=P.|year=1999|title=Encyclopaedia of Indian Cinema|edition=2nd|publisher=British Film Institute|isbn=978-0-85170-669-6 |url=https://archive.org/details/encyclopaediaofi0000raja}}
* {{citation|translator-last=Ramanujan|translator-first=A. K.|translator-link=A. K. Ramanujan|year=1985|title=Poems of Love and War: From the Eight Anthologies and the Ten Long Poems of Classical Tamil|publisher=Columbia University Press|place=New York|isbn=978-0-231-05107-1 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=nIybE0HRvdQC|ref={{SfnRef|Ramanujan|1985}}}}
* {{citation|last=Roberts|first=N. W.|year=2004|title=Building Type Basics for Places of Worship|publisher=John Wiley &amp; Sons|isbn=978-0-471-22568-3|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=hOxOAAAAMAAJ}}
* {{harvc|last=Roger|first=Delphine|in1=Kiple|in2=Ornelas|year=2000|pages=1140–1150|c=The Middle East and South Asia (in Chapter: History and Culture of Food and Drink in Asia) |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=Vr2qnK_QOuAC&amp;pg=PA1140}}
* {{citation|last=Schwartzberg|first=J.|year=2011|title=India: Caste|encyclopedia=Encyclopædia Britannica|url=https://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/285248/India/46404/Caste|access-date=17 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last=Silverman|first=S.|year=2007|title=Vastu: Transcendental Home Design in Harmony with Nature|publisher=Gibbs Smith|isbn=978-1-4236-0132-6|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=iwaryJd3fD8C&amp;pg=PA20}}
* {{citation|last=Tarlo|first=E.|year=1996|title=Clothing Matters: Dress and Identity in India|publisher=University of Chicago Press|isbn=978-0-226-78976-7|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=ByoTXhXCuyAC|access-date=24 July 2011}}
* {{citation|last1=Xavier|first1=L.|date=12 September 2010|title=Sushil Kumar Wins Gold in World Wrestling Championship|newspaper=The Times of India|url=https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/sports/more-sports/wrestling/Sushil-Kumar-wins-gold-in-World-Wrestling-Championship/articleshow/6542488.cms?referral=PM|access-date=5 October 2010}}
* {{citation|last=Zvelebil|first=K. V.|year=1997|title=Companion Studies to the History of Tamil Literature|publisher=Brill Publishers|isbn=978-90-04-09365-2|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=qAPtq49DZfoC}}
* {{citation|title=Anand Crowned World Champion|date=29 October 2008|publisher=Rediff |url=https://www.rediff.com/sports/2008/oct/29anand.htm|access-date=29 October 2008|ref={{sfnRef|Rediff 2008 b}}}}
* {{citation|title=Taj Mahal|work=World Heritage Convention|publisher=United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation|url=https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/252|access-date=3 March 2012|ref={{sfnRef|United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation}}}}
* {{citation|title=Saina Nehwal: India&#x27;s Badminton Star and &quot;New Woman&quot;|date=1 August 2010|work=BBC News|url=https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-10725584|access-date=5 October 2010|ref={{sfnRef|British Broadcasting Corporation 2010 a}}}}
* {{citation|title=Commonwealth Games 2010: India Dominate Shooting Medals|date=7 October 2010 |work=Commonwealth Games 2010|publisher=BBC|ref={{sfnRef|Commonwealth Games 2010}} |url=https://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/commonwealth_games/delhi_2010/9068886.stm |access-date=3 June 2011}}
{{refend}}

== External links ==
{{Sister project links|collapsible=collapsed|voy=India|India}}
Government
* Official website of the Government of India
* Government of India Web Directory

General information
* India. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* {{GovPubs|India}}
* India from BBC News
* {{wikiatlas|India}}
* {{osmrelation-inline|304716}}
* Key Development Forecasts for India from International Futures

{{India topics}}
{{Navboxes
|title=Related topics
|list1=
{{States and Union Territories of India}}
{{South Asian topics}}
{{The Commonwealth}}
{{South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation}}
{{G8 nations}}
{{G20}}
{{BRICS}}
{{East Asia Summit (EAS)}}
{{Shanghai Cooperation Organisation}}
{{Countries of Asia}}
{{Authority control}}
{{Coord|21|N|78|E|region:IN_type:country_source:dewiki|display=title}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="0" end="5" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="22" end="39" title="India" label="Republic of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="57" end="67" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="79" end="110" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="seventh-largest country by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q66084740" start="116" end="137" title="List of countries by population (United Nations)" label="most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="255" end="267" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="286" end="297" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="324" end="337" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="384" end="392" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="406" end="411" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="413" end="418" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="424" end="430" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="449" end="459" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="464" end="471" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="520" end="529" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="538" end="546" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="552" end="579" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="609" end="617" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="632" end="641" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="644" end="657" title="Modern humans" label="Modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="673" end="692" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="875" end="892" title="genetic diversity" label="genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="894" end="906" title="Neolithic" label="Settled life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="965" end="970" title="Indus River" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="971" end="982" title="river basin" label="river basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="1028" end="1053" title="Indus Valley Civilisation" label="Indus Valley Civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="1091" end="1103" title="Proto-language" label="archaic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1107" end="1115" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="1120" end="1142" title="Indo-European language" label="Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213532" start="1148" end="1156" title="Trans-cultural diffusion" label="diffused"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="1188" end="1197" title="Rig Veda" label="Its hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="1222" end="1230" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="1267" end="1286" title="Dravidian languages" label="Dravidian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="1333" end="1338" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q19700986" start="1372" end="1380" title="History of Buddhism in India" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222031" start="1385" end="1392" title="History of Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518716" start="1417" end="1429" title="social order" label="social order"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="1512" end="1518" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="1523" end="1535" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216180" start="1617" end="1631" title="untouchability" label="untouchability"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="1663" end="1674" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1680" end="1695" title="Middle kingdoms of India#The Deccan plateau and South" label="Middle kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1774" end="1788" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1819" end="1831" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1833" end="1838" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="1840" end="1847" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="1853" end="1867" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1951" end="1963" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="2031" end="2046" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="2089" end="2116" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="networks of mediaeval Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="2138" end="2157" title="Vijayanagara Empire" label="Vijayanagara Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="2213" end="2219" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="2221" end="2228" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="2280" end="2293" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="2368" end="2389" title="Mughal architecture" label="luminous architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="2411" end="2449" title="Company rule in India" label="rule of the British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="2521" end="2532" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2534" end="2552" title="British Raj" label="British Crown rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="2624" end="2645" title="Industrial Revolution" label="technological changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="2749" end="2769" title="Indian independence movement" label="nationalist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="2901" end="2912" title="Partition of India" label="partitioned"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2934" end="2943" title="Dominion#India and Pakistan" label="dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775277" start="2962" end="2979" title="dominion of India" label="dominion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006542" start="3002" end="3022" title="dominion of Pakistan" label="dominion of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="3127" end="3143" title="federal republic" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="3186" end="3206" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="3216" end="3227" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="3229" end="3241" title="Multilingualism" label="multilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="3246" end="3266" title="Multiculturalism" label="multi-ethnic society"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3383" end="3400" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764970" start="3547" end="3559" title="List of countries by real GDP growth rate" label="fast-growing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="3560" end="3573" title="G20" label="major economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031253" start="3578" end="3619" title="Information technology in India" label="a hub for information technology services"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="3655" end="3668" title="Cinema of India" label="Indian movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q531426" start="3673" end="3678" title="Music of India" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918065" start="3736" end="3752" title="Poverty in India" label="its poverty rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="3816" end="3836" title="List of states with nuclear weapons" label="nuclear-weapon state"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="3842" end="3876" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="ranks high in military expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="3899" end="3906" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592139" start="4039" end="4056" title="Gender inequality in India" label="gender inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056486" start="4058" end="4076" title="Malnutrition in India" label="child malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698355" start="4099" end="4112" title="Air pollution in India" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="4135" end="4146" title="megadiverse country" label="megadiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="4157" end="4178" title="biodiversity hotspots" label="biodiversity hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001385" start="4180" end="4201" title="Wildlife of India" label="India&amp;#x27;s wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q323466" start="4257" end="4268" title="Culture of India" label="its culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828718" start="4320" end="4338" title="Protected areas of India" label="protected habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="4381" end="4406" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="4482" end="4497" title="Classical Latin" label="Classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="4532" end="4542" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="4641" end="4658" title="Hellenistic Greek" label="Hellenistic Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="4699" end="4712" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35225" start="4753" end="4764" title="Old Persian" label="Old Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435520" start="4771" end="4778" title="Hindush" label="Hindush"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4813" end="4830" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="4852" end="4859" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4865" end="4873" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="4933" end="4944" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="5003" end="5017" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5152" end="5158" title="Names for India#Bharat" label="Bharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193297" start="5189" end="5207" title="Indian epic poetry" label="Indian epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="5216" end="5237" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087336" start="5268" end="5289" title="Names for India" label="many Indian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="5388" end="5399" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q853968" start="5507" end="5516" title="Hindustan" label="Hindustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="5531" end="5545" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="5643" end="5656" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="5755" end="5774" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="5807" end="5815" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="5944" end="5956" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q242148" start="6282" end="6290" title="Mehrgarh" label="Mehrgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q163239" start="6310" end="6331" title="Balochistan, Pakistan" label="Balochistan, Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="6368" end="6393" title="Indus Valley Civilisation" label="Indus Valley Civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="6519" end="6531" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="6533" end="6540" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9468" start="6542" end="6551" title="Dholavira" label="Dholavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722226" start="6557" end="6567" title="Kalibangan" label="Kalibangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="6768" end="6780" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6797" end="6805" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="6816" end="6821" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="6861" end="6869" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="6951" end="6964" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="6972" end="6985" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab region"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="7000" end="7014" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q269145" start="7095" end="7115" title="Indo-Aryan migration" label="Indo-Aryan migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="7163" end="7175" title="caste system" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="7354" end="7368" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="7484" end="7495" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="7565" end="7573" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="7642" end="7653" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515208" start="7655" end="7671" title="irrigation tanks" label="irrigation tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="7917" end="7930" title="mahajanapadas" label="mahajanapadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="8051" end="8058" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="8113" end="8121" title="Mahavira" label="Mahavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8123" end="8131" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="8159" end="8173" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664483" start="8403" end="8415" title="Nekkhamma" label="renunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="8536" end="8543" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="8597" end="8610" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="8903" end="8909" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="8989" end="8995" title="Dharma (Buddhism)" label="dhamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="9008" end="9025" title="Sangam literature" label="Sangam literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="9033" end="9047" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil language"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="9116" end="9122" title="Chera dynasty" label="Cheras"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="9128" end="9134" title="Chola dynasty" label="Cholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="9144" end="9151" title="Pandya dynasty" label="Pandyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q513839" start="9168" end="9208" title="Indo-Roman trade relations" label="traded extensively with the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="9218" end="9222" title="Western Asia" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="9227" end="9241" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="9395" end="9407" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056552" start="9714" end="9723" title="Sculpture in the Indian subcontinent" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q61050" start="9728" end="9740" title="Architecture of India" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9784" end="9813" title="Sanskrit literature#Classical Sanskrit literature" label="Classical Sanskrit literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124036" start="9836" end="9850" title="History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinent" label="Indian science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292962" start="9852" end="9861" title="Indian astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="9863" end="9871" title="Ayurveda" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279571" start="9877" end="9888" title="Indian mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216895" start="10039" end="10045" title="Harsha" label="Harsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="10049" end="10056" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="10162" end="10170" title="Chalukya dynasty" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="10265" end="10269" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="10278" end="10284" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="10363" end="10371" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="10424" end="10431" title="Pandya dynasty" label="Pandyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="10440" end="10446" title="Chola dynasty" label="Cholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q507417" start="10893" end="10909" title="Bhakti" label="devotional hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="11050" end="11086" title="Languages of India" label="modern languages of the subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="11510" end="11517" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="11519" end="11527" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="11529" end="11533" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="11535" end="11541" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="11543" end="11551" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="11553" end="11560" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="11562" end="11573" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="11575" end="11583" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="11589" end="11598" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001480" start="11903" end="11914" title="courser (horse)" label="swift-horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="12095" end="12110" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="12382" end="12396" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="12534" end="12543" title="Human migration" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="12838" end="12857" title="Vijayanagara Empire" label="Vijayanagara Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="12878" end="12886" title="Shaivism" label="Shaivite"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="13288" end="13301" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="13595" end="13600" title="Akbar" label="Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049336" start="14112" end="14120" title="Mughal painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="14152" end="14164" title="Mughal architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="14238" end="14246" title="Maratha Empire" label="Marathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="14252" end="14258" title="Rajput" label="Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="14269" end="14274" title="Sikh Empire" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="14843" end="14869" title="East India Company" label="English East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="15223" end="15229" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="15548" end="15562" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q333117" start="16077" end="16091" title="James Broun-Ramsay, 1st Marquess of Dalhousie" label="Lord Dalhousie"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="16448" end="16454" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="16538" end="16562" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="16948" end="16978" title="British Raj" label="direct administration of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="17020" end="17033" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="17311" end="17335" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658557" start="17607" end="17614" title="Famine in India" label="famines"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18051" end="18062" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605509" start="18087" end="18113" title="Indian Army during World War I" label="one million Indians served"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904172" start="18152" end="18167" title="Montagu–Chelmsford Reforms" label="British reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006357" start="18177" end="18199" title="Rowlatt act" label="repressive legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="18273" end="18283" title="nonviolent" label="nonviolent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="18323" end="18337" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019652" start="18563" end="18599" title="India in World War II" label="Indian participation in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41219" start="18672" end="18690" title="Muslim nationalism in South Asia" label="Muslim nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="18767" end="18785" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333520" start="19008" end="19026" title="Economic liberalisation in India" label="began in the 1980s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764970" start="19154" end="19203" title="List of countries by GDP (real) growth rate" label="one of the world&amp;#x27;s fastest-growing economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992570" start="19327" end="19336" title="Religious violence in India" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049637" start="19341" end="19363" title="Caste-related violence in India" label="caste-related violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q912158" start="19368" end="19405" title="Naxalite" label="Maoist-inspired Naxalite insurgencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q749970" start="19414" end="19445" title="Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir" label="separatism in Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125513" start="19450" end="19468" title="insurgency in Northeast India" label="in Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19514" end="19519" title="China–India relations#1960s" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119132" start="19529" end="19537" title="Indo-Pakistani wars and conflicts" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q499481" start="19858" end="19879" title="Indian Plate" label="Indian tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="19895" end="19916" title="Indo-Australian Plate" label="Indo-Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="20052" end="20060" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="20085" end="20090" title="Plate tectonics" label="drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q215920" start="20101" end="20119" title="seafloor spreading" label="seafloor spreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="20197" end="20204" title="Tethys Ocean" label="Tethyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238851" start="20205" end="20218" title="oceanic crust" label="oceanic crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="20247" end="20254" title="subduction" label="subduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="20265" end="20279" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="20344" end="20350" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q858571" start="20404" end="20421" title="continental crust" label="continental crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="20475" end="20484" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068705" start="20577" end="20583" title="trough (geology)" label="trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="20654" end="20673" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q626690" start="20762" end="20776" title="Aravalli range" label="Aravalli range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253810" start="20801" end="20812" title="Delhi Ridge" label="Delhi Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q172691" start="20864" end="20875" title="Thar Desert" label="Thar Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="20974" end="20990" title="South India" label="peninsular India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145416" start="21078" end="21085" title="Satpura Range" label="Satpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q271435" start="21090" end="21097" title="Vindhya Range" label="Vindhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881042" start="21216" end="21236" title="Chota Nagpur Plateau" label="Chota Nagpur Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="21316" end="21330" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="21395" end="21402" title="Western Ghats" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q465055" start="21407" end="21420" title="Eastern Ghats" label="Eastern Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="21981" end="21988" title="mudflat" label="mudflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="22088" end="22094" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="22103" end="22114" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="22145" end="22158" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="22246" end="22252" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q695610" start="22261" end="22265" title="Kosi River" label="Kosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191314" start="22540" end="22548" title="Godavari River" label="Godavari"/>
<link wikidata="Q271044" start="22554" end="22562" title="Mahanadi River" label="Mahanadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q216239" start="22568" end="22574" title="Kaveri River" label="Kaveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q193499" start="22584" end="22591" title="Krishna River" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q234004" start="22680" end="22687" title="Narmada River" label="Narmada"/>
<link wikidata="Q707056" start="22696" end="22701" title="Tapti River" label="Tapti"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="22724" end="22735" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026866" start="22811" end="22824" title="Rann of Kutch" label="Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526" start="22859" end="22869" title="Sundarbans" label="Sundarbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="22984" end="22995" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="23002" end="23013" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="23015" end="23027" title="Atoll" label="coral atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="23127" end="23138" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091594" start="23179" end="23193" title="Climate of India" label="Indian climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="23333" end="23340" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212903" start="23415" end="23429" title="katabatic wind" label="katabatic wind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23857" end="23869" title="Climate of India#Tropical wet" label="tropical wet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23871" end="23883" title="Climate of India#Arid and semi-arid regions" label="tropical dry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23885" end="23902" title="Climate of India#Subtropical humid" label="subtropical humid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23908" end="23915" title="Climate of India#Mountain" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764551" start="24045" end="24068" title="Climate change in India" label="Climate change in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q903816" start="24107" end="24136" title="Retreat of glaciers since 1850" label="retreat of Himalayan glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134348" start="24164" end="24173" title="Volumetric flow rate" label="flow rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="24219" end="24225" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="24234" end="24245" title="Brahmaputra" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="24472" end="24491" title="megadiverse country" label="megadiverse country"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="24544" end="24564" title="biological diversity" label="biological diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="24602" end="24612" title="indigenous (ecology)" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="24617" end="24624" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="24648" end="24655" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="24672" end="24678" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="24690" end="24694" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="24712" end="24719" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="24735" end="24744" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="24763" end="24767" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="24793" end="24808" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="24942" end="24962" title="biodiversity hotspot" label="biodiversity hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="25081" end="25096" title="biogeography" label="biogeographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="25130" end="25144" title="vascular plant" label="vascular plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158579" start="25244" end="25265" title="tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forest" label="tropical moist forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q186233" start="25273" end="25288" title="Andaman Islands" label="Andaman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="25294" end="25307" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="25313" end="25328" title="Northeast India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q144019" start="25519" end="25546" title="temperate coniferous forest" label="temperate coniferous forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="25554" end="25562" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="25591" end="25594" title="Shorea robusta" label="sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="25648" end="25652" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246061" start="25751" end="25763" title="deserts and xeric shrublands" label="thorn forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="25776" end="25790" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q378705" start="26556" end="26566" title="astringent" label="astringent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170461" start="26573" end="26591" title="Azadirachta indica" label="Azadirachta indica"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="26657" end="26672" title="herbal medicine" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071706" start="26698" end="26713" title="Ficus religiosa" label="Ficus religiosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="26787" end="26799" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="26817" end="26827" title="Gautama Buddha" label="the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="26847" end="26857" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pali canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="26938" end="26946" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833" start="26961" end="26975" title="supercontinent" label="supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55819" start="27159" end="27168" title="Deccan Traps" label="volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="27173" end="27189" title="Climate variability and change" label="climatic changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q599991" start="27325" end="27338" title="Zoogeography" label="zoogeographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144310" start="27587" end="27605" title="Nilgiri Langur" label="hooded leaf monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009139" start="27625" end="27644" title="Duttaphrynus beddomii" label="Beddome&amp;#x27;s toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="27686" end="27690" title="World Conservation Union" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056733" start="27702" end="27727" title="List of endangered animals in India" label="threatened animal species"/>
<link wikidata="Q80952" start="27810" end="27822" title="Bengal tiger" label="Bengal tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q950620" start="27831" end="27851" title="South Asian river dolphin" label="Ganges river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="27853" end="27874" title="Critically endangered" label="Critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134" start="27895" end="27902" title="gharial" label="gharial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="27906" end="27917" title="crocodilian" label="crocodilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q864359" start="27923" end="27943" title="great Indian bustard" label="great Indian bustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q327118" start="27953" end="27980" title="Indian white-rumped vulture" label="Indian white-rumped vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q244408" start="28048" end="28058" title="diclofenac" label="diclofenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q278912" start="28296" end="28311" title="Asiatic cheetah" label="Asiatic cheetah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125269" start="29057" end="29071" title="National parks of India" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828718" start="29076" end="29091" title="protected areas of India" label="protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249509" start="29175" end="29198" title="Wildlife Protection Act of 1972" label="Wildlife Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180609" start="29251" end="29264" title="Project Tiger" label="Project Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721449" start="29438" end="29481" title="Wildlife sanctuaries of India" label="more than five hundred wildlife sanctuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915296" start="29486" end="29520" title="Biosphere reserves of India" label="eighteen{{Nbsp}}biosphere reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q163248" start="29552" end="29587" title="World Network of Biosphere Reserves" label="World Network of Biosphere Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195912" start="29589" end="29610" title="List of Ramsar sites in India" label="seventy-five wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="29636" end="29653" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161826" start="29923" end="29936" title="Janadesh 2007" label="Janadesh 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893085" start="29949" end="29960" title="land reform in India" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358094" start="29961" end="29969" title="landless" label="landless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="29980" end="29994" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q283559" start="30005" end="30020" title="Rajagopal P. V." label="Rajagopal P. V."/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="30049" end="30071" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="30079" end="30097" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30167" end="30183" title="List of political parties in India#National parties" label="national parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="30199" end="30223" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="30238" end="30260" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30292" end="30308" title="List of political parties in India#State parties" label="regional parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="30373" end="30379" title="Centrism" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q303132" start="30390" end="30407" title="political culture" label="political culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="30421" end="30431" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="30623" end="30633" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="30835" end="30855" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531591" start="30965" end="30969" title="1951 Indian general election" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532217" start="30971" end="30975" title="1957 Indian general election" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532199" start="30981" end="30985" title="1962 Indian general election" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="30991" end="31014" title="Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q244689" start="31079" end="31098" title="Lal Bahadur Shastri" label="Lal Bahadur Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="31213" end="31226" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532250" start="31286" end="31290" title="1967 Indian general election" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532241" start="31295" end="31299" title="1971 Indian general election" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726232" start="31338" end="31356" title="The Emergency (India)" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531393" start="31418" end="31422" title="1977 Indian general election" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352638" start="31437" end="31449" title="Janata Party" label="Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q218661" start="31592" end="31605" title="Morarji Desai" label="Morarji Desai"/>
<link wikidata="Q319824" start="31610" end="31622" title="Charan Singh" label="Charan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347903" start="31727" end="31739" title="Assassination of Indira Gandhi" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="31770" end="31782" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532183" start="31833" end="31848" title="1984 Indian general election" label="later that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532186" start="31886" end="31890" title="1989 Indian general election" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784865" start="31898" end="31912" title="National Front (India)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682547" start="31948" end="31958" title="Janata Dal" label="Janata Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q234277" start="31980" end="31990" title="Communist Party of India (Marxist)" label="Left Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q315338" start="32143" end="32153" title="V.P. Singh" label="V.P. Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q334279" start="32158" end="32173" title="Chandra Shekhar" label="Chandra Shekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532223" start="32237" end="32241" title="1991 Indian general election" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="32340" end="32359" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q275146" start="32367" end="32386" title="P. V. Narasimha Rao" label="P. V. Narasimha Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="32618" end="32630" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169287" start="32645" end="32652" title="Member of Parliament (India)" label="members"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="32660" end="32679" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="32683" end="32692" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532207" start="32784" end="32788" title="1996 Indian general election" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887789" start="32943" end="32955" title="United Front (India, 1996)" label="United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q377870" start="33055" end="33070" title="H.D. Deve Gowda" label="H.D. Deve Gowda"/>
<link wikidata="Q248484" start="33075" end="33086" title="I.K. Gujral" label="I.K. Gujral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532246" start="33091" end="33095" title="1998 Indian general election" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q129815" start="33150" end="33178" title="National Democratic Alliance" label="National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q233289" start="33193" end="33213" title="Atal Bihari Vajpayee" label="Atal Bihari Vajpayee"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="33254" end="33274" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523023" start="33356" end="33384" title="2004 Indian general election" label="2004 Indian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323719" start="33518" end="33545" title="United Progressive Alliance" label="United Progressive Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="33575" end="33587" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-leaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134751" start="33658" end="33679" title="2009 Indian general election" label="2009 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567675" start="33752" end="33782" title="List of Communist Parties in India" label="India&amp;#x27;s communist parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="33832" end="33846" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="33885" end="33901" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532217" start="33905" end="33909" title="1957 Indian general election" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532199" start="33914" end="33918" title="1962 Indian general election" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587169" start="34006" end="34027" title="2014 Indian general election" label="2014 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28164181" start="34155" end="34176" title="2019 Indian general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042773" start="34229" end="34250" title="2024 Indian general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q126392128" start="34317" end="34338" title="Third Modi ministry" label="formed the government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="34340" end="34353" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096847" start="34364" end="34378" title="Chief minister (India)" label="chief minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="34382" end="34389" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q677555" start="34691" end="34709" title="Rashtrapati Bhavan" label="Rashtrapati Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="34741" end="34759" title="President of India" label="President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="34796" end="34809" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q382771" start="34814" end="34827" title="Herbert Baker" label="Herbert Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="34836" end="34852" title="Viceroy of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="34903" end="34914" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="34930" end="34940" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="34948" end="34968" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440567" start="35086" end="35105" title="Federalism in India" label="Federalism in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="35163" end="35169" title="States and territories of India" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="35304" end="35313" title="Sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="35315" end="35325" title="liberal democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="35326" end="35334" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="35406" end="35415" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="35417" end="35424" title="Secularism" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="35854" end="35863" title="Executive (government)" label="Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="35865" end="35876" title="Legislature" label="Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="35882" end="35891" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="35897" end="35915" title="President of India" label="President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="35934" end="35947" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537593" start="36028" end="36045" title="Electoral College (India)" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="36161" end="36184" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="36192" end="36210" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="36230" end="36245" title="executive (government)" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="36374" end="36379" title="political party" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="36383" end="36401" title="political alliance" label="political alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641162" start="36552" end="36566" title="Vice President of India" label="vice-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q960484" start="36576" end="36602" title="Union Council of Ministers" label="Union Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="36612" end="36619" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q224747" start="36977" end="36991" title="Civil Services of India" label="Civil servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="37045" end="37054" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="37140" end="37149" title="bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="37150" end="37160" title="Parliament of India" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="37180" end="37197" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="37259" end="37270" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="37320" end="37329" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="37567" end="37594" title="States and union territories of India" label="state and union territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="37870" end="37898" title="Single-member constituency" label="single-member constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724360" start="38007" end="38017" title="Anglo-Indian reserved seats in the Lok Sabha" label="nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q368125" start="38021" end="38033" title="Anglo-Indian" label="Anglo-Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="38199" end="38236" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="38359" end="38380" title="Judicial independence" label="independent judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="38425" end="38438" title="Supreme Court of India" label="supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243690" start="38454" end="38476" title="Chief Justice of India" label="Chief Justice of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840882" start="38488" end="38499" title="High courts of India" label="high courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="38588" end="38609" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345485" start="38631" end="38649" title="Fundamental rights in India" label="fundamental rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="38706" end="38728" title="appellate jurisdiction" label="appellate jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="39158" end="39164" title="States and union territories of India" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="39171" end="39188" title="Union territory" label="union territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="39270" end="39287" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q66743" start="39289" end="39299" title="Puducherry (union territory)" label="Puducherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="39308" end="39343" title="Delhi" label="National Capital Territory of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305282" start="39570" end="39595" title="States Reorganisation Act, 1956" label="States Reorganisation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="39893" end="39907" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162" start="39910" end="39927" title="Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="39930" end="39935" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="39938" end="39943" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="39946" end="39958" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="39961" end="39964" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="39967" end="39974" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="39977" end="39984" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="39987" end="40003" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="40006" end="40015" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="40018" end="40027" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="40030" end="40036" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="40039" end="40053" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="40056" end="40067" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="40070" end="40077" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="40080" end="40089" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="40092" end="40099" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599" start="40102" end="40110" title="Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="40113" end="40119" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="40122" end="40128" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="40131" end="40140" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="40143" end="40149" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="40152" end="40162" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="40165" end="40174" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="40177" end="40184" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="40187" end="40200" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="40203" end="40214" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="40217" end="40228" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="40324" end="40351" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="40354" end="40364" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q77997266" start="40367" end="40407" title="Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu" label="Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="40410" end="40427" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="40430" end="40436" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="40439" end="40450" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="40453" end="40488" title="Delhi" label="National Capital Territory of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66743" start="40491" end="40501" title="Puducherry (union territory)" label="Puducherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="40870" end="40890" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="40912" end="40930" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q170468" start="40934" end="40954" title="United Arab Republic" label="United Arab Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="40968" end="40983" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="40987" end="40997" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="41002" end="41018" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="41087" end="41101" title="decolonisation" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="41105" end="41111" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="41116" end="41120" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12974453" start="41125" end="41146" title="India and the Non-Aligned Movement" label="played a leading role"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="41154" end="41174" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="41285" end="41307" title="Sino-Indian War" label="war with China in 1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222426" start="41385" end="41410" title="Nathu La and Cho La clashes" label="military conflict in 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q349333" start="41478" end="41493" title="Indo-Pakistani relations" label="tense relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q652285" start="41570" end="41574" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q233583" start="41576" end="41580" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="41582" end="41586" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q404517" start="41592" end="41596" title="Kargil War" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413732" start="41639" end="41668" title="Kashmir conflict" label="disputed territory of Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="41744" end="41770" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="independence of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358912" start="41909" end="41932" title="Indian Peace Keeping Force" label="peace-keeping operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="41936" end="41945" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634613" start="42008" end="42037" title="1988 Maldives coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1988 coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089240" start="42139" end="42165" title="India-Soviet Union relations" label="ties with the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622116" start="42282" end="42314" title="India–Russia relations" label="special relationship with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902811" start="42339" end="42368" title="India–Israel relations" label="defence relations with Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424165" start="42373" end="42379" title="France–India relations" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="42429" end="42477" title="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation" label="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="42486" end="42510" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q320919" start="42544" end="42552" title="Indian Armed Forces" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595371" start="42557" end="42563" title="Law enforcement in India" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q219575" start="42589" end="42615" title="United Nations peacekeeping" label="UN peacekeeping operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="42663" end="42679" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484463" start="42685" end="42689" title="G8+5" label="G8+5"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="42789" end="42802" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578792" start="42835" end="42863" title="Look East policy (India)" label="&amp;quot;Look East&amp;quot; policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="42911" end="42916" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566910" start="42926" end="42931" title="India–Japan relations" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024325" start="42937" end="42948" title="India–South Korea relations" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="43357" end="43373" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043180" start="43407" end="43435" title="Bastille Day military parade" label="Bastille Day military parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633326" start="43556" end="43578" title="Maratha Light Infantry" label="Maratha Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420139" start="43611" end="43631" title="596 (nuclear test)" label="nuclear test of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426448" start="43824" end="43850" title="Smiling Buddha" label="first nuclear weapons test"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270072" start="43875" end="43905" title="Pokhran-II" label="additional underground testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="43986" end="44023" title="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty" label="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="44032" end="44064" title="Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty" label="Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520989" start="44158" end="44170" title="no first use" label="no first use"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731619" start="44212" end="44225" title="nuclear triad" label="nuclear triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183699" start="44260" end="44287" title="Minimum Credible Deterrence" label="Minimum Credible Deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q864874" start="44359" end="44391" title="Indian Ballistic Missile Defense Program" label="ballistic missile defence shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451017" start="44399" end="44427" title="HAL AMCA" label="fifth-generation fighter jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360973" start="44524" end="44567" title="Vikrant class aircraft carrier" label="&amp;quot;Vikrant&amp;quot;-class aircraft carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075135" start="44572" end="44616" title="Arihant class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Arihant&amp;quot;-class nuclear submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q975259" start="44905" end="44915" title="Hans M. Kristensen" label="Kristensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q762201" start="44975" end="45008" title="Federation of American Scientists" label="Federation of American Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="45310" end="45318" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7480405" start="45400" end="45413" title="India–United States relations" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024215" start="45422" end="45436" title="India–European Union relations" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657882" start="45476" end="45502" title="U.S.–India Civil Nuclear Agreement" label="civilian nuclear agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="45694" end="45728" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480793" start="45737" end="45760" title="Nuclear Suppliers Group" label="Nuclear Suppliers Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q267166" start="46003" end="46026" title="Nuclear power in India" label="civilian nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024354" start="46118" end="46132" title="India–United Kingdom relations" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029579" start="46158" end="46164" title="Canada–India relations" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="46335" end="46348" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q296741" start="46401" end="46419" title="Enrique Peña Nieto" label="Enrique Peña Nieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="46594" end="46630" title="List of countries by number of troops" label="world&amp;#x27;s second-largest military"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="46649" end="46660" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="46666" end="46677" title="Indian Navy" label="Indian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="46683" end="46699" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q356379" start="46709" end="46727" title="Indian Coast Guard" label="Indian Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="46784" end="46798" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="defence budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="47333" end="47367" title="Indian Space Research Organisation" label="Indian Space Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514536" start="47381" end="47401" title="South Asia Satellite" label="South Asia Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="47441" end="47446" title="SAARC" label="SAARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="47556" end="47562" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861006" start="47579" end="47591" title="S-400 Triumf" label="S-400 Triumf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155630" start="47671" end="47686" title="missile defence" label="missile defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="47942" end="47951" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864" start="48236" end="48244" title="Junagadh" label="Junagadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="48697" end="48724" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="48806" end="48827" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="fifth-largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="48891" end="48904" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="third-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="48908" end="48931" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764970" start="49116" end="49154" title="List of countries by real GDP growth rate" label="world&amp;#x27;s fastest-growing economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="49510" end="49523" title="protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461789" start="49589" end="49622" title="Licence Raj" label="state intervention and regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153957" start="49687" end="49721" title="1991 Indian economic crisis" label="balance of payments crisis in 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333520" start="49743" end="49765" title="Economic liberalisation in India" label="liberalise its economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="50072" end="50096" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467553" start="50180" end="50199" title="Labour in India" label="Indian labour force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235713" start="50207" end="50234" title="List of countries by labour force" label="world&amp;#x27;s second largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="50410" end="50438" title="Remittance" label="foreign exchange remittances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053969" start="51167" end="51202" title="List of countries by imports" label="world&amp;#x27;s ninth-largest importer"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="51211" end="51237" title="List of countries by exports" label="sixteenth-largest exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="51725" end="51730" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067257" start="52231" end="52253" title="Global Competitiveness Report" label="global competitiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="52737" end="52760" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831590" start="52816" end="52842" title="List of largest consumer markets" label="world&amp;#x27;s fifth largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="52884" end="52898" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="53430" end="53439" title="Bengaluru" label="Bengaluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="53527" end="53552" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="53822" end="53825" title="PwC" label="PwC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065643" start="54592" end="54616" title="Transport in India" label="transport infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q973808" start="54685" end="54694" title="Education in India" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187358" start="54696" end="54711" title="Energy policy of India" label="energy security"/>
<link wikidata="Q21901381" start="54717" end="54730" title="Healthcare in India" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="54817" end="54844" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="54991" end="55000" title="Bangalore" label="Bengaluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="55008" end="55014" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="55022" end="55029" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="55040" end="55049" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668014" start="55442" end="55481" title="Telecommunications in India" label="India&amp;#x27;s telecommunication industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447044" start="55489" end="55516" title="List of mobile network operators" label="second-largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344523" start="55727" end="55753" title="Automotive industry in India" label="Indian automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031253" start="56080" end="56098" title="Information technology in India" label="Indian IT industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082849" start="56295" end="56327" title="pharmaceutical industry in India" label="pharmaceutical industry in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="56916" end="56928" title="Indian rupee" label="Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11899851" start="57161" end="57170" title="Renewable energy in India" label="renewable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137830" start="57172" end="57204" title="Coal in India" label="The country&amp;#x27;s usage of coal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57225" end="57258" title="Climate change in India#Greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions by India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11899851" start="57263" end="57283" title="Renewable energy in India" label="its renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="57398" end="57412" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076056" start="57478" end="57499" title="Electrification" label="access to electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q106936195" start="57504" end="57517" title="clean cooking" label="clean cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="57523" end="57546" title="liquefied petroleum gas" label="liquefied petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="57964" end="57989" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918065" start="58173" end="58187" title="poverty in India" label="largest number"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="58586" end="58619" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q245319" start="58681" end="58699" title="Midday Meal Scheme" label="Midday Meal Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q21523772" start="58770" end="58790" title="Walk Free Foundation" label="Walk Free Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369955" start="58880" end="58894" title="modern slavery" label="modern slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165988" start="58904" end="58917" title="bonded labour" label="bonded labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="58919" end="58931" title="child labour" label="child labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530354" start="59137" end="59156" title="List of Indian states by GDP" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406741" start="59224" end="59250" title="Net domestic product" label="net state domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530272" start="59338" end="59357" title="Corruption in India" label="Corruption in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="59407" end="59435" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861882" start="60029" end="60059" title="2011 Census of India" label="2011 provisional census report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100540" start="60779" end="60795" title="Green Revolution in India" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142547" start="61681" end="61723" title="List of million-plus urban agglomerations in India" label="million-plus urban agglomerations in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="61736" end="61742" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="61744" end="61749" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="61751" end="61758" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="61760" end="61767" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="61769" end="61778" title="Bangalore" label="Bengaluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="61780" end="61789" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="61794" end="61803" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="62201" end="62207" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="62263" end="62268" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q733577" start="62509" end="62527" title="San Thome Basilica" label="San Thome Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="62529" end="62536" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="62538" end="62548" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62635" end="62661" title="Christianity in India#Early Christianity in India" label="Syriac-speaking Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="62688" end="62704" title="languages of India" label="Indian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="62716" end="62736" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="62768" end="62791" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="62803" end="62822" title="Dravidian languages" label="Dravidian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="62838" end="62848" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="62922" end="62945" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="62953" end="62975" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="63050" end="63055" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="63194" end="63201" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q973808" start="63375" end="63384" title="Education in India" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q15604660" start="63609" end="63626" title="religion in India" label="religion in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621477" start="63668" end="63676" title="Hinduism in India" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145265" start="63717" end="63722" title="Islam in India" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q530005" start="63752" end="63764" title="Christianity in India" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513710" start="63774" end="63781" title="Sikhism in India" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19700986" start="63791" end="63799" title="History of Buddhism in India" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124074" start="63809" end="63816" title="Statistics of Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63890" end="63903" title="List of countries by Muslim population#List" label="third-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="64207" end="64222" title="Harmandir Sahib" label="Harmandir Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="64245" end="64253" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="64366" end="64378" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="64436" end="64452" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="64454" end="64463" title="Hindu mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q618680" start="64465" end="64473" title="Hindu theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194040" start="64478" end="64488" title="Hindu texts" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="64570" end="64576" title="Dharma" label="dhárma"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="64590" end="64595" title="Karma" label="kárma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="64609" end="64613" title="yoga" label="yóga"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="64631" end="64636" title="moksha" label="mokṣa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="64709" end="64732" title="Indian religions" label="its religious diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621477" start="64739" end="64747" title="Hinduism in India" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19700986" start="64749" end="64757" title="Buddhism in India" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513710" start="64759" end="64766" title="Sikhism in India" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145265" start="64768" end="64773" title="Islam in India" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q530005" start="64775" end="64787" title="Christianity in India" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124074" start="64793" end="64800" title="Jainism in India" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="64992" end="65002" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068646" start="65051" end="65062" title="Yoga Sutras of Patanjali" label="Yoga Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q507417" start="65074" end="65101" title="Bhakti" label="&amp;quot;Bhakti&amp;quot; movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001079" start="65137" end="65156" title="Buddhist philosophy" label="Buddhist philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="65315" end="65322" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="65365" end="65377" title="Buddhist art" label="Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="65410" end="65417" title="Central Asia" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="65419" end="65423" title="East Asia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="65428" end="65442" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65504" end="65544" title="Indus Valley civilisation#Seals" label="seals from the Indus Valley Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942840" start="65653" end="65679" title="&amp;quot;Pashupati&amp;quot; seal" label="&amp;quot;Pashupati&amp;quot; seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="65694" end="65706" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056552" start="66012" end="66021" title="Indian sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793993" start="66132" end="66143" title="Mauryan art" label="Mauryan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="66288" end="66300" title="Buddhist art" label="Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="66333" end="66340" title="Central Asia" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="66342" end="66346" title="East Asia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="66351" end="66365" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200893" start="66403" end="66412" title="Hindu art" label="Hindu art"/>
<link wikidata="Q617793" start="66611" end="66634" title="ancient Greek sculpture" label="ancient Greek sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q639313" start="66953" end="66968" title="Ardhanarishvara" label="Ardhanarishvara"/>
<link wikidata="Q170485" start="66987" end="66994" title="Parvati" label="Parvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="67132" end="67137" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="67147" end="67153" title="Sanchi" label="Sanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q324394" start="67155" end="67162" title="Sarnath" label="Sarnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351111" start="67167" end="67176" title="Amaravati Stupa" label="Amaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="67220" end="67226" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="67245" end="67251" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372431" start="67253" end="67258" title="Karla Caves" label="Karla"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="67263" end="67269" title="Ellora" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q72343089" start="67623" end="67632" title="Gupta art" label="Gupta art"/>
<link wikidata="Q649384" start="67823" end="67838" title="Elephanta Caves" label="Elephanta Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="68108" end="68115" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallava"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="68120" end="68135" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68178" end="68215" title="Chola art and architecture#Sculpture and bronzes" label="sustained period of great achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23641297" start="68249" end="68257" title="Nataraja" label="Nataraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="68459" end="68471" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q28173212" start="68920" end="68935" title="Deccan painting" label="Deccan painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049336" start="68962" end="68978" title="Mughal miniature" label="Mughal miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988788" start="69234" end="69251" title="Rajput painting" label="among the Rajputs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858931" start="69360" end="69371" title="Nihâl Chand" label="Nihâl Chand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252229" start="69376" end="69384" title="Nainsukh" label="Nainsukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q861297" start="69521" end="69537" title="Company painting" label="Company painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6352595" start="69671" end="69688" title="Kalighat painting" label="Kalighat painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153484" start="69743" end="69751" title="folk art" label="folk art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="69757" end="69765" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q948504" start="69787" end="69807" title="Bengal School of Art" label="Bengal School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888716" start="69883" end="69905" title="modern Indian painting" label="modern Indian painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="70198" end="70210" title="Yamuna river" label="Yamuna river"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141" start="70418" end="70427" title="Taj Mahal" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="70444" end="70476" title="Mughal architecture" label="Indo-Islamic Mughal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q171309" start="70482" end="70507" title="Dravidian architecture" label="South Indian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022893" start="70595" end="70618" title="Indian vernacular architecture" label="Vernacular architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120985" start="70659" end="70672" title="Vastu shastra" label="Vastu shastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277569" start="70770" end="70782" title="Mamuni Mayan" label="Mamuni Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="71025" end="71050" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633112" start="71082" end="71097" title="Shilpa Shastras" label="Shilpa Shastras"/>
<link wikidata="Q481201" start="71241" end="71249" title="Absolute (philosophy)" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="71319" end="71323" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="71359" end="71373" title="Mughal emperors" label="Mughal emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="71374" end="71384" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="71434" end="71460" title="UNESCO World Heritage List" label="UNESCO World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="71660" end="71695" title="Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q825394" start="71756" end="71781" title="Indo-Islamic architecture" label="Indo-Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="71948" end="71956" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053936" start="72014" end="72033" title="Sanskrit literature" label="Sanskrit literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="72052" end="72059" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193297" start="72109" end="72114" title="Indian epic poetry" label="epics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="72122" end="72133" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahābhārata"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="72189" end="72197" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q320594" start="72278" end="72306" title="The Recognition of Śakuntalā" label="The Recognition of Śakuntalā"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011" start="72334" end="72342" title="Kālidāsa" label="Kālidāsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053936" start="72384" end="72393" title="Sanskrit Classical poetry" label="Mahākāvya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10549089" start="72490" end="72506" title="Tamil literature" label="Tamil literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="72512" end="72529" title="Sangam literature" label="Sangam literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914617" start="72851" end="72867" title="Bhakti movement" label="devotional poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q312551" start="72873" end="72878" title="Kabir" label="Kabīr"/>
<link wikidata="Q312976" start="72880" end="72888" title="Tulsidas" label="Tulsīdās"/>
<link wikidata="Q83322" start="72894" end="72904" title="Guru Nanak" label="Guru Nānak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350701" start="73277" end="73282" title="Works of Rabindranath Tagore" label="works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="73327" end="73346" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="73393" end="73418" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606713" start="73671" end="73707" title="Sangeet Natak Akademi" label="National Academy of Performance Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145471" start="73790" end="73799" title="Kuchipudi" label="Kuchipudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="73881" end="73896" title="Indian classical music" label="Classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="73967" end="73977" title="Hindustani classical music" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q956883" start="73995" end="74003" title="Carnatic music" label="Carnatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q544440" start="74074" end="74079" title="filmi" label="filmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022257" start="74084" end="74094" title="Indian folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="74100" end="74109" title="Syncretism" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q811449" start="74133" end="74137" title="baul" label="baul"/>
<link wikidata="Q225586" start="74181" end="74193" title="Dance in India" label="Indian dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056077" start="74265" end="74276" title="List of Indian folk dances" label="folk dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479601" start="74288" end="74295" title="Bhangra (dance)" label="bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351768" start="74319" end="74323" title="bihu dance" label="bihu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839077" start="74346" end="74353" title="Jhumair" label="Jhumair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071518" start="74370" end="74375" title="Chhau dance" label="chhau"/>
<link wikidata="Q882985" start="74426" end="74431" title="Garba (dance)" label="garba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629880" start="74448" end="74455" title="Dandiya Raas" label="dandiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556922" start="74480" end="74487" title="ghoomar" label="ghoomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722134" start="74518" end="74524" title="lavani" label="lavani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990304" start="74638" end="74660" title="Classical Indian dance" label="classical dance status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606713" start="74677" end="74720" title="Sangeet Natak Akademi" label="National Academy of Music, Dance, and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q334156" start="74739" end="74752" title="Bharata Natyam" label="bharatanatyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q949256" start="74793" end="74799" title="kathak" label="kathak"/>
<link wikidata="Q839500" start="74830" end="74839" title="kathakali" label="kathakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q940868" start="74856" end="74868" title="mohiniyattam" label="mohiniyattam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145471" start="74892" end="74901" title="kuchipudi" label="kuchipudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q511116" start="74933" end="74941" title="Manipuri dance" label="manipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014687" start="74966" end="74972" title="odissi" label="odissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724537" start="75004" end="75012" title="sattriya" label="sattriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632209" start="75030" end="75046" title="Theatre in India" label="Theatre in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901494" start="75277" end="75283" title="bhavai" label="bhavai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348813" start="75312" end="75317" title="Jatra (Bengal)" label="jatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363943" start="75350" end="75358" title="nautanki" label="nautanki"/>
<link wikidata="Q167067" start="75375" end="75382" title="ramlila" label="ramlila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634822" start="75411" end="75418" title="tamasha" label="tamasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000356" start="75447" end="75457" title="burrakatha" label="burrakatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705309" start="75503" end="75513" title="terukkuttu" label="terukkuttu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584013" start="75549" end="75559" title="yakshagana" label="yakshagana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595808" start="75650" end="75674" title="National School of Drama" label="National School of Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="75701" end="75710" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294433" start="75755" end="75774" title="Ministry of Culture (India)" label="Ministry of culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="75776" end="75795" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="75802" end="75822" title="Cinema of India" label="Indian film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677185" start="75959" end="75967" title="Cinema of Assam" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120804" start="75969" end="75976" title="Cinema of West Bengal" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901910" start="75978" end="75986" title="Bhojpuri cinema" label="Bhojpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="75988" end="75993" title="Bollywood" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250548" start="75995" end="76002" title="Cinema of Karnataka" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744006" start="76004" end="76013" title="Malayalam cinema" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120791" start="76015" end="76022" title="Cinema of Punjab" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732167" start="76024" end="76032" title="Gujarati cinema" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345861" start="76034" end="76041" title="Marathi cinema" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622637" start="76043" end="76047" title="Cinema of Odisha" label="Odia"/>
<link wikidata="Q926324" start="76049" end="76054" title="Tamil cinema" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q779935" start="76060" end="76066" title="Telugu cinema" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567541" start="76258" end="76270" title="Cinema of South India" label="South Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763315" start="76540" end="76554" title="Doordarshan" label="state monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q234869" start="77254" end="77259" title="Salah" label="namaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="77281" end="77289" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="77385" end="77404" title="Caste system in India" label="Indian caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q212926" start="77561" end="77571" title="endogamous" label="endogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915083" start="77613" end="77617" title="jāti" label="jāti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216180" start="77690" end="77704" title="untouchability" label="untouchability"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="77738" end="77750" title="Constitution of India" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811480" start="77837" end="77850" title="Family values" label="Family values"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="77913" end="77924" title="patrilineal" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q721790" start="77925" end="77939" title="joint family" label="joint families"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="77976" end="77992" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear families"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795849" start="78109" end="78133" title="Arranged marriage in the Indian subcontinent" label="their marriages arranged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546421" start="78383" end="78397" title="Child marriage" label="Child marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056312" start="78545" end="78572" title="Female infanticide in India" label="Female infanticide in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442759" start="78585" end="78601" title="female foeticide in India" label="female foeticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043137" start="78652" end="78665" title="missing women" label="missing women"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052027" start="79173" end="79178" title="Dowry system in India" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052027" start="79189" end="79196" title="Dowry law in India" label="illegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303649" start="79237" end="79264" title="Dowry deaths" label="Deaths resulting from dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966111" start="79278" end="79291" title="bride burning" label="bride burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q927083" start="79351" end="79367" title="Public holidays in India" label="Indian festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="79416" end="79422" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q929250" start="79424" end="79440" title="Ganesh Chaturthi" label="Ganesh Chaturthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29271" start="79442" end="79453" title="Thai Pongal" label="Thai Pongal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="79455" end="79459" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145922" start="79461" end="79471" title="Durga Puja" label="Durga Puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="79473" end="79484" title="Eid ul-Fitr" label="Eid ul-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="79486" end="79493" title="Bakr-Id" label="Bakr-Id"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79495" end="79504" title="Christmas worldwide#India" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461213" start="79510" end="79518" title="Vaisakhi" label="Vaisakhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q68104" start="80391" end="80409" title="Reservation in India" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348070" start="80566" end="80586" title="economic development in India" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q172827" start="80774" end="80778" title="sari" label="sari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="80809" end="80819" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q850794" start="80900" end="80905" title="dhoti" label="dhoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="80938" end="80946" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305837" start="81050" end="81056" title="Draped garment" label="draped"/>
<link wikidata="Q172827" start="81090" end="81094" title="sari" label="sari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81277" end="81286" title="Petticoat#Asian petticoats" label="petticoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q152563" start="81384" end="81390" title="blouse" label="blouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q861019" start="81395" end="81400" title="choli" label="choli"/>
<link wikidata="Q850794" start="81621" end="81626" title="dhoti" label="dhoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="81761" end="81776" title="Delhi sultanate" label="Delhi sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="81823" end="81836" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017061" start="81938" end="81945" title="shalwar" label="shalwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193204" start="81951" end="81957" title="pyjama" label="pyjama"/>
<link wikidata="Q855915" start="82000" end="82005" title="kurta" label="kurta"/>
<link wikidata="Q855915" start="82010" end="82016" title="kameez" label="kameez"/>
<link wikidata="Q867122" start="82298" end="82306" title="churidar" label="churidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q855915" start="82312" end="82318" title="kameez" label="kameez"/>
<link wikidata="Q12456113" start="82374" end="82388" title="shalwar kameez" label="shalwar kameez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82623" end="82627" title="Grain (textile)#Bias" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q867122" start="82659" end="82667" title="churidar" label="churidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q855915" start="82870" end="82875" title="kurta" label="kurta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10950828" start="82989" end="82995" title="chikan (embroidery)" label="chikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207848" start="83575" end="83583" title="bandgala" label="bandgala"/>
<link wikidata="Q11339904" start="83594" end="83607" title="Nehru jackets" label="Nehru jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425448" start="83644" end="83653" title="groomsmen" label="groomsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q837879" start="83663" end="83671" title="sherwani" label="sherwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364455" start="83793" end="83798" title="khadi" label="khadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894306" start="84102" end="84114" title="mutton curry" label="mutton curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="84120" end="84126" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642148" start="84206" end="84211" title="thali" label="thali"/>
<link wikidata="Q752006" start="84392" end="84399" title="chapati" label="chapati"/>
<link wikidata="Q956595" start="84502" end="84506" title="idli" label="idli"/>
<link wikidata="Q920940" start="84537" end="84541" title="Dosa (food)" label="dosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q369447" start="84613" end="84617" title="Vigna mungo" label="gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="84657" end="84663" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="84666" end="84672" title="pulses" label="pulses"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="84709" end="84715" title="ginger root" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="84720" end="84726" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="84783" end="84792" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q132624" start="84794" end="84799" title="cumin" label="cumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="84801" end="84809" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="84811" end="84819" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625808" start="84821" end="84829" title="cardamon" label="cardamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642148" start="85029" end="85034" title="thali" label="thali"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="85595" end="85601" title="ahimsa" label="ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="85724" end="85744" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishadic Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="85746" end="85754" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="85759" end="85766" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="85935" end="85940" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="86483" end="86496" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q485796" start="86517" end="86522" title="pilaf" label="pilaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="86559" end="86576" title="Abbasid caliphate" label="Abbasid caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q271555" start="87011" end="87018" title="biryani" label="biryani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090705" start="87201" end="87216" title="Punjabi cuisine" label="Punjabi cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057649" start="87236" end="87252" title="tandoori chicken" label="tandoori chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q379831" start="87267" end="87274" title="tandoor" label="tandoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="87429" end="87441" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="87586" end="87604" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27981" start="87870" end="87879" title="hopscotch" label="hopscotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287117" start="87883" end="87888" title="Jaora" label="Jaora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="87890" end="87904" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q115825713" start="87999" end="88028" title="Traditional games of India" label="traditional indigenous sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q148636" start="88043" end="88050" title="kabaddi" label="kabaddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520517" start="88064" end="88071" title="kho kho" label="kho kho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404776" start="88079" end="88087" title="pehlwani" label="pehlwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254757" start="88095" end="88106" title="gilli-danda" label="gilli-danda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27981" start="88114" end="88123" title="hopscotch" label="hopscotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575049" start="88128" end="88140" title="Indian martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q841285" start="88155" end="88169" title="Kalarippayattu" label="Kalarippayattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q983842" start="88186" end="88195" title="marma adi" label="marma adi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093330" start="88218" end="88223" title="Chess in India" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88249" end="88268" title="History of chess#India" label="originated in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q206230" start="88278" end="88288" title="Chaturanga" label="chaturaṅga"/>
<link wikidata="Q105269" start="88383" end="88395" title="Grandmaster (chess)" label="grandmasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511387" start="88439" end="88448" title="Parcheesi" label="Parcheesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796171" start="88471" end="88478" title="Pachisi" label="Pachisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="88588" end="88602" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="88603" end="88618" title="Akbar the Great" label="Akbar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185016" start="88646" end="88653" title="Cricket in India" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="88690" end="88695" title="India national cricket team" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="88708" end="88725" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139931" start="88732" end="88744" title="1983 Cricket World Cup" label="1983 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="88753" end="88765" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q645688" start="88819" end="88834" title="Field hockey at the Summer Olympics" label="summer olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="88912" end="88920" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201822" start="88926" end="88954" title="ISSF World Shooting Championships" label="World Shooting Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="89103" end="89112" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860977" start="89220" end="89228" title="Football in India" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="89243" end="89254" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="89256" end="89259" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="89261" end="89271" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="89273" end="89279" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="89289" end="89309" title="Seven Sister States" label="north-eastern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q396412" start="89344" end="89365" title="Indian Premier League" label="Indian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="89416" end="89435" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="89437" end="89445" title="Soccer" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069491" start="89455" end="89473" title="Pro Kabaddi League" label="Pro Kabaddi League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365748" start="89493" end="89526" title="Administrative divisions of India" label="Administrative divisions of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348804" start="89529" end="89545" title="Outline of India" label="Outline of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="89942" end="89960" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="89971" end="89998" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="90207" end="90242" title="Library of Congress Country Studies" label="Library of Congress Country Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="90253" end="90272" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440366" start="90273" end="90298" title="Federal Research Division" label="Federal Research Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="90723" end="90742" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="90883" end="90910" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309427" start="91311" end="91366" title="Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India" label="Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q313019" start="91782" end="91809" title="National Informatics Centre" label="National Informatics Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="91811" end="91830" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805028" start="93021" end="93035" title="Lund Humphries" label="Lund Humphries"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="93266" end="93292" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="93478" end="93504" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763980" start="93677" end="93721" title="The Short Oxford History of the Modern World" label="The Short Oxford History of the Modern World"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="93732" end="93755" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="94052" end="94078" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q911673" start="94208" end="94215" title="Longman" label="Longman"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="94454" end="94477" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="94649" end="94658" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="94939" end="94962" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093776" start="95114" end="95135" title="Oneworld Publications" label="Oneworld Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093776" start="95259" end="95280" title="Oneworld Publications" label="Oneworld Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="95587" end="95613" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="95827" end="95853" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420723" start="96032" end="96047" title="Pearson Education" label="Pearson Longman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="96223" end="96232" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580872" start="96744" end="96763" title="Springer Publishing" label="Springer Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372254" start="97000" end="97015" title="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield" label="Rowman Altamira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076074" start="97170" end="97178" title="Palgrave Macmillan" label="Palgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076074" start="97359" end="97377" title="Palgrave Macmillan" label="Palgrave Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="97551" end="97560" title="Macmillan Publishers" label="Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q911673" start="97807" end="97814" title="Longman" label="Longman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="98007" end="98031" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q167049" start="98278" end="98322" title="American University International Law Review" label="American University International Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q767319" start="98463" end="98478" title="Wiley-Blackwell" label="Wiley-Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q767319" start="98720" end="98735" title="Wiley-Blackwell" label="Wiley-Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="99063" end="99084" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons" label="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="99262" end="99285" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716529" start="99460" end="99481" title="Earth-Science Reviews" label="Earth-Science Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="99780" end="99806" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278607" start="99922" end="99941" title="Geographical Review" label="Geographical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156372" start="100016" end="100045" title="American Geographical Society" label="American Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="100742" end="100765" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="100947" end="100956" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195083" start="101511" end="101526" title="Current Science" label="Current Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="102010" end="102019" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294412" start="102128" end="102168" title="Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (India)" label="Ministry of Information and Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="102170" end="102189" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300422" start="102397" end="102417" title="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest Association" label="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195083" start="102705" end="102720" title="Current Science" label="Current Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q917441" start="103310" end="103335" title="Department of Environment" label="Department of Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="103651" end="103679" title="Geological Society of London" label="Geological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="104066" end="104092" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195083" start="104319" end="104334" title="Current Science" label="Current Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="104748" end="104794" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="104966" end="104979" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749442" start="105164" end="105199" title="Ministry of Environment and Forests (India)" label="Ministry of Environment and Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="105201" end="105220" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282101" start="105486" end="105517" title="Economic &amp;amp; Political Weekly" label="Economic &amp;amp; Political Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q880582" start="105943" end="105963" title="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis" label="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307816" start="106605" end="106622" title="Business Standard" label="Business Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="107076" end="107102" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785031" start="107511" end="107532" title="Third World Quarterly" label="Third World Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712554" start="107846" end="107858" title="M. E. Sharpe" label="M. E. Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724317" start="108052" end="108080" title="Election Commission of India" label="Election Commission of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116159" start="108714" end="108723" title="Greenwood Publishing Group" label="Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806750" start="108972" end="108984" title="Asian Survey" label="Asian Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732186" start="109152" end="109169" title="Malayala Manorama" label="Malayala Manorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q313019" start="109334" end="109361" title="National Informatics Centre" label="National Informatics Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="109363" end="109382" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387409" start="110032" end="110040" title="S. Chand" label="S. Chand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387409" start="110282" end="110290" title="S. Chand" label="S. Chand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816305" start="110510" end="110518" title="Atlantic Books" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138963" start="110706" end="110727" title="Parliamentary Affairs" label="Parliamentary Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="110917" end="110930" title="Prentice Hall" label="Prentice Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111131" end="111143" title="India Review" label="India Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="111316" end="111339" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478700" start="111582" end="111596" title="The Australian" label="The Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039284" start="111875" end="111917" title="Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses" label="Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="112115" end="112123" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="112134" end="112137" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="112374" end="112392" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="112995" end="113009" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916402" start="113339" end="113346" title="Pearson PLC" label="Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015856" start="113519" end="113533" title="William Morrow and Company" label="William Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004412" start="113746" end="113779" title="Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists" label="Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="114136" end="114143" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="114872" end="114890" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="115411" end="115429" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="116006" end="116024" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="116373" end="116391" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="116690" end="116720" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q140676" start="116921" end="116927" title="Rediff.com" label="Rediff"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="117122" end="117129" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="117638" end="117647" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="118264" end="118282" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q880582" start="118855" end="118875" title="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis" label="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="119081" end="119110" title="The Christian Science Monitor" label="The Christian Science Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="119386" end="119408" title="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company" label="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="119842" end="119860" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="120185" end="120207" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q251266" start="120483" end="120500" title="SAGE Publishing" label="SAGE Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671637" start="120743" end="120799" title="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs" label="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="120990" end="121010" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="121220" end="121243" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="121608" end="121631" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q279739" start="121730" end="121743" title="Business Line" label="Business Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954757" start="121966" end="121984" title="The Economic Times" label="The Economic Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="122559" end="122572" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954843" start="122750" end="122763" title="Express India" label="Express India"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="123175" end="123188" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="123578" end="123632" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="124031" end="124041" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959813" start="124511" end="124518" title="NASSCOM" label="NASSCOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="124872" end="124896" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="125263" end="125290" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607861" start="125791" end="125823" title="Ministry of Home Affairs (India)" label="Ministry of Home Affairs (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895564" start="126253" end="126277" title="University of Iowa Press" label="University of Iowa Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q251266" start="126608" end="126625" title="SAGE Publishing" label="SAGE Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="127097" end="127120" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="127431" end="127454" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="127715" end="127741" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="128014" end="128024" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944238" start="128941" end="128948" title="Cengage" label="Cengage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607861" start="129610" end="129634" title="Ministry of Home Affairs (India)" label="Ministry of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="129636" end="129655" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309427" start="129991" end="130046" title="Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India" label="Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607861" start="130057" end="130081" title="Ministry of Home Affairs (India)" label="Ministry of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="130083" end="130102" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="130459" end="130483" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733669" start="130668" end="130687" title="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson" label="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="130921" end="130942" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733669" start="131111" end="131130" title="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson" label="Thames &amp;amp; Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="131394" end="131407" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="131559" end="131582" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895804" start="131799" end="131828" title="University of Minnesota Press" label="University of Minnesota Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030420" start="132007" end="132026" title="Infobase Publishing" label="Infobase Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="132226" end="132244" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349399" start="132557" end="132572" title="Sahitya Akademi" label="Sahitya Akademi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349399" start="132705" end="132720" title="Sahitya Akademi" label="Sahitya Akademi"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="132852" end="132875" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358493" start="133120" end="133147" title="University of Hawaiʻi Press" label="University of Hawaiʻi Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q60694411" start="133391" end="133405" title="Trentham Books" label="Trentham Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="133605" end="133628" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="134303" end="134333" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014807" start="134562" end="134587" title="New York University Press" label="New York University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229724" start="134828" end="134845" title="Popular Prakashan" label="Popular Prakashan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042817" start="135020" end="135048" title="Oxford World&amp;#x27;s Classics" label="Oxford World&amp;#x27;s Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="135059" end="135082" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955648" start="135249" end="135287" title="National University of Singapore Press" label="National University of Singapore Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="135519" end="135542" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q667886" start="135924" end="135932" title="ABC-CLIO" label="ABC-CLIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="136301" end="136327" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743906" start="136525" end="136558" title="Britannica Educational Publishing" label="Britannica Educational Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611458" start="136712" end="136731" title="Sterling Publishing" label="Sterling Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="136929" end="136952" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805028" start="137097" end="137115" title="Ashgate Publishing" label="Ashgate Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739825" start="137341" end="137361" title="Kessinger Publishing" label="Kessinger Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="137582" end="137591" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q251266" start="138274" end="138291" title="SAGE Publishing" label="SAGE Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q880582" start="138538" end="138558" title="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis" label="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="138789" end="138812" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271133" start="138982" end="138986" title="Mint (newspaper)" label="Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165861" start="139293" end="139312" title="Motilal Banarsidass" label="Motilal Banarsidass"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="139554" end="139576" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080179" start="139872" end="139897" title="Columbia University Press" label="Columbia University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="140127" end="140148" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons" label="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="140552" end="140575" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086037" start="140795" end="140806" title="Gibbs Smith" label="Gibbs Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814982" start="141000" end="141027" title="University of Chicago Press" label="University of Chicago Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="141259" end="141277" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="141585" end="141601" title="Brill Publishers" label="Brill Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q140676" start="141757" end="141763" title="Rediff.com" label="Rediff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096669" start="141913" end="141938" title="World Heritage Convention" label="World Heritage Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="141949" end="142014" title="UNESCO" label="United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="142273" end="142281" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="142558" end="142561" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="142933" end="142951" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="142959" end="142986" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="143021" end="143029" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="143127" end="143148" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14535" wikidata="Q531426" url="?curid=14535" title="Music of India">
<text>Owing to India&#x27;s vastness and diversity, Indian music encompasses numerous genres in multiple varieties and forms which include classical music, folk, rock, and pop. It has a history spanning several millennia and developed over several geo-locations spanning the sub-continent. Music in India began as an integral part of socio-religious life.

==History==


=== Pre-history ===
====Paleolithic====
The 30,000-year-old paleolithic and neolithic cave paintings at the UNESCO world heritage site at Bhimbetka rock shelters in Madhya Pradesh show a type of dance. Mesolithic and chalcolithic cave art of Bhimbetka illustrates musical instruments such as Gongs, Bowed Lyre, daf etc.

====Neolithic====
Chalcolithic era (4000 BCE onward) narrow bar shaped polished stone celts like music instruments, one of the earlier musical instrument in India, were excavated at Sankarjang in the Angul district of Odisha. There is historical evidence in the form of sculptural evidence, i.e. musical instruments, singing and dancing postures of damsels in the Ranigumpha Caves in Khandagiri and Udayagiri at Bhubaneswar.

==== Indus River Valley Civilization ====
Dancing Girl sculpture (2500 BCE) was found from the Indus Valley civilization (IVC) site. There are IVC-era paintings on pottery of a man with a dhol hanging from his neck and a woman holding a drum under her left arm.

===Vedic and ancient era===
Vedas (c. 1500 – c. 800 BCE Vedic period) document rituals with performing arts and play. For example, Shatapatha Brahmana (800–700 BCE) has verses in chapter 13.2 written in the form of a play between two actors. &quot;Tala&quot; or &quot;taal&quot; is an ancient music concept traceable to Vedic era texts of Hinduism, such as the &quot;Samaveda&quot; and methods for singing the Vedic hymns. Smriti (500 BCE to 100 BCE ) post-vedic Hindu texts include Valmiki&#x27;s Ramayana (500 BCE to 100 BCE) which mentions dance and music (dance by Apsaras such as Urvashi, Rambha, Menaka, Tilottama Panchāpsaras, and Ravana&#x27;s wives excelling in &quot;nrityageeta&quot; or &quot;singing and dancing&quot; and &quot;nritavaditra&quot; or &quot;playing musical instruments&quot;), music and singing by Gandharvas, several string instruments (vina, tantri, bīn, vipanci and &quot;vallaki&quot; similar to &quot;veena&quot;), wind instruments (shankha, venu and &quot;venugana&quot; – likely a mouth organ made by tying several flutes together), raga (including &quot;kaushika&quot; such as &quot;raag kaushik dhwani&quot;), vocal registers (seven &quot;svara&quot; or &quot;sur&quot;, &quot;ana&quot; or &quot;ekashurti&quot; drag note, &quot;murchana&quot; the regulated rise and fall of voice in &quot;matra&quot; and &quot;tripramana&quot; three-fold &quot;teen taal&quot; &quot;laya&quot; such as &quot;drut&quot; or quick, &quot;madhya&quot; or middle, and &quot;vilambit&quot; or slow), poetry recitation in Bala Kanda and also in Uttara Kanda by Luv and Kusha in &quot;marga&quot; style. 
Starting from the earliest known work Tholkappiyam (500 BCE), there are several references to music and &quot;Panns&quot; in the ancient pre-Sangam and Sangam literature starting from the earliest known work Tholkappiyam (500 BCE). Among Sangam literature, &quot;Mathuraikkanci&quot; refers to women singing &quot;sevvazhi pann&quot; to invoke the mercy of God during childbirth. In &quot;Tolkappiyam&quot;, the five landscapes of the Sangam literature had each an associated &quot;Pann&quot;, each describing the mood of the song associated with that landscape. Among the numerous &quot;panns&quot; that find mention in the ancient Tamil literature are, &quot;Ambal Pann&quot;, which is suitable to be played on the flute, &quot;sevvazhi pann&quot; on the &quot;Yazh&quot; (lute), &quot;Nottiram&quot; and &quot;Sevvazhi&quot; expressing pathos, the captivating &quot;Kurinji pann&quot; and the invigorating &quot;Murudappann&quot;. Pann() is the melodic mode used by the Tamil people in their music since the ancient times. The ancient &quot;panns&quot; over centuries evolved first into a pentatonic scale and later into the seven note Carnatic Sargam. But from the earliest times, Tamil Music is heptatonic and known as Ezhisai (ஏழிசை).

sanskrit saint-poet Jayadeva, who was the great composer and illustrious master of classical music, shaped &quot;Odra-Magadhi&quot; style music and had great influence on Odissi Sangita.

Śārṅgadeva composed Sangita-Ratnakara, one of the most important Sanskrit musicological texts from India, which is regarded as the definitive text in both Hindustani music and Carnatic music traditions of Indian classical music.

Assamese poet Madhava Kandali, writer of Saptakanda Ramayana, lists several instruments in his version of &quot;Ramayana&quot;, such as mardala, khumuchi, bhemachi, dagar, gratal, ramtal, tabal, jhajhar, jinjiri, bheri mahari, tokari, dosari, kendara, dotara, vina, rudra-vipanchi, etc. (meaning that these instruments existed since his time in the 14th century or earlier). The Indian system of notation is perhaps the world&#x27;s oldest and most elaborate.

===Medieval era===
In the early 14th century under the Khiljis, there were concerts and competitions between Hindustani and Carnatic musicians.

From the 16th century onwards, treatises written on music were Sangitamava Chandrika, Gita Prakasha, Sangita Kalalata and Natya Manorama.

===Twentieth century===
In the early 1960s Jazz pioneers such as John Coltrane and George Harrison collaborated with Indian instrumentalists and started to use Indian instruments such as sitar in their songs. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, rock and roll fusions with Indian music were well known throughout Europe and North America. In the late 1980s, Indian-British artists fused Indian and Western traditions to make the Asian Underground. In the new millennium, American hip-hop has featured Indian filmi and bhangra. hip-hop artists have sampled songs from Bollywood movies and have collaborated with Indian artists, such as Timbaland&#x27;s &quot;Indian Flute&quot;

In 2010, Laura Marling and Mumford &amp; Sons collaborated with the Dharohar Project.

== Classical music ==

The two main traditions of Indian classical music are Carnatic music, which is practised predominantly in the peninsular (southern) regions, and Hindustani music, which is found in the northern, eastern and central regions. The basic concepts of this music includes &quot;Shruti&quot; (microtones), &quot;Swaras&quot; (notes), &quot;Alankar&quot; (ornamentations), &quot;Raga&quot; (melodies improvised from basic grammars), and &quot;Tala&quot; (rhythmic patterns used in percussion). Its tonal system divides the octave into 22 segments called Shrutis, not all equal but each roughly equal to a quarter of a whole tone of the Western music. Both the classical music are standing on the fundamentals of The seven notes of Indian Classical music. These seven notes are also called as Sapta svara or Sapta Sur. These seven svaras are Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha and Ni respectively. These Sapta Svaras are spelt as Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha and Ni, but these are shortforms of Shadja (षड्ज), Rishabha (ऋषभ), Gandhara (गान्धार), Madhyama (मध्यम), Panchama (पंचम), Dhaivata (धैवत) and Nishada (निषाद) respectively. These are also equivalent to Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti. Only these seven svaras built up the Hindustani classical music and the Carnatic classical music. These seven svaras are the fundamentals of a raga. This seven svaras without any variations in them, are called as Shuddha svaras. Variations in these svaras cause them to be and svaras. All the other svaras except Sadja(Sa) and Pancham (Pa) can be or svaras but Sa and Pa are always svaras. And hence svaras Sa and Pa are called Achal Svaras, since these svaras don&#x27;t move from their original position while svaras Ra, Ga, Ma, Dha, Ni are called Chal Svaras, since these svaras move from their original position.
 Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni - Svaras
 Re, Ga, Dha, Ni - Komal Svaras 
 Ma - Svaras

Sangeet Natak Academy recognizes eight classical dance and music forms, namely Bharatanatyam, Kathak, Kuchipudi, Odissi, Kathakali, Sattriya, Manipuri and Mohiniyattam. Additionally, India&#x27;s Ministry of culture also includes Chhau in its classical list.

===Carnatic music===

Carnatic music can be traced to the 14th - 15th centuries AD and thereafter. It originated in South India during the rule of Vijayanagar Empire through the Keerthanas composed by Purandara Dasa. Like Hindustani music, it is melodic, with improvised variations, but tends to have more fixed compositions. It consists of a composition with improvised embellishments added to the piece in the forms of &quot;Raga Alapana&quot;, &quot;Kalpanaswaram&quot;, &quot;Neraval&quot; and, in the case of more advanced students, Ragam Thanam Pallavi. The main emphasis is on the vocals as most compositions are written to be sung, and even when played on instruments, they are meant to be performed in a singing style (known as &quot;gāyaki&quot;). Around 300 ragams are in use today. Annamayya is the first known composer in Carnatic music. He is widely regarded as the Andhra Pada kavitā Pitāmaha (Godfather of Telugu song-writing).

Purandara Dasa is considered the father of Carnatic music, while the later musicians Tyagaraja, Shyama Shastry and Muthuswami Dikshitar are considered the trinity of Carnatic music.

Noted artists of Carnatic music include Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar (the father of the current concert format), Palghat Mani Iyer, Madurai Mani Iyer, Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer, Nedunuri Krishnamurthy Alathur Brothers, M. S. Subbulakshmi, Lalgudi Jayaraman, Balamuralikrishna, T. N. Seshagopalan, K. J. Yesudas, N. Ramani, Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman, Sanjay Subrahmanyan, T. M. Krishna, Bombay Jayashri, Aruna Sairam, Mysore Manjunath,

Every December, the city of Chennai in India has its eight-week-long Music Season, which is the world&#x27;s largest cultural event.

Carnatic music has served as the foundation for most music in South India, including folk music, festival music and has also extended its influence to film music in the past 100–150 years or so.

===Hindustani music===
The tradition of Hindustani music dates back to Vedic times where the hymns in the Sama Veda, an ancient religious text, were sung as Samagana and not chanted. It diverged from Carnatic music around the 13th–14th centuries CE, primarily due to Islamic influences. Developing a strong and diverse tradition over several centuries, it has contemporary traditions established primarily in India but also in Pakistan and Bangladesh. In contrast to Carnatic music, the other main Indian classical music tradition originating from the South, Hindustani music was not only influenced by ancient Hindu musical traditions, historical Vedic philosophy and native Indian sounds but also enriched by the Persian performance practices of the Mughals. Classical genres are dhrupad, dhamar, khyal, tarana and sadra, and there are also several semi-classical forms.

The root of the name C(K)arnatic music is derived from Sanskrit. Karnam means ears and Atakam means that which is sweet or that which lingers on.

===Light classical music===
There are many types of music which comes under the category of light classical or semi-classical. Some of the forms are Thumri, Dadra, Bhajan, Ghazal, Chaiti, Kajri, Tappa, Natya Sangeet and Qawwali. These forms place emphasis on explicitly seeking emotion from the audience, as opposed to the classical forms.

==Folk music==

=== Tamang Selo ===
This is a musical genre of the Tamang people and popular amongst the Nepali speaking community in West Bengal, Sikkim, India and around the world. It is accompanied by Tamang instruments, the Madal, Damphu and Tungna, although nowadays musicians have taken to modern instruments. A Tamang Selo can be catchy and lively or slow and melodious, and is usually sung to convey sorrow, love, happiness or day-to-day incidents and stories of folklore.

Hira Devi Waiba is hailed as the pioneer of Nepali folk songs and Tamang Selo. Her song &#x27;Chura ta Hoina Astura&#x27; (चुरा त होइन अस्तुरा) is said to be the first Tamang Selo ever recorded. She has sung nearly 300 songs through her musical career spanning 40 years. After Waiba&#x27;s death in 2011, her son Satya Aditya Waiba (producer/manager) and Navneet Aditya Waiba (singer) collaborated and re-recorded her most iconic songs and released an album titled &quot;Ama Lai Shraddhanjali&quot; (आमालाई श्रद्धाञ्जली-Tribute to Mother). The duo are the only individuals in the Nepali folk music genre who produce authentic traditional Nepali folk songs without adulteration or modernisation.

===Bhangra and Giddha===
Bhangra (Punjabi: ਭੰਗੜਾ) is a form of dance-oriented folk music of Punjab. The present musical style is derived from non-traditional musical accompaniment to the riffs of Punjab called by the same name. The female dance of Punjab region is known as Giddha (Punjabi: ਗਿੱਧਾ).

===Bihu and Borgeet===


Bihu () is the festival of New Year of Assam falling on mid-April. This is a festival of nature and mother earth where the first day is for the cows and buffaloes. The second day of the festival is for the man. Bihu dances and songs accompanied by traditional drums and wind instruments are an essential part of this festival. Bihu songs are energetic and with beats to welcome the festive spring. Assamese drums (dhol), Pepa(usually made from buffalo horn), Gogona are major instruments used.

Borgeets () are lyrical songs that are set to specific ragas but not necessarily to any tala. These songs, composed by Srimanta Sankardeva and Madhavdeva in the 15th–16th centuries, are used to begin prayer services in monasteries, e.g. Satra and Namghar associated with the Ekasarana Dharma; and they also belong to the repertoire of Music of Assam outside the religious context. They are a lyrical strain that express the religious sentiments of the poets reacting to different situations, and differ from other lyrics associated with the Ekasarana Dharma. Prominent instruments used in borgeets are &quot;Negera,&quot;Taal, Khols etc.

=== Dandiya ===
Dandiya or Raas is a form of Gujarati cultural dance that is performed with sticks. The present musical style is derived from the traditional musical accompaniment to the folk dance. It is practiced mainly in the state of Gujarat. There is also another type of dance and music associated with Dandiya/Raas called Garba.

=== Gaana ===

Gaana is a rap-like &quot;collection of rhythms, beats and sensibilities native to the Dalits of Chennai.&quot; It evolved over the past two centuries, combining influences from the &quot;siddhars&quot; (tantric adepts) of ancient Tamilakam, Tamil Sufi saints, and more. Gaana songs are performed at weddings, stage shows, political rallies, and funerals. Performers sing about a wide range of topics, but the essence of gaana is said to be &quot;angst and melancholy&quot; based in life&#x27;s struggles. In the past few decades, the genre has entered the music of the mainstream Tamil film industry and gained popularity. Contemporary gaana bands like The Casteless Collective are bringing the genre to new audiences while using it for social activism, especially against caste discrimination.

=== Haryanvi ===

Haryana folk music has two main forms: classical folk music of Haryana and desi folk music of Haryana (country music of Haryana). They take the form of ballads and pangs of parting of lovers, valor and bravery, harvest and happiness. Haryana is rich in musical tradition and even places have been named after ragas, for example Charkhi Dadri district has many villages named as Nandyam, Sarangpur, Bilawala, Brindabana, Todi, Asaveri, Jaisri, Malakoshna, Hindola, Bhairvi and Gopi Kalyana.

=== Himachali ===
Himachal&#x27;s folk music varies according to the event or the festival. One of the most popular style of music is &quot;Nati Music,&quot; where &quot;nati&quot; being the traditional dance that is done on the song. Nati Music is usually celebratory, and done in fairs or other occasions such as marriages.

===Jhumair and Domkach===
Jhumair and Domkach are Nagpuri folk music. The musical instruments used in folk music and dance are Dhol, Mandar, Bansi, Nagara, Dhak, Shehnai, Khartal, Narsinga etc.

===Lavani===
Lavani comes from the word &quot;Lavanya&quot; which means &quot;beauty&quot;. This is one of the most popular forms of dance and music that is practiced all over Maharashtra. It has, in fact, become a necessary part of the Maharashtrian folk dance performances. Traditionally, the songs are sung by female artists, but male artists may occasionally sing Lavanis. The dance format associated with Lavani is known as Tamasha. Lavani is a combination of traditional song and dance, which particularly performed to the enchanting beats of &#x27;Dholaki&#x27;, a drum-like instrument. The dance is performed by attractive women wearing nine-yard saris. They are sung in a quick tempo. Lavani originated in the arid region of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.

=== Manipuri ===

Music of Manipur and Manipuri dance are heritage of Manipuri people. According to tradition of the Manipuri people in the Himalayan foothills and valleys connecting India to Burma, they are the Gandharvas (celestial musicians and dancers) in the Vedic texts, and historic texts of Manipuri people calls the region as &quot;Gandharva-desa&quot;. The Vedic &quot;Usha&quot;, the goddess of the dawn, is a cultural motif for Manipuri women, and in the Indian tradition, it was &quot;Usha&quot; who created and taught the art of feminine dance to girls. This oral tradition of women&#x27;s dance is celebrated as &quot;Chingkheirol&quot; in the Manipuri tradition.

The ancient Sanskrit texts such as the Mahabharata epic mentions Manipur, where Arjuna meets and falls in love with Chitragada. Dance is called &quot;Jagoi&quot; in a major Meitei language of the region and it traces a long tradition in Manipur. Lai Haraoba dance likely has ancient roots and shares many similarities with dance postures of Nataraja and his legendary disciple called Tandu (locally called &quot;Tangkhu&quot;). Similarly, as does the dance related to commoner &quot;Khamba&quot; and princess &quot;Thoibi&quot; – who perform as pan-Indian Shiva and Parvati, in the legendary tragic love story of Khamba-Thoibi found in the Manipuri epic &quot;Moirang Parba&quot;.

=== Marfa music ===
Hadrani Marfa, or simply Marfa music, introduced during the 18th century in Hyderabad State by the East African Siddi community from Afro-Arab music of Hadhramawt in Yemen, is a form of celebratory rhythmic music and dance among the Hyderabadi Muslims, played with high tempo using Marfa instrument, daff, Dhol, sticks, steel pots and wooden strips called &quot;thapi&quot;.

=== Mizo ===
Mizo music originated when couplets were developed during the settlement of Thantlang in Burma between 1300 and 1400 CE, and folk songs developed during this period were dar hla (songs on gong); Bawh hla (War chants), Hlado (Chants of hunting); Nauawih hla (Cradle songs) A greater development of songs can be seen from the settlement of Lentlang in Burma, estimated between late 15th to 17th Century CE. The Mizo occupied the present Mizoram from the late 17th century. The pre-colonial period, that is from the 18th to 19th century was another important era in the history of Mizo folk literature. Prior to the annexation by the British Government, the Mizo occupied the present Mizoram for two centuries. In comparison with the folk songs of Thantlang and Lentlang settlement, the songs of this period are more developed in its number, form and contents. The languages are more polished and the flows also better. Most of the songs of this period are named after the composers.

=== Odissi ===

Jayadeva, the 12th century sanskrit saint-poet, the great composer and illustrious master of classical music, has immense contribution to Odissi music. During his time Odra-Magadhi style music got shaped and achieved its classical status. He indicated the classical ragas prevailing at that time in which these were to be sung. Prior to that there was the tradition of Chhanda which was simple in musical outline. From the 16th century onwards, treatises on music were Sangitamava Chandrika, Gita Prakasha, Sangita Kalalata and Natya Manorama. A couple of treatise namely, &quot;Sangita Sarani&quot; and &quot;Sangi Narayana&quot;, were also written in the early path of the 19th century.

Odissi Sangita comprises four classes of music namely Dhruvapada, Chitrapada, Chitrakala and Panchal, described in the ancient oriya music texts. The chief Odissi and Shokabaradi. Odissi Sangita (music) is a synthesis of four classes of music, i.e. Dhruvapada, Chitrapada, Chitrakala and Panchal, described in the above-mentioned texts.

The great exponents of Odissi music in modern times are the Late Singhari Shyamasundara Kar, Markandeya Mahapatra, Kashinath Pujapanda, Balakrushna Das, Gopal Chandra Panda, Ramhari Das, Bhubaneswari Misra, Shymamani Devi and Sunanda Patnaik, who have achieved eminence in classical music.

===Rabindra Sangeet (music of Bengal)===

Rabindra Sangeet ( &quot;Robindro Shonggit&quot;, ), also known as Tagore songs, are songs written and composed by Rabindranath Tagore. They have distinctive characteristics in the music of Bengal, popular in India and Bangladesh. &quot;Sangeet&quot; means music, &quot;Rabindra Sangeet&quot; means music (or more aptly songs) of Rabindra.
Tagore wrote some 2,230 songs in Bengali, now known as &quot;Rabindra Sangeet&quot;, using classical music and traditional folk music as sources.

Tagore wrote national anthems of India and Bangladesh, and influenced the national anthem of Sri Lanka. Furthermore, the digitisation of Rabindra Sangeet has been undertaken by Saregama, which has created digital archives and made the music available on streaming platforms. Additionally, Brainware University&#x27;s &quot;Celebrating Tagore&quot; initiative includes online archives, educational resources, and digital performances to promote Tagore&#x27;s works.

===Rajasthani===
Rajasthan has a very diverse cultural collection of musician castes, including Langas, Sapera, Bhopa, Jogi and Manganiyar (lit. &quot;the ones who ask/beg&quot;). &quot;Rajasthan Diary&quot; quotes it as a soulful, full-throated music with harmonious diversity. The melodies of Rajasthan come from a variety of instruments. The stringed variety includes the Sarangi, Ravanahatha, Kamayacha, Morsing and Ektara. Percussion instruments come in all shapes and sizes from the huge Nagaras and Dhols to the tiny Damrus. The Daf and Chang are a favorite of Holi (the festival of colours) revelers. Flutes and bagpipers come in local flavors such as Shehnai, Poongi, Algoza, Tarpi, Been and Bankia.

Rajasthani music is derived from a combination of string instruments, percussion instruments and wind instruments accompanied by renditions of folk singers. It enjoys a respectable presence in Bollywood music as well.

=== Sufi folk rock / Sufi rock ===
Sufi folk rock contains elements of modern hard rock and traditional folk music with Sufi poetry. While it was pioneered by bands like Junoon in Pakistan it became very popular, especially in northern India.

===Uttarakhandi===

Uttarakhandi folk music had its root in the lap of nature and the hilly terrain of the region. Common themes in the folk music of Uttarakhand are the beauty of nature, various seasons, festivals, religious traditions, cultural practices, folk stories, historical characters, and the bravery of ancestors. The folk songs of Uttarakhand are a reflection of the cultural heritage and the way people live their lives in the Himalayas. Musical instruments used in Uttarakhand music include the Dhol, Damoun, Hudka, Turri, Ransingha, Dholki, Daur, Thali, Bhankora and Masakbhaja. Tabla and Harmonium are also sometimes used, especially in recorded folk music from the 1960s onwards. Generic Indian and global musical instruments have been incorporated in modern popular folks by singers like Mohan Upreti, Narendra Singh Negi, Gopal Babu Goswami, and Chandra Singh Rahi.

==Popular music in India==

===Dance music===
Dance music, more popularly called &quot;DJ music&quot;, is mostly played at nightclubs, parties, weddings and other celebrations. It is more popular among youths. It is mostly based on Indian movie music as well as Indian pop music, both of which tend to borrow and modernise the classical and folk dance songs with modern instruments and other innovations.

===Movie music===
The biggest form of Indian popular music is filmi, or songs from Indian films, it makes up 72% of the music sales in India. The film industry of India supported music by according reverence to classical music while utilising the western orchestration to support Indian melodies. Music composers, like R. D. Burman, Shankar Jaikishan, S. D. Burman, Laxmikant–Pyarelal, Madan Mohan, Bhupen Hazarika, Naushad Ali, O. P. Nayyar, Hemant Kumar, C. Ramchandra, Salil Chowdhury, Kalyanji Anandji, Ilaiyaraaja, A. R. Rahman, Jatin–Lalit, Anu Malik, Nadeem-Shravan, Harris Jayaraj, Himesh Reshammiya, Vidyasagar, Shankar–Ehsaan–Loy, Salim–Sulaiman, Pritam, M. S. Viswanathan, K. V. Mahadevan, Ghantasala and S. D. Batish employed the principles of harmony while retaining classical and folk flavor. Reputed names in the domain of Indian classical music like Ravi Shankar, Vilayat Khan, Ali Akbar Khan and Ram Narayan have also composed music for films. Traditionally, in Indian films, the voice for the songs is not provided by the actors, they are provided by the professional playback singers, to sound more developed, melodious and soulful, while actors lipsynch on the screen. In the past, only a handful of singers provided the voice in films. These include Kishore Kumar, K. J. Yesudas, Mohammed Rafi, Mukesh, S. P. Balasubrahmanyam, T. M. Soundararajan, Hemant Kumar, Manna Dey, P. Susheela, Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhonsle, K. S. Chitra, Geeta Dutt, S. Janaki, Shamshad Begum, Suraiya, Noorjahan and Suman Kalyanpur. Recent playback singers include Udit Narayan, Kumar Sanu, Kailash Kher, Alisha Chinai, KK, Shaan, S. P. Charan, Madhushree, Shreya Ghoshal, Nihira Joshi, Kavita Krishnamurthy, Hariharan (singer), Ilaiyaraaja, A. R. Rahman, Sonu Nigam, Sukhwinder Singh, Kunal Ganjawala, Anu Malik, Sunidhi Chauhan, Anushka Manchanda, Raja Hasan, Arijit Singh and Alka Yagnik. Rock bands like Indus Creed, Indian Ocean, Silk Route and Euphoria have gained mass appeal with the advent of cable music television.

===Pop music===

Indian pop music is based on an amalgamation of Indian folk and classical music, and modern beats from different parts of the world. Pop music really started in the South Asian region with the playback singer Ahmed Rushdi&#x27;s song ‘&quot;Ko Ko Korina&quot;’ in 1966, then by Kishore Kumar in the early 1970s.

After that, much of Indian Pop music comes from the Indian Film Industry, and until the 1990s, few singers like Usha Uthup, Sharon Prabhakar, and Peenaz Masani outside it were popular. Since then, pop singers in the latter group have included Daler Mehndi, Baba Sehgal, Alisha Chinai, KK, Shantanu Mukherjee a.k.a. Shaan, Sagarika, Colonial Cousins (Hariharan, Lesle Lewis), Lucky Ali, and Sonu Nigam, and music composers like Zila Khan or Jawahar Wattal, who made top selling albums with, Daler Mehndi, Shubha Mudgal, Baba Sehgal, Shweta Shetty and Hans Raj Hans.

Besides those listed above, popular Indi-pop singers include Sanam (Band), Gurdas Maan, Sukhwinder Singh, Papon, Zubeen Garg, Raghav Sachar Rageshwari, Vandana Vishwas, Devika Chawla, Bombay Vikings, Asha Bhosle, Sunidhi Chauhan, Anushka Manchanda, Bombay Rockers, Anu Malik, Jazzy B, Malkit Singh, Raghav, Jay Sean, Jaimin Rajani, Juggy D, Rishi Rich, Udit Swaraj, Sheila Chandra, Bally Sagoo, Punjabi MC, Beno, Bhangra Knights, Mehnaz, Sanober and Vaishali Samant.

Recently, Indian pop has taken an interesting turn with the &quot;remixing&quot; of songs from past Indian movie songs, new beats being added to them.

===Patriotic music===
Patriotic feelings have been instigated within Indians through music since the era of the freedom struggle. Jana Gana Mana, the national anthem of India by Rabindranath Tagore, is largely credited for uniting India through music and Vande Mataram by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay as the national song of India. Patriotic songs were also written in many regional languages such as &quot;Biswo Bizoyi No Zuwan &quot; in Assamese. Post-independence songs such as Aye mere watan ke logo, Mile Sur Mera Tumhara, Ab Tumhare Hawale Watan Saathiyo, Maa Tujhe Salaam by A.R. Rahman have been responsible for consolidating feelings of national integration and unity in diversity.

===Western music adoption in India===
Western world&#x27;s music has been adopted in India, by creating fusion music in India which in turn have enriched and created global genres of western music.

====Goa trance====
Goa trance, an electronic music style that originated during the late 1980s in Goa in India, has funky, drone-like basslines, similar to the techno minimalism of 21st century psytrance. Psychedelic trance developed from Goa trance. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Goa became popular as a hippie capital, which resulted in evolution of Goa trance throughout the 1980s by mixing the spiritual culture of India with western musical elements of industrial music, new beat and electronic body music (EBM), and the actual Goa trance style became established by the early 1990s.

====Jazz and blues====
Jazz in India was first performed regularly in the metropoles Calcutta and Bombay in the early or middle 1920s. From the 1930s to the 1950s is called as the golden age of jazz in India, when jazz musicians like Leon Abbey, Crickett Smith, Creighton Thompson, Ken Mac, Roy Butler, Teddy Weatherford (who recorded with Louis Armstrong), and Rudy Jackson who toured India to avoid the racial discrimination they faced in the United States. In the 1930s, jazz musicians played in the nightclubs of Bombay, such as at the Taj Mahal hotel ballroom, many of these musicians were Goans most whom also worked in the Bollywood film industry and were responsible for the introduction of genres like jazz and swing to Hindi film music.

Indian blues is less prevalent in India than jazz. Interest in the blues in India has only been incidental due to the shared ancestry with jazz.

====Rock and metal music====

=====Indian rock=====

The rock music scene in India is small compared to the filmi or fusion musicality scenes. Rock music in India has its origins in the 1960s when international stars such as the Beatles visited India and brought their music with them. These artists&#x27; collaboration with Indian musicians such as Ravi Shankar and Zakir Hussain have led to the development of raga rock. International shortwave radio stations such as The Voice of America, BBC, and Radio Ceylon played a major part in bringing Western pop, folk, and rock music to the masses. Indian rock bands began to gain prominence only much later, around the late 1980s.

It was around this time that the rock band Indus Creed formerly known as The Rock Machine got itself noticed on the international stage with hits like &quot;Rock N Roll Renegade&quot;. Other bands quickly followed. With the introduction of MTV in the early 1990s, Indians began to be exposed to various forms of rock such as grunge and speed metal, impacting the national scene. The cities of the North Eastern Region, mainly Guwahati and Shillong, Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore have emerged as major melting pots for rock and metal enthusiasts. Bangalore has been the hub for rock and metal movement in India. Some prominent bands include Nicotine, Voodoo Child, Indian Ocean, Kryptos, Thermal and a Quarter, Demonic Resurrection, Motherjane, Avial, Bloodywood and Parikrama. Rock-specific labels such as DogmaTone Records and Eastern Fare Music Foundation have since emerged, supporting Indian rock acts.

From Central India, Nicotine, an Indore-based metal band, has been credited with pioneering metal music in the region.

=====Raga rock=====

Raga rock is rock or pop music with a heavy Indian influence, either in its construction, its timbre, or its use of instrumentation, such as the sitar and tabla. Raga and other forms of classical Indian music began to influence many rock groups during the 1960s; most famously the Beatles. The first traces of &quot;raga rock&quot; can be heard on songs such as &quot;See My Friends&quot; by the Kinks and the Yardbirds&#x27; &quot;Heart Full of Soul&quot;, released the previous month, featured a sitar-like riff by guitarist Jeff Beck. The Beatles song &quot;Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)&quot;, which first appeared on the band&#x27;s 1965 album Rubber Soul, was the first western pop song to actually incorporate the sitar (played by lead guitarist George Harrison). The Byrds&#x27; March 1966 single &quot;Eight Miles High&quot; and its B-side &quot;Why&quot; were also influential in originating the musical subgenre. Indeed, the term &quot;raga rock&quot; was coined by The Byrds&#x27; publicist in the press releases for the single and was first used in print by journalist Sally Kempton in her review of &quot;Eight Miles High&quot; for The Village Voice. George Harrison&#x27;s interest in Indian music, popularised the genre in the mid-1960s with songs such as &quot;Love You To&quot;, &quot;Tomorrow Never Knows&quot; (credited to Lennon-McCartney), &quot;Within You Without You&quot; and &quot;The Inner Light&quot;. The rock acts of the sixties both in turn influenced British and American groups and Indian acts to develop a later form of Indian rock.

====Western classical music====
Despite more than a century of exposure to Western classical music and two centuries of British colonialism, classical music in India has never gained significant popularity..

However, Western classical music education has improved with the help of certain institutions in India, including KM Music Conservatory (founded by Oscar-winning Composer A.R. Rahman), Calcutta School of Music, Eastern Fare Music Foundation, In 1930, Mehli Mehta set up the Bombay Symphony Orchestra. His son Zubin Mehta has enjoyed a long international conducting career. The Bombay Chamber Orchestra (BCO) was founded in 1962. Delhi School of Music, Delhi Music Academy, Guitarmonk and others supporting Western classical music.. In 2006, the Symphony Orchestra of India was founded, housed at the NCPA in Mumbai. It is today the only professional symphony orchestra in India and presents two concert seasons per year, with world-renowned conductors and soloists.

== Globalization of Indian music ==

As per UN, the Indian diaspora is world&#x27;s largest overseas diaspora with 17.5 million Indian-origin international migrants across the world, who help spread the global soft power of India.

=== Influence on other genres ===

==== Ancient influence on Southeast Asian music genres ====

With expansion of Indosphere cultural influence of Greater India, through transmission of Hinduism in Southeast Asia and the Silk Road transmission of Buddhism leading to Indianization of Southeast Asia through formation of non-Indian southeast Asian native Indianized kingdoms which adopted sanskritized language and other Indian elements such as the honorific titles, naming of people, naming of places, mottos of organisations and educational institutes as well as adoption of Indian architecture, martial arts, Indian music and dance, traditional Indian clothing, and Indian cuisine, a process which has also been aided by the ongoing historic expansion of Indian diaspora.

===== Indonesian and Malay music =====
In Indonesian and Malaysian music, the Dangdut a genre of folk music is partly derived and fused from Hindustani music. It is a very popular because of its melodious instrumentation and vocals. Dangdut features a tabla and gendang beat. Indonesians dance in somewhat similar to the ghoomar while listening to dangdut music, but in a much slower version.

===== Thai music =====
Thai literature and drama draws great inspiration from Indian arts and Hindu legends. Epic of Ramayana is as popular in Thailand as the Ramakien. Two of the most popular classical thai dances the Khon, performed by men wearing ferocious masks, and the Lakhon (Lakhon nai, Lakhon chatri and Lakhon nok), performed by women who play both male and female roles draws inspiration primarily from the Ramakien. Percussion instruments and Piphat, a type of woodwind accompany the dance. Nang talung, a Thai shadow play inspired by South Indian Bommalattam, has shadows made from the pieces of cow or water buffalo hide cut to represent human figures with movable arms and legs are thrown on a screen for the entertainment of spectators.

===== Philippines =====
* Filipino epics and chants inspired by the Indian Hindu religious epics Ramayana and Mahabharta.
** Alim and Hudhud Oral traditions of Ifugao of Ifugao people of the Cordillera Administrative Region in Luzon island of Philippines, 11 Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity in 2001 and formally inscribed as a UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2008. See also Hudhud – the Ifugao epic.
** Biag ni Lam-ang () is an epic poem of the Ilocano people from the Ilocos region.
** Ibalong epic of Bikol region of southeast Luzon.
** &quot;Aginid, Bayok sa atong Tawarik&quot;, a Bisayan epic of Cebu.
** Bayok, an epic of Marano people of northwestern Mindanao .
* Music instrument
** Kudyapi, native Filipino guitar of Maranao, Manobo and Maguindanao people, is influenced by the Indian classical music concepts of melody and scale.

==== Fusion with traditional music of other nations ====

Sometimes, the music of India is fused with the native traditional music of other countries. For example, Delhi 2 Dublin, a band based in Canada, is known for fusing Indian and Irish music, and Bhangraton is a fusion of Bhangra music with reggaeton.

==== Western world music ====

=====Film music=====
Indian film composer A. R. Rahman wrote the music for Andrew Lloyd Webber&#x27;s &quot;Bombay Dreams&quot;, and a musical version of &quot;Hum Aapke Hain Koun&quot; was staged in London&#x27;s West End. The Bollywood sports film &quot;Lagaan&quot; (2001) was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and two other Bollywood films (2002&#x27;s &quot;Devdas&quot; and 2006&#x27;s &quot;Rang De Basanti&quot;) were nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language.

Danny Boyle&#x27;s &quot;Slumdog Millionaire&quot; (2008) was inspired by Bollywood films.

=====Hip hop and reggae=====
Bhangraton is a fusion of Bhangra music with reggaeton, which itself is a fusion of hip hop, reggae, and traditional Latin American music.

===== Jazz =====
In early 1960s Jazz pioneers such as John Coltrane—who recorded a composition entitled &#x27;India&#x27; during the November 1961 sessions for his album &quot;Live at the Village Vanguard&quot; (the track was not released until 1963 on Coltrane&#x27;s album &quot;Impressions&quot;)—also embraced this fusion. George Harrison (of the Beatles) played the sitar on the song &quot;Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)&quot; in 1965, which sparked interest from Shankar, who subsequently took Harrison as his apprentice. Jazz innovator Miles Davis recorded and performed with musicians like Khalil Balakrishna, Bihari Sharma, and Badal Roy in his post-1968 electric ensembles. Virtuoso jazz guitarist John McLaughlin spent several years in Madurai learning Carnatic music and incorporated it into many of his acts including Shakti which featured prominent Indian musicians. Other Western artists such as the Grateful Dead, Incredible String Band, the Rolling Stones, the Move and Traffic soon incorporated Indian influences and instruments, and added Indian performers.

Legendary Grateful Dead frontman Jerry Garcia joined guitarist Sanjay Mishra on his classic CD &quot;Blue Incantation&quot; (1995). Mishra also wrote an original score for French Director Eric Heumann for his film &quot;Port Djema&quot; (1996) which won best score at Hamptons film festival and The Golden Bear at Berlin. in 2000 he recorded &quot;Rescue&quot; with drummer Dennis Chambers (Carlos Santana, John McLaughlin et al.) and in 2006 Chateau Benares with guests DJ Logic and Keller Williams (guitar and bass).

=====Musical film=====
Since the early 2000s, Bollywood began influencing musical films in the Western world and was instrumental role in reviving the American musical film. Baz Luhrmann said that his musical film, &quot;Moulin Rouge!&quot; (2001), was inspired by Bollywood musicals; the film incorporated a Bollywood-style dance scene with a song from the film &quot;China Gate&quot;. The critical and financial success of &quot;Moulin Rouge!&quot; began a renaissance of Western musical films such as &quot;Chicago&quot;, &quot;Rent&quot;, and &quot;Dreamgirls&quot;.

===== Psychedelic and trance music =====
Psychedelic trance developed from Goa trance.

===== Rock and roll =====
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, rock and roll fusions with Indian music were well known throughout Europe and North America. Ali Akbar Khan&#x27;s 1955 performance in the United States was perhaps the beginning of this trend. In 1985, a beat-oriented, Raga Rock hybrid called Sitar Power by Ashwin Batish reintroduced sitar in western nations. Sitar Power drew the attention of a number of record labels and was snapped up by Shanachie Records of New Jersey to head their World Beat Ethno Pop division.

=====Technopop=====
The influence of &quot;filmi&quot; may be seen in popular music worldwide. Technopop pioneers Haruomi Hosono and Ryuichi Sakamoto of the Yellow Magic Orchestra produced a 1978 electronic album, &quot;Cochin Moon&quot;, based on an experimental fusion of electronic music and Bollywood-inspired Indian music. Truth Hurts&#x27; 2002 song &quot;Addictive&quot;, produced by DJ Quik and Dr. Dre, was taken from Lata Mangeshkar&#x27;s &quot;Thoda Resham Lagta Hai&quot; in &quot;Jyoti&quot; (1981). The Black Eyed Peas&#x27; Grammy Award winning 2005 song &quot;Don&#x27;t Phunk with My Heart&quot; was inspired by two 1970s Bollywood songs: &quot;Ye Mera Dil Yaar Ka Diwana&quot; from &quot;Don&quot; (1978) and &quot;Ae Nujawan Hai Sub&quot; from &quot;Apradh&quot; (1972). Both songs were composed by Kalyanji Anandji, sung by Asha Bhosle, and featured the dancer Helen.

=====Western classical music=====
Some prominent Indians in Western classical music are: 
* Andre de Quadros- conductor and music educator, 
* Zubin Mehta, conductor
* Mehli Mehta, father of Zubin, violinist and founding conductor of the Bombay Symphony Orchestra
* Anil Srinivasan, pianist
* Ilaiyaraaja, the first Indian to compose a full symphony performed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra in London&#x27;s Walthamstow Town Hall
* Naresh Sohal, British Indian-born composer
* Param Vir, British Indian-born composer
* Beno, Indian-born composer

=== Influence on national music scene ===
Bollywood has been a significant form of soft power for India, increasing its influence and changing overseas perceptions of India. According to author Roopa Swaminathan, &quot;Bollywood cinema is one of the strongest global cultural ambassadors of a new India.&quot; Its role in expanding India&#x27;s global influence is comparable to Hollywood&#x27;s similar role with American influence.

==== Africa ====

Kishore Kumar is popular in Egypt and Somalia.

Hindi films were originally distributed to some parts of Africa by Lebanese businessmen, and &quot;Mother India&quot; (1957) continued to be screened in Nigeria decades after its release. Indian movies have influenced Hausa clothing, songs have been covered by Hausa singers, and stories have influenced Nigerian novelists. Stickers of Indian films and stars decorate taxis and buses in Nigeria&#x27;s Northern Region, and posters of Indian films hang on the walls of tailoring shops and mechanics&#x27; garages.

In South Africa, film imports from India were watched by black and Indian audiences. Several Bollywood figures have travelled to Africa for films and off-camera projects. &quot;Padmashree Laloo Prasad Yadav&quot; (2005) was filmed in South Africa. &quot;Dil Jo Bhi Kahey...&quot; (2005) was also filmed almost entirely in Mauritius, which has a large ethnic-Indian population.

In Egypt, Bollywood films were popular during the 1970s and 1980s. Amitabh Bachchan has remained popular in the country and Indian tourists visiting Egypt are asked, &quot;Do you know Amitabh Bachchan?&quot;

==== Americas ====

===== Caribbean =====
Indo-Caribbean music of Indo-Caribbean people in Caribbean is most common in Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, Jamaica, and Suriname, which reflects their Bhojpuri heritage. Main instrumentation are dhantal, metal rod, clapper, dholak, two-headed barrel drum. Women sing Hindu bhajans and folk songs from the music of Bhojpur on various important life events, rituals, celebrations, festivals like phagwah and holi. Indo-Caribbean contributions to popular music are very important. The most well-known is the Indo-Trinidadian &quot;chutney music&quot; tradition. Chutney is a form of popular dance music that developed in the mid-to late 20th century. Baithak Gana is a similar popular form originating in Suriname.

===== Latin America =====

There is significant Indian diaspora communities in Suriname and Guyana, Indian music and Hindi-language movies are popular. In 2006, &quot;Dhoom 2&quot; became the first Bollywood film to be shot in Rio de Janeiro.

===== North America =====
In the new millennium, American hip-hop has featured Indian filmi and bhangra. hip-hop artists have sampled songs from Bollywood movies and have collaborated with Indian artists. Examples include Timbaland&#x27;s &quot;Indian Flute&quot;, Erick Sermon and Redman&#x27;s &quot;React&quot;, Slum Village&#x27;s &quot;Disco&quot;, and Truth Hurts&#x27; hit song &quot;Addictive&quot;, which sampled a Lata Mangeshkar song, and The Black Eyed Peas sampled Asha Bhosle&#x27;s song &quot;Yeh Mera Dil&quot; in their hit single &quot;Don&#x27;t Phunk With My Heart&quot;. In 1997, the British band Cornershop paid tribute to Asha Bhosle with their song &quot;Brimful of Asha&quot;, which became an international hit. British-born Indian artist Panjabi MC also had a Bhangra hit in the US with &quot;Mundian To Bach Ke&quot; which featured rapper Jay-Z. Asian Dub Foundation are not huge mainstream stars, but their politically charged rap and punk rock influenced sound has a multi-racial audience in their native UK. In 2008, international star Snoop Dogg appeared in a song in the film Singh Is Kinng. In 2007, hip-hop producer Madlib released Beat Konducta Vol 3–4: Beat Konducta in India; an album which heavily samples and is inspired by the music of India.

==== Asia ====
===== South Asia =====
Due to shared cultural heritage and language, Indian music and Bollywood films are also popular in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Nepal, where Hindustani is widely understood.

===== Southeast Asia =====
Already covered in earlier section Ancient influence on Southeast Asian music genre.

===== West Asia =====
West Asia has large Indian diaspora population, who mainly consume Indian music. Indian music is also popular with native middle eastern people. 85% of Qatar&#x27;s and 75% of UAE&#x27;s total population are Indian citizens. Hindi films and music have become popular in Arab countries, and imported Indian films are usually subtitled in Arabic when they are released. Bollywood has progressed in Israel since the early 2000s, with channels dedicated to Indian films on cable television;

==== Europe ====

=====Germany=====

In Germany, Indian stereotypes included bullock carts, beggars, sacred cows, corrupt politicians, and catastrophes before Bollywood and the IT industry transformed global perceptions of India.

===== UK =====
In the late 1980s, Indian-British artists fused Indian and Western traditions to make the Asian Underground. Since the 1990s, Canadian born musician Nadaka who has spent most of his life in India, has been creating music that is an acoustic fusion of Indian classical music with western styles. One such singer who has merged the Bhakti sangeet tradition of India with the western non-Indian music is Krishna Das and sells music records of his musical sadhana. Another example is the Indo-Canadian musician Vandana Vishwas who has experimented with western music in her 2013 album &quot;Monologues&quot;.

In a more recent example of Indian-British fusion, Laura Marling along with Mumford and Sons collaborated in 2010 with the Dharohar Project on a four-song EP. The British band Bombay Bicycle Club also sampled the song &quot;Man Dole Mera Tan Dole&quot; for their single &quot;Feel&quot;. Laxmikant-Pyarelal

==== Oceania ====
Due to large Indian diaspora population, Indian music and movies are very popular in Fiji especially among Indo-Fijians.

Australia and New Zealand have 2 percent Indian population, as well as other a large South Asian diaspora, and Bollywood music and movies are popular amongst non-Asians in the country as well.

==Organisations promoting Indian music==

Sangeet Natak Akademi is the national level academy for performing arts set up by the Government of India in 1952, which bestows Sangeet Natak Akademi Award as the highest official Indian government&#x27;s recognition given to practicing artists, It has established several institutions including the Manipur Dance Academy in Imphal, Ravindra Rangshala Centers, Sattriya Centre, Kathak Kendra (National Institute of Kathak Dance) at New Delhi, Centre for Kutiyattam at Thiruvananthapuram, Chhau Centre at Baripada in Jamshedpur, Banaras Music Akademi, Varanasi, and the Northeast Centre. Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal (अखिल भारतीय गान्धर्व महाविद्यालय मंडल) is an institution for the promotion and propagation of Indian classical music and dance.

==See also==
* Indian classical music
* Indian classical dance
* Indian musical instruments
* Indian Music Industry
* Military Music Wing
* Music of South Asia
* List of regional genres of music
==References==
===Works cited===
*
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Wade, Bonnie C. (1987). &quot;Music in India: the Classical Traditions&quot;. New Dehi, India: Manohar, 1987, t.p. 1994. xix, [1], 252 p., amply ill., including with examples in musical notation. 
*Maycock, Robert and Hunt, Ken. &quot;How to Listen - a Routemap of India&quot;. 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), &quot;World Music, Vol. 2: Latin &amp; North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific&quot;, pp. 63–69. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. 
*Hunt, Ken. &quot;Ragas and Riches&quot;. 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), &quot;World Music, Vol. 2: Latin &amp; North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific&quot;, pp. 70–78. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. .
*&quot;Hindu music.&quot; (2011). Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th Edition, 1.
*Emmie te Nijenhuis (1977), &quot;A History of Indian Literature: Musicological Literature&quot;, Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, , 
*Natya Sastra &quot;Ancient Indian Theory and Practice of Music&quot; (translated by M. Ghosh)

==External links==

* BBC Radio 3 Audio (45 minutes): The Nizamuddin shrine in Delhi. Accessed 25 November 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (45 minutes): A mahfil Sufi gathering in Karachi. Accessed 25 November 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): The Misra brothers perform Vedic chant. Accessed 25 November 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Rikhi Ram and sons, Nizami brothers. Accessed 25 November 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Rajasthan, Bombay and Trilok Gurtu. Accessed 25 November 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (45 minutes): Gujarat - Praful Dave. Accessed 25 November 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (45 minutes): Courtesan songs and music of the Bauls. Accessed 25 November 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Music from the Golden Temple of Amritsar. Accessed 25 November 2010.
* Hindustani Rag Sangeet Online – A rare collection of more than 800 audio and video archives from 1902
* Rabindra Sangeet - Celebrating Tagore </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="133" end="148" title="Indian classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022257" start="150" end="154" title="Indian folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056349" start="156" end="160" title="Indian rock" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535998" start="166" end="169" title="Indian pop" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="425" end="436" title="paleolithic" label="paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="441" end="450" title="neolithic" label="neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="473" end="499" title="World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO world heritage site"/>
<link wikidata="Q331603" start="503" end="526" title="Bhimbetka rock shelters" label="Bhimbetka rock shelters"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="567" end="577" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="582" end="594" title="chalcolithic" label="chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q331603" start="607" end="616" title="Bhimbetka rock shelters" label="Bhimbetka"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="657" end="661" title="Gong" label="Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="664" end="674" title="Lyre" label="Bowed Lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="676" end="679" title="daf" label="daf"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="704" end="716" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q498249" start="772" end="777" title="Celt (tool)" label="celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418676" start="868" end="878" title="Sankarjang" label="Sankarjang"/>
<link wikidata="Q518237" start="886" end="891" title="Angul" label="Angul"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="904" end="910" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536413" start="1070" end="1080" title="Khandagiri" label="Khandagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536413" start="1085" end="1094" title="Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q171771" start="1098" end="1109" title="Bhubaneswar" label="Bhubaneswar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008494" start="1154" end="1176" title="Dancing Girl (prehistoric sculpture)" label="Dancing Girl sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="1207" end="1232" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="1300" end="1304" title="dhol" label="dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="1403" end="1408" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="1431" end="1443" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q676774" start="1506" end="1525" title="Shatapatha Brahmana" label="Shatapatha Brahmana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754210" start="1544" end="1550" title="shloka" label="verses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896571" start="1623" end="1627" title="Tala (music)" label="Tala"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="1695" end="1700" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="1714" end="1722" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q236226" start="1742" end="1750" title="Samaveda" label="Samaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q840548" start="1798" end="1804" title="Smriti" label="Smriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194040" start="1838" end="1849" title="Hindu texts" label="Hindu texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q715607" start="1858" end="1865" title="Valmiki" label="Valmiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="1873" end="1881" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q148773" start="1944" end="1950" title="Apsara" label="Apsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307799" start="1960" end="1967" title="Urvashi" label="Urvashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207396" start="1969" end="1975" title="Rambha (apsara)" label="Rambha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367292" start="1977" end="1983" title="Menaka" label="Menaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275998" start="1985" end="1994" title="Tilottama" label="Tilottama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130375" start="1995" end="2007" title="Panchāpsaras" label="Panchāpsaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q235102" start="2013" end="2019" title="Ravana" label="Ravana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291498" start="2200" end="2209" title="Gandharva" label="Gandharva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="2220" end="2237" title="string instrument" label="string instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q959769" start="2240" end="2244" title="Veena" label="vina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912399" start="2246" end="2252" title="Santoor" label="tantri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266546" start="2254" end="2257" title="Rudra veena" label="bīn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752984" start="2259" end="2266" title="Vipanchi veena" label="vipanci"/>
<link wikidata="Q173453" start="2322" end="2337" title="wind instrument" label="wind instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479786" start="2340" end="2347" title="shankha" label="shankha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753171" start="2349" end="2353" title="venu" label="venu"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="2442" end="2446" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q178673" start="2521" end="2535" title="vocal register" label="vocal register"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380503" start="2550" end="2555" title="svara" label="svara"/>
<link wikidata="Q58257" start="2607" end="2616" title="Shruti (music)" label="ekashurti"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="2659" end="2682" title="Scale (music)" label="regulated rise and fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867393" start="2701" end="2706" title="Matra (music)" label="matra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2757" end="2766" title="Tala (music)#Description" label="teen taal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2779" end="2783" title="Tempo#Musical vocabulary" label="laya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309414" start="2804" end="2808" title="drut" label="drut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727621" start="2831" end="2837" title="Madhya laya" label="madhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930064" start="2865" end="2873" title="vilambit" label="vilambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849870" start="2911" end="2921" title="Bala Kanda" label="Bala Kanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="2934" end="2946" title="Uttara Kanda" label="Uttara Kanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725716" start="2950" end="2953" title="Lava (Ramayana)" label="Luv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725781" start="2958" end="2963" title="Kusha (Ramayana)" label="Kusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072151" start="2973" end="2978" title="Marga Sangeet" label="marga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418484" start="3031" end="3043" title="Tholkappiyam" label="Tholkappiyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="3145" end="3162" title="Sangam literature" label="Sangam literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418484" start="3201" end="3213" title="Tholkappiyam" label="Tholkappiyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791990" start="3256" end="3270" title="Mathuraikkanci" label="Mathuraikkanci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418484" start="3382" end="3393" title="Tolkappiyam" label="Tolkappiyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417802" start="3410" end="3420" title="Sangam landscape" label="landscapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131357" start="3927" end="3931" title="Pann" label="Pann"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="3966" end="3978" title="Tamil people" label="Tamil people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752921" start="3982" end="3993" title="Ancient Tamil music" label="their music"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="4085" end="4095" title="pentatonic" label="pentatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380503" start="4141" end="4147" title="Swara" label="Sargam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565473" start="4193" end="4203" title="heptatonic" label="heptatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4235" end="4243" title="sanskrit" label="sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q335015" start="4255" end="4263" title="Jayadeva" label="Jayadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077860" start="4406" end="4420" title="Odissi music" label="Odissi Sangita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632913" start="4423" end="4433" title="Sharngadeva" label="Śārṅgadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418021" start="4443" end="4460" title="Sangita-Ratnakara" label="Sangita-Ratnakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4488" end="4496" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="4578" end="4594" title="Hindustani music" label="Hindustani music"/>
<link wikidata="Q956883" start="4599" end="4613" title="Carnatic music" label="Carnatic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="4628" end="4650" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287940" start="4653" end="4661" title="Assamese people" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636016" start="4667" end="4682" title="Madhava Kandali" label="Madhava Kandali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421142" start="4694" end="4713" title="Saptakanda Ramayana" label="Saptakanda Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046658" start="4789" end="4796" title="Pakhavaj" label="mardala"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="4841" end="4846" title="tabla" label="tabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478508" start="4848" end="4855" title="anklet" label="jhajhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813494" start="4880" end="4886" title="Tokari geet" label="tokari"/>
<link wikidata="Q25644178" start="4896" end="4903" title="kendara" label="kendara"/>
<link wikidata="Q611259" start="4905" end="4911" title="dotara" label="dotara"/>
<link wikidata="Q959769" start="4913" end="4917" title="Veena" label="vina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266546" start="4919" end="4933" title="Rudra veena" label="rudra-vipanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="5049" end="5057" title="Musical notation" label="notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q919071" start="5169" end="5176" title="Khiljis" label="Khiljis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5322" end="5395" title="Arts of Odisha#Music" label="Sangitamava Chandrika, Gita Prakasha, Sangita Kalalata and Natya Manorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="5441" end="5445" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="5463" end="5476" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="5481" end="5496" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="5585" end="5590" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="5642" end="5655" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5709" end="5715" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="5720" end="5733" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976128" start="5825" end="5842" title="Asian Underground" label="Asian Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q26224" start="5851" end="5865" title="new millennium" label="new millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="5876" end="5883" title="hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="5923" end="5930" title="hip-hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="5963" end="5979" title="Bollywood movies" label="Bollywood movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573975" start="6007" end="6021" title="List of Indian artists" label="Indian artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179257" start="6031" end="6040" title="Timbaland" label="Timbaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q236735" start="6083" end="6096" title="Laura Marling" label="Laura Marling"/>
<link wikidata="Q953918" start="6101" end="6119" title="Mumford &amp;amp; Sons" label="Mumford &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q956883" start="6238" end="6252" title="Carnatic music" label="Carnatic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="6329" end="6345" title="Hindustani music" label="Hindustani music"/>
<link wikidata="Q58257" start="6456" end="6462" title="Shruti (music)" label="Shruti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380503" start="6489" end="6495" title="Swaras" label="Swaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q11684850" start="6517" end="6524" title="Alankar" label="Alankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="6555" end="6559" title="Raga" label="Raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896571" start="6619" end="6623" title="Tala (music)" label="Tala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380503" start="6888" end="6929" title="The seven notes of Indian Classical music" label="The seven notes of Indian Classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="7490" end="7494" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606713" start="8049" end="8070" title="Sangeet Natak Academy" label="Sangeet Natak Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334156" start="8128" end="8141" title="Bharatanatyam" label="Bharatanatyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q949256" start="8143" end="8149" title="Kathak" label="Kathak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145471" start="8151" end="8160" title="Kuchipudi" label="Kuchipudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014687" start="8162" end="8168" title="Odissi" label="Odissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q839500" start="8170" end="8179" title="Kathakali" label="Kathakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724537" start="8181" end="8189" title="Sattriya" label="Sattriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q511116" start="8191" end="8199" title="Manipuri dance" label="Manipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q940868" start="8204" end="8216" title="Mohiniyattam" label="Mohiniyattam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071518" start="8279" end="8284" title="Chhau dance" label="Chhau"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="8456" end="8474" title="Vijayanagar Empire" label="Vijayanagar Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350157" start="8510" end="8524" title="Purandara Dasa" label="Purandara Dasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="8555" end="8562" title="Melodic music" label="melodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708326" start="8736" end="8748" title="Alapana" label="Raga Alapana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354377" start="8762" end="8775" title="Kalpanaswaram" label="Kalpanaswaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039913" start="8789" end="8796" title="Niraval" label="Neraval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282802" start="8847" end="8867" title="Ragam Thanam Pallavi" label="Ragam Thanam Pallavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="9078" end="9082" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536517" start="9103" end="9112" title="Annamayya" label="Annamayya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350157" start="9254" end="9268" title="Purandara Dasa" label="Purandara Dasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044389" start="9339" end="9348" title="Tyagaraja" label="Tyagaraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519351" start="9350" end="9364" title="Shyama Shastry" label="Shyama Shastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771067" start="9369" end="9389" title="Muthuswami Dikshitar" label="Muthuswami Dikshitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530897" start="9477" end="9503" title="Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar" label="Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361411" start="9548" end="9565" title="Palghat Mani Iyer" label="Palghat Mani Iyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728813" start="9567" end="9584" title="Madurai Mani Iyer" label="Madurai Mani Iyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525273" start="9586" end="9611" title="Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer" label="Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986393" start="9613" end="9635" title="Nedunuri Krishnamurthy" label="Nedunuri Krishnamurthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708823" start="9636" end="9652" title="Alathur Brothers" label="Alathur Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465067" start="9654" end="9672" title="M. S. Subbulakshmi" label="M. S. Subbulakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519943" start="9674" end="9691" title="Lalgudi Jayaraman" label="Lalgudi Jayaraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880506" start="9693" end="9710" title="Balamuralikrishna" label="Balamuralikrishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668541" start="9712" end="9730" title="T. N. Seshagopalan" label="T. N. Seshagopalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051849" start="9732" end="9745" title="K. J. Yesudas" label="K. J. Yesudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117026" start="9747" end="9756" title="N. Ramani" label="N. Ramani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108773" start="9758" end="9782" title="Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman" label="Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418484" start="9784" end="9803" title="Sanjay Subrahmanyan" label="Sanjay Subrahmanyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668495" start="9805" end="9818" title="T. M. Krishna" label="T. M. Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519929" start="9820" end="9835" title="Bombay Jayashri" label="Bombay Jayashri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866036" start="9837" end="9849" title="Aruna Sairam" label="Aruna Sairam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948705" start="9851" end="9867" title="Mysore Manjunath" label="Mysore Manjunath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="9898" end="9905" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530224" start="9939" end="9951" title="Madras Music Season" label="Music Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="10848" end="10864" title="Historical Vedic religion" label="Vedic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223087" start="10915" end="10922" title="Persian traditional music" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="10952" end="10959" title="Mughal era" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q59158" start="10982" end="10989" title="dhrupad" label="dhrupad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025683" start="10991" end="10997" title="dhamar (music)" label="dhamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q62128" start="10999" end="11004" title="khyal" label="khyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981034" start="11006" end="11012" title="tarana" label="tarana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17037735" start="11017" end="11022" title="sadra (music)" label="sadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q69596" start="11370" end="11376" title="Thumri" label="Thumri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157018" start="11378" end="11383" title="Dadra" label="Dadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q854775" start="11385" end="11391" title="Bhajan" label="Bhajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q281111" start="11393" end="11399" title="Ghazal" label="Ghazal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068130" start="11401" end="11407" title="Chaiti" label="Chaiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348907" start="11409" end="11414" title="Kajri" label="Kajri"/>
<link wikidata="Q70076" start="11416" end="11421" title="Tappa" label="Tappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417910" start="11423" end="11436" title="Natya Sangeet" label="Natya Sangeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q512410" start="11441" end="11448" title="Qawwali" label="Qawwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144444" start="11629" end="11642" title="Tamang people" label="Tamang people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726202" start="11790" end="11795" title="Madal" label="Madal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353519" start="11797" end="11803" title="Damphu drum" label="Damphu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181472" start="11808" end="11814" title="Tungna" label="Tungna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768775" start="12044" end="12059" title="Hira Devi Waiba" label="Hira Devi Waiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001554" start="12138" end="12159" title="Chura ta Hoina Astura" label="Chura ta Hoina Astura"/>
<link wikidata="Q50048571" start="12399" end="12419" title="Navneet Aditya Waiba" label="Navneet Aditya Waiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q50764747" start="12515" end="12536" title="Ama Lai Shraddhanjali" label="Ama Lai Shraddhanjali"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="12765" end="12772" title="Bhangra (music)" label="Bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q689894" start="12774" end="12781" title="Gurmukhi" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="12803" end="12808" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="12818" end="12828" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="12832" end="12838" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="12936" end="12942" title="Punjab (India)" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="12988" end="13001" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab region"/>
<link wikidata="Q985135" start="13014" end="13020" title="Giddha" label="Giddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q689894" start="13022" end="13029" title="Gurmukhi" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765292" start="13065" end="13069" title="Bihu" label="Bihu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="13104" end="13109" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945025" start="13560" end="13567" title="Borgeet" label="Borgeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="13615" end="13619" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896571" start="13648" end="13652" title="Tala (music)" label="tala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116915" start="13679" end="13698" title="Srimanta Sankardeva" label="Srimanta Sankardeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633983" start="13703" end="13713" title="Madhavdeva" label="Madhavdeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426457" start="13779" end="13790" title="Satra (Ekasarana Dharma)" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426457" start="13797" end="13802" title="Satra (Ekasarana Dharma)" label="Satra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961682" start="13807" end="13814" title="Namghar" label="Namghar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277579" start="13835" end="13851" title="Ekasarana Dharma" label="Ekasarana Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942006" start="13895" end="13909" title="Music of Assam" label="Music of Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277579" start="14101" end="14117" title="Ekasarana Dharma" label="Ekasarana Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672803" start="14181" end="14185" title="Taal (instrument)" label="Taal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436500" start="14187" end="14191" title="Khol" label="Khol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629880" start="14215" end="14222" title="Dandiya" label="Dandiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q882985" start="14528" end="14533" title="Garba (dance)" label="Garba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515214" start="14551" end="14556" title="Gaana" label="Gaana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="14562" end="14565" title="Rapping" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q219517" start="14638" end="14643" title="Dalit" label="Dalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681435" start="14782" end="14791" title="Tamilakam" label="Tamilakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806737" start="15205" end="15229" title="The Casteless Collective" label="The Casteless Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="15325" end="15345" title="Caste system in India" label="caste discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942112" start="15366" end="15384" title="Music of Haryana" label="Haryana folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="15675" end="15679" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q28172110" start="15694" end="15716" title="Charkhi Dadri district" label="Charkhi Dadri district"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839077" start="16210" end="16217" title="Jhumair" label="Jhumair"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749916" start="16222" end="16229" title="Domkach" label="Domkach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16234" end="16252" title="Nagpuri people#Culture" label="Nagpuri folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="16311" end="16315" title="Dhol" label="Dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726202" start="16317" end="16323" title="Madal" label="Mandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q960389" start="16325" end="16330" title="Bansuri" label="Bansi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898734" start="16332" end="16338" title="Naqareh" label="Nagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268703" start="16340" end="16344" title="Dhak (instrument)" label="Dhak"/>
<link wikidata="Q847911" start="16346" end="16353" title="Shehnai" label="Shehnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193614" start="16355" end="16362" title="Khartal" label="Khartal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722134" start="16392" end="16398" title="Lavani" label="Lavani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="16555" end="16566" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722134" start="16747" end="16753" title="Lavani" label="Lavani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722134" start="16789" end="16795" title="Lavani" label="Lavani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634822" start="16808" end="16815" title="Tamasha" label="Tamasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942170" start="17164" end="17180" title="Music of Manipur" label="Music of Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q511116" start="17185" end="17199" title="Manipuri dance" label="Manipuri dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q930821" start="17216" end="17231" title="Meitei people" label="Manipuri people"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="17410" end="17415" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="17891" end="17898" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23641297" start="18167" end="18175" title="Nataraja" label="Nataraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759033" start="18528" end="18541" title="Marfa (music)" label="Hadrani Marfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240096" start="18604" end="18619" title="Hyderabad State" label="Hyderabad State"/>
<link wikidata="Q13685" start="18640" end="18655" title="Siddi" label="Siddi community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517159" start="18680" end="18690" title="Hadhramawt" label="Hadhramawt"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="18694" end="18699" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953992" start="18761" end="18779" title="Hyderabadi Muslims" label="Hyderabadi Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759026" start="18810" end="18826" title="Marfa (instrument)" label="Marfa instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="18828" end="18831" title="daf" label="daf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="18834" end="18838" title="Dhol" label="Dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="18840" end="18846" title="percussion instrument" label="sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764456" start="18848" end="18857" title="steel pot" label="steel pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="18863" end="18869" title="wooden" label="wooden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073966" start="18917" end="18927" title="Mizo music" label="Mizo music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710643" start="18993" end="19002" title="Thantlang" label="Thantlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q335015" start="19915" end="19923" title="Jayadeva" label="Jayadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077860" start="20605" end="20619" title="Odissi music" label="Odissi Sangita"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064006" start="20698" end="20705" title="Panchal" label="Panchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064006" start="20893" end="20900" title="Panchal" label="Panchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15724801" start="21079" end="21094" title="Balakrushna Das" label="Balakrushna Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q86952094" start="21096" end="21115" title="Gopal Chandra Panda" label="Gopal Chandra Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17565430" start="21117" end="21128" title="Ramhari Das" label="Ramhari Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048299" start="21169" end="21184" title="Sunanda Patnaik" label="Sunanda Patnaik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="21391" end="21410" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349675" start="21457" end="21472" title="music of Bengal" label="music of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="21495" end="21505" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="21649" end="21656" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="21707" end="21722" title="Indian classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022257" start="21739" end="21749" title="Indian folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="21806" end="21816" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="21856" end="21865" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="22246" end="22255" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="22307" end="22312" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486053" start="22325" end="22330" title="Langha (tribe)" label="Langa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420940" start="22333" end="22339" title="Sapera" label="Sapera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901988" start="22341" end="22346" title="Bhopa" label="Bhopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11043540" start="22348" end="22352" title="Jogi (caste)" label="Jogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213004" start="22357" end="22367" title="Manganiyar" label="Manganiyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q608650" start="22604" end="22611" title="Sarangi" label="Sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724498" start="22613" end="22624" title="Ravanahatha" label="Ravanahatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="22797" end="22801" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130542544" start="22930" end="22936" title="Bankia (instrument)" label="Bankia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="23745" end="23756" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="23881" end="23892" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="23996" end="24001" title="Tabla" label="Tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="24006" end="24015" title="Harmonium" label="Harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="24375" end="24377" title="Disc jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196994" start="24432" end="24440" title="Weddings in India" label="weddings"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="24739" end="24752" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q544440" start="24756" end="24761" title="filmi" label="filmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351160" start="25013" end="25025" title="R. D. Burman" label="R. D. Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631402" start="25027" end="25044" title="Shankar Jaikishan" label="Shankar Jaikishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723913" start="25046" end="25058" title="S. D. Burman" label="S. D. Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032420" start="25060" end="25078" title="Laxmikant–Pyarelal" label="Laxmikant–Pyarelal"/>
<link wikidata="Q422999" start="25080" end="25091" title="Madan Mohan (music director)" label="Madan Mohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q855128" start="25093" end="25108" title="Bhupen Hazarika" label="Bhupen Hazarika"/>
<link wikidata="Q674337" start="25110" end="25121" title="Naushad Ali" label="Naushad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397628" start="25123" end="25135" title="O. P. Nayyar" label="O. P. Nayyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732205" start="25137" end="25149" title="Hemant Kumar" label="Hemant Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022556" start="25151" end="25164" title="C. Ramchandra" label="C. Ramchandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349404" start="25166" end="25181" title="Salil Chowdhury" label="Salil Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723490" start="25183" end="25199" title="Kalyanji Anandji" label="Kalyanji Anandji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720141" start="25201" end="25212" title="Ilaiyaraaja" label="Ilaiyaraaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="25214" end="25226" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750298" start="25228" end="25239" title="Jatin–Lalit" label="Jatin–Lalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q612167" start="25241" end="25250" title="Anu Malik" label="Anu Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530501" start="25252" end="25266" title="Nadeem-Shravan" label="Nadeem-Shravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748506" start="25268" end="25282" title="Harris Jayaraj" label="Harris Jayaraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395430" start="25284" end="25301" title="Himesh Reshammiya" label="Himesh Reshammiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595530" start="25303" end="25313" title="Vidyasagar (composer)" label="Vidyasagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531621" start="25315" end="25333" title="Shankar–Ehsaan–Loy" label="Shankar–Ehsaan–Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124942" start="25335" end="25349" title="Salim–Sulaiman" label="Salim–Sulaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633978" start="25351" end="25357" title="Pritam" label="Pritam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115598" start="25359" end="25376" title="M. S. Viswanathan" label="M. S. Viswanathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536748" start="25378" end="25393" title="K. V. Mahadevan" label="K. V. Mahadevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429974" start="25395" end="25405" title="Ghantasala (musician)" label="Ghantasala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279537" start="25410" end="25422" title="S. D. Batish" label="S. D. Batish"/>
<link wikidata="Q103774" start="25560" end="25572" title="Ravi Shankar" label="Ravi Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395417" start="25574" end="25586" title="Vilayat Khan" label="Vilayat Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q468356" start="25588" end="25602" title="Ali Akbar Khan" label="Ali Akbar Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41074" start="25607" end="25618" title="Ram Narayan" label="Ram Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755412" start="25780" end="25795" title="playback singer" label="playback singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q471542" start="25965" end="25978" title="Kishore Kumar" label="Kishore Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051849" start="25980" end="25993" title="K. J. Yesudas" label="K. J. Yesudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156815" start="25995" end="26008" title="Mohammed Rafi" label="Mohammed Rafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367593" start="26010" end="26016" title="Mukesh (singer)" label="Mukesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049688" start="26018" end="26040" title="S. P. Balasubrahmanyam" label="S. P. Balasubrahmanyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7484728" start="26042" end="26061" title="T. M. Soundararajan" label="T. M. Soundararajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732205" start="26063" end="26075" title="Hemant Kumar" label="Hemant Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q156310" start="26077" end="26086" title="Manna Dey" label="Manna Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050197" start="26088" end="26099" title="P. Susheela" label="P. Susheela"/>
<link wikidata="Q156347" start="26101" end="26116" title="Lata Mangeshkar" label="Lata Mangeshkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38393" start="26118" end="26130" title="Asha Bhonsle" label="Asha Bhonsle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049950" start="26132" end="26144" title="K. S. Chitra" label="K. S. Chitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q470416" start="26146" end="26156" title="Geeta Dutt" label="Geeta Dutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051296" start="26158" end="26167" title="S. Janaki" label="S. Janaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764762" start="26169" end="26183" title="Shamshad Begum" label="Shamshad Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630336" start="26185" end="26192" title="Suraiya" label="Suraiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q466955" start="26194" end="26203" title="Noorjahan" label="Noorjahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630686" start="26208" end="26223" title="Suman Kalyanpur" label="Suman Kalyanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q469818" start="26257" end="26269" title="Udit Narayan" label="Udit Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200364" start="26271" end="26281" title="Kumar Sanu" label="Kumar Sanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391295" start="26283" end="26295" title="Kailash Kher" label="Kailash Kher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722967" start="26297" end="26310" title="Alisha Chinai" label="Alisha Chinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634230" start="26312" end="26314" title="KK (singer)" label="KK"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346448" start="26316" end="26321" title="Shaan (singer)" label="Shaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533144" start="26323" end="26335" title="S. P. Charan" label="S. P. Charan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645808" start="26337" end="26347" title="Madhushree" label="Madhushree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050788" start="26349" end="26363" title="Shreya Ghoshal" label="Shreya Ghoshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21934488" start="26365" end="26377" title="Nihira Joshi" label="Nihira Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q467315" start="26379" end="26399" title="Kavita Krishnamurthy" label="Kavita Krishnamurthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051231" start="26401" end="26419" title="Hariharan (singer)" label="Hariharan (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720141" start="26421" end="26432" title="Ilaiyaraaja" label="Ilaiyaraaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="26434" end="26446" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q470898" start="26448" end="26458" title="Sonu Nigam" label="Sonu Nigam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344606" start="26460" end="26476" title="Sukhwinder Singh" label="Sukhwinder Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444155" start="26478" end="26493" title="Kunal Ganjawala" label="Kunal Ganjawala"/>
<link wikidata="Q612167" start="26495" end="26504" title="Anu Malik" label="Anu Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722933" start="26506" end="26521" title="Sunidhi Chauhan" label="Sunidhi Chauhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777932" start="26523" end="26540" title="Anushka Manchanda" label="Anushka Manchanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285449" start="26542" end="26552" title="Raja Hasan" label="Raja Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790608" start="26554" end="26566" title="Arijit Singh" label="Arijit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q466826" start="26571" end="26582" title="Alka Yagnik" label="Alka Yagnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027409" start="26600" end="26611" title="Indus Creed" label="Indus Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511310" start="26613" end="26625" title="Indian Ocean (band)" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117995" start="26627" end="26637" title="Silk Route (band)" label="Silk Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q172367" start="26642" end="26650" title="Euphoria (Indian band)" label="Euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="26901" end="26912" title="South Asian" label="South Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q401467" start="26945" end="26957" title="Ahmed Rushdi" label="Ahmed Rushdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q96386171" start="26977" end="26989" title="Ko Ko Korina" label="Ko Ko Korina"/>
<link wikidata="Q471542" start="27014" end="27027" title="Kishore Kumar" label="Kishore Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="27101" end="27121" title="Indian Film Industry" label="Indian Film Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595144" start="27161" end="27171" title="Usha Uthup" label="Usha Uthup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490181" start="27173" end="27189" title="Sharon Prabhakar" label="Sharon Prabhakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071207" start="27195" end="27208" title="Penaz Masani" label="Peenaz Masani"/>
<link wikidata="Q464185" start="27292" end="27304" title="Daler Mehndi" label="Daler Mehndi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595122" start="27306" end="27317" title="Baba Sehgal" label="Baba Sehgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722967" start="27319" end="27332" title="Alisha Chinai" label="Alisha Chinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634230" start="27334" end="27336" title="KK (singer)" label="KK"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346448" start="27338" end="27356" title="Shantanu Mukherjee" label="Shantanu Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399059" start="27371" end="27379" title="Sagarika Mukherjee" label="Sagarika"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148311" start="27381" end="27397" title="Colonial Cousins" label="Colonial Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051231" start="27399" end="27408" title="Hariharan (singer)" label="Hariharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530974" start="27410" end="27421" title="Lesle Lewis (composer)" label="Lesle Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595213" start="27424" end="27433" title="Lucky Ali" label="Lucky Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q470898" start="27439" end="27449" title="Sonu Nigam" label="Sonu Nigam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492958" start="27476" end="27485" title="Zila Khan" label="Zila Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165963" start="27489" end="27503" title="Jawahar Wattal" label="Jawahar Wattal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464185" start="27539" end="27551" title="Daler Mehndi" label="Daler Mehndi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724342" start="27553" end="27566" title="Shubha Mudgal" label="Shubha Mudgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595122" start="27568" end="27579" title="Baba Sehgal" label="Baba Sehgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9076907" start="27581" end="27594" title="Shweta Shetty" label="Shweta Shetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650648" start="27599" end="27612" title="Hans Raj Hans" label="Hans Raj Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48784325" start="27676" end="27681" title="Sanam (band)" label="Sanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694931" start="27690" end="27701" title="Gurdas Maan" label="Gurdas Maan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344606" start="27703" end="27719" title="Sukhwinder Singh" label="Sukhwinder Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761956" start="27721" end="27726" title="Papon (Assamese singer)" label="Papon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595893" start="27728" end="27739" title="Zubeen Garg" label="Zubeen Garg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632518" start="27741" end="27754" title="Raghav Sachar" label="Raghav Sachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040478" start="27755" end="27765" title="Rageshwari" label="Rageshwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914355" start="27767" end="27782" title="Vandana Vishwas" label="Vandana Vishwas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267047" start="27784" end="27797" title="Devika Chawla" label="Devika Chawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398670" start="27799" end="27813" title="Bombay Vikings" label="Bombay Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q38393" start="27815" end="27826" title="Asha Bhosle" label="Asha Bhosle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722933" start="27828" end="27843" title="Sunidhi Chauhan" label="Sunidhi Chauhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777932" start="27845" end="27862" title="Anushka Manchanda" label="Anushka Manchanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940583" start="27864" end="27878" title="Bombay Rockers" label="Bombay Rockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q612167" start="27880" end="27889" title="Anu Malik" label="Anu Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168478" start="27891" end="27898" title="Jazzy B" label="Jazzy B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695398" start="27900" end="27912" title="Malkit Singh" label="Malkit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282930" start="27914" end="27920" title="Raghav" label="Raghav"/>
<link wikidata="Q294907" start="27922" end="27930" title="Jay Sean" label="Jay Sean"/>
<link wikidata="Q113911231" start="27932" end="27945" title="Jaimin Rajani" label="Jaimin Rajani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304866" start="27947" end="27954" title="Juggy D" label="Juggy D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386543" start="27956" end="27966" title="Rishi Rich" label="Rishi Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q458961" start="27981" end="27995" title="Sheila Chandra" label="Sheila Chandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881398" start="27997" end="28008" title="Bally Sagoo" label="Bally Sagoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346896" start="28010" end="28020" title="Punjabi MC" label="Punjabi MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q818081" start="28022" end="28026" title="Beno" label="Beno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948933" start="28028" end="28043" title="Bhangra Knights" label="Bhangra Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391765" start="28045" end="28051" title="Mehnaz" label="Mehnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418879" start="28053" end="28060" title="Sanober" label="Sanober"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908862" start="28065" end="28080" title="Vaishali Samant" label="Vaishali Samant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="28149" end="28154" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q83099" start="28365" end="28379" title="Jana Gana Mana" label="Jana Gana Mana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="28385" end="28400" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="28413" end="28432" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q279417" start="28490" end="28503" title="Vande Mataram" label="Vande Mataram"/>
<link wikidata="Q377881" start="28507" end="28535" title="Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay" label="Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595516" start="28740" end="28761" title="Mile Sur Mera Tumhara" label="Mile Sur Mera Tumhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663084" start="28763" end="28795" title="Ab Tumhare Hawale Watan Saathiyo" label="Ab Tumhare Hawale Watan Saathiyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12452104" start="28797" end="28813" title="Maa Tujhe Salaam (song)" label="Maa Tujhe Salaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="28817" end="28828" title="A.R. Rahman" label="A.R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893834" start="28906" end="28924" title="unity in diversity" label="unity in diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="28965" end="28978" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q835131" start="29145" end="29155" title="Goa trance" label="Goa trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="29160" end="29176" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="29224" end="29227" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q622871" start="29320" end="29329" title="psychedelic trance" label="psytrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="29436" end="29442" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="29529" end="29555" title="Indian religions" label="spiritual culture of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="29589" end="29605" title="industrial music" label="industrial music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890098" start="29607" end="29615" title="new beat" label="new beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q372103" start="29620" end="29641" title="electronic body music" label="electronic body music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168383" start="29744" end="29757" title="Jazz in India" label="Jazz in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="29806" end="29814" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="29819" end="29825" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818852" start="29955" end="29965" title="Leon Abbey" label="Leon Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712975" start="30024" end="30041" title="Teddy Weatherford" label="Teddy Weatherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="30061" end="30076" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19104" start="30261" end="30276" title="Taj Mahal Palace &amp;amp; Tower" label="Taj Mahal hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="30316" end="30319" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575247" start="30337" end="30374" title="Goans in Hindi film music composition" label="worked in the Bollywood film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="30840" end="30851" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q103774" start="30965" end="30977" title="Ravi Shankar" label="Ravi Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q144719" start="30982" end="30995" title="Zakir Hussain (musician)" label="Zakir Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702909" start="31027" end="31036" title="raga rock" label="raga rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027409" start="31337" end="31348" title="Indus Creed" label="Indus Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207752" start="31733" end="31741" title="Shillong" label="Shillong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="31743" end="31750" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="31752" end="31757" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="31759" end="31765" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="31770" end="31779" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q21088718" start="31941" end="31949" title="Nicotine (band)" label="Nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22032341" start="31951" end="31963" title="Voodoo Child (band)" label="Voodoo Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511310" start="31965" end="31977" title="Indian Ocean (band)" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q501745" start="31979" end="31986" title="Kryptos (band)" label="Kryptos"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169315" start="31988" end="32009" title="Thermal and a Quarter" label="Thermal and a Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256257" start="32011" end="32031" title="Demonic Resurrection" label="Demonic Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917533" start="32033" end="32043" title="Motherjane" label="Motherjane"/>
<link wikidata="Q279001" start="32045" end="32050" title="Avial (band)" label="Avial"/>
<link wikidata="Q63883353" start="32052" end="32062" title="Bloodywood" label="Bloodywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137093" start="32067" end="32076" title="Parikrama (band)" label="Parikrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330139" start="32129" end="32158" title="Eastern Fare Music Foundation" label="Eastern Fare Music Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21088718" start="32229" end="32237" title="Nicotine (band)" label="Nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="32301" end="32312" title="metal music" label="metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="32627" end="32638" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130464" start="32718" end="32732" title="See My Friends" label="See My Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="32742" end="32751" title="the Kinks" label="the Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192725" start="32756" end="32769" title="the Yardbirds" label="the Yardbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692002" start="32782" end="32800" title="Heart Full of Soul" label="Heart Full of Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q192474" start="32877" end="32886" title="Jeff Beck" label="Jeff Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q965926" start="32911" end="32947" title="Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)" label="Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)"/>
<link wikidata="Q190640" start="33006" end="33017" title="Rubber Soul" label="Rubber Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="33110" end="33125" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="33128" end="33137" title="The Byrds" label="The Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303534" start="33168" end="33184" title="Eight Miles High" label="Eight Miles High"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997714" start="33212" end="33215" title="Why (The Byrds song)" label="Why"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="33503" end="33520" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935345" start="33635" end="33646" title="Love You To" label="Love You To"/>
<link wikidata="Q630338" start="33660" end="33680" title="Tomorrow Never Knows" label="Tomorrow Never Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="33700" end="33716" title="Lennon-McCartney" label="Lennon-McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q541835" start="33725" end="33747" title="Within You Without You" label="Within You Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q670989" start="33764" end="33779" title="The Inner Light (song)" label="The Inner Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056349" start="33911" end="33922" title="Indian rock" label="Indian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334110" start="34248" end="34269" title="KM Music Conservatory" label="KM Music Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="34305" end="34316" title="A.R. Rahman" label="A.R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018954" start="34319" end="34343" title="Calcutta School of Music" label="Calcutta School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330139" start="34345" end="34374" title="Eastern Fare Music Foundation" label="Eastern Fare Music Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985072" start="34385" end="34396" title="Mehli Mehta" label="Mehli Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q157635" start="34443" end="34454" title="Zubin Mehta" label="Zubin Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253815" start="34563" end="34584" title="Delhi School of Music" label="Delhi School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253781" start="34586" end="34605" title="Delhi Music Academy" label="Delhi Music Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885834" start="34607" end="34617" title="Guitarmonk" label="Guitarmonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661634" start="34679" end="34706" title="Symphony Orchestra of India" label="Symphony Orchestra of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17057162" start="34734" end="34738" title="National Centre for the Performing Arts (India)" label="NCPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671637" start="34945" end="34947" title="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="34953" end="34968" title="Indian diaspora" label="Indian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023983" start="35104" end="35130" title="Indianization" label="global soft power of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037883" start="35247" end="35257" title="Indosphere" label="Indosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="35280" end="35293" title="Greater India" label="Greater India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405188" start="35319" end="35345" title="Hinduism in Southeast Asia" label="Hinduism in Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515193" start="35354" end="35388" title="Silk Road transmission of Buddhism" label="Silk Road transmission of Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="35400" end="35431" title="Indianization of Southeast Asia" label="Indianization of Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="35487" end="35505" title="Indianized kingdom" label="Indianized kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296474" start="35521" end="35542" title="Sanskritization" label="sanskritized language"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056348" start="35581" end="35597" title="Indian honorifics" label="honorific titles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35599" end="35615" title="Indian name#Global Indian influence in names" label="naming of people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35617" end="35633" title="Place names in India#Global Indian influence in place name" label="naming of places"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35709" end="35728" title="Hindu temple architecture#Southeast Asia as part of Greater India" label="Indian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35730" end="35742" title="Indian martial arts#Influence" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35744" end="35766" title="#Globalization of Indian music" label="Indian music and dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690961" start="35768" end="35795" title="Clothing in India" label="traditional Indian clothing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35801" end="35815" title="Indian cuisine#Outside India" label="Indian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="35890" end="35905" title="Indian diaspora" label="Indian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210921" start="35950" end="35960" title="Indonesian music" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328715" start="35965" end="35974" title="Music of Malaysia" label="Malaysian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159539" start="35986" end="35993" title="Dangdut" label="Dangdut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="36049" end="36059" title="Hindustani Classical Music" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="36160" end="36165" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553249" start="36170" end="36177" title="gendang" label="gendang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556922" start="36229" end="36236" title="ghoomar" label="ghoomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049777" start="36325" end="36340" title="Thai literature" label="Thai literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864755" start="36345" end="36350" title="Thai art" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q831768" start="36380" end="36390" title="Indian art" label="Indian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="36396" end="36408" title="Hindu mythology" label="Hindu legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="36419" end="36427" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567623" start="36461" end="36469" title="Ramakien" label="Ramakien"/>
<link wikidata="Q915953" start="36521" end="36525" title="Khon" label="Khon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36577" end="36583" title="Dance in Thailand#Lakhon" label="Lakhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479660" start="36585" end="36595" title="Lakhon nai" label="Lakhon nai"/>
<link wikidata="Q25049096" start="36597" end="36610" title="Lakhon chatri" label="Lakhon chatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479661" start="36615" end="36625" title="Lakhon nok" label="Lakhon nok"/>
<link wikidata="Q478176" start="36757" end="36763" title="Piphat" label="Piphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q876043" start="36805" end="36816" title="Nang talung" label="Nang talung"/>
<link wikidata="Q854836" start="36825" end="36836" title="shadow play" label="shadow play"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="36849" end="36860" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="37131" end="37136" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="37153" end="37161" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="37166" end="37176" title="Mahabharta" label="Mahabharta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37181" end="37222" title="Ifugao#Alim and Hudhud Oral traditions of Ifugao" label="Alim and Hudhud Oral traditions of Ifugao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543654" start="37226" end="37239" title="Ifugao people" label="Ifugao people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606" start="37247" end="37279" title="Cordillera Administrative Region" label="Cordillera Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="37283" end="37288" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="37299" end="37310" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q877988" start="37315" end="37375" title="Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity" label="Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37466" end="37490" title="Rice Terraces of the Philippine Cordilleras#The Ifugao epic Hudhud" label="Hudhud – the Ifugao epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169520" start="37495" end="37510" title="Biag ni Lam-ang" label="Biag ni Lam-ang"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="37520" end="37529" title="epic poem" label="epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527423" start="37537" end="37551" title="Ilocano people" label="Ilocano people"/>
<link wikidata="Q12933" start="37561" end="37567" title="Ilocos" label="Ilocos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13662" start="37579" end="37586" title="Ibalong" label="Ibalong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13662" start="37595" end="37607" title="Bicol Region" label="Bikol region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485397" start="37783" end="37790" title="Kudyapi" label="Kudyapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q311883" start="37818" end="37825" title="Maranao" label="Maranao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872633" start="37827" end="37833" title="Manobo" label="Manobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748253" start="37838" end="37856" title="Maguindanao people" label="Maguindanao people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="37879" end="37901" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253734" start="38097" end="38111" title="Delhi 2 Dublin" label="Delhi 2 Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378776" start="38168" end="38173" title="music of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="38211" end="38218" title="Bhangra (music)" label="Bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q202930" start="38230" end="38239" title="reggaeton" label="reggaeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="38315" end="38327" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="38348" end="38367" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940553" start="38381" end="38394" title="Bombay Dreams" label="Bombay Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497594" start="38433" end="38452" title="Hum Aapke Hain Koun" label="Hum Aapke Hain Koun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339864" start="38511" end="38522" title="sports film" label="sports film"/>
<link wikidata="Q843949" start="38529" end="38535" title="Lagaan" label="Lagaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="38571" end="38615" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q247854" start="38666" end="38672" title="Devdas (2002 Hindi film)" label="Devdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q924135" start="38701" end="38716" title="Rang De Basanti" label="Rang De Basanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925687" start="38747" end="38800" title="BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language" label="BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="38803" end="38814" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q125076" start="38828" end="38847" title="Slumdog Millionaire" label="Slumdog Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="38950" end="38957" title="Bhangra (music)" label="Bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q202930" start="38969" end="38978" title="reggaeton" label="reggaeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q727781" start="39041" end="39061" title="Latin American music" label="Latin American music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="39096" end="39100" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="39118" end="39131" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q670623" start="39234" end="39274" title="Village Vanguard" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Village Vanguard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="39317" end="39325" title="John Coltrane" label="Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988706" start="39345" end="39356" title="Impressions (John Coltrane album)" label="Impressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="39391" end="39406" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="39411" end="39422" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="39435" end="39440" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q965926" start="39459" end="39495" title="Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)" label="Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="39598" end="39602" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="39613" end="39624" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="39985" end="39998" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500510" start="40000" end="40022" title="Incredible String Band" label="Incredible String Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="40024" end="40042" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133828" start="40044" end="40052" title="the Move" label="the Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048439" start="40057" end="40064" title="Traffic (band)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312870" start="40181" end="40193" title="Jerry Garcia" label="Jerry Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418451" start="40211" end="40224" title="Sanjay Mishra (musician)" label="Sanjay Mishra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="40443" end="40458" title="The Golden Bear" label="The Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="40462" end="40468" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q727507" start="40522" end="40537" title="Dennis Chambers" label="Dennis Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q819016" start="40539" end="40553" title="Carlos Santana" label="Carlos Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q164757" start="40555" end="40570" title="John McLaughlin (musician)" label="John McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087525" start="40591" end="40606" title="Chateau Benares" label="Chateau Benares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154166" start="40619" end="40627" title="DJ Logic" label="DJ Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385688" start="40632" end="40647" title="Keller Williams" label="Keller Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="40742" end="40754" title="musical film" label="musical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q250545" start="40842" end="40854" title="Baz Luhrmann" label="Baz Luhrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q193573" start="40889" end="40902" title="Moulin Rouge!" label="Moulin Rouge!"/>
<link wikidata="Q594519" start="41037" end="41047" title="China Gate (1998 film)" label="China Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189889" start="41178" end="41185" title="Chicago (2002 film)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049095" start="41199" end="41203" title="Rent (film)" label="Rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q329056" start="41221" end="41231" title="Dreamgirls (film)" label="Dreamgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="41281" end="41299" title="Psychedelic music" label="Psychedelic trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q835131" start="41315" end="41325" title="Goa trance" label="Goa trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="41389" end="41402" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="41456" end="41462" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="41467" end="41480" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q468356" start="41482" end="41496" title="Ali Akbar Khan" label="Ali Akbar Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="41528" end="41541" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702909" start="41609" end="41618" title="Raga Rock" label="Raga Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806186" start="41648" end="41661" title="Ashwin Batish" label="Ashwin Batish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503081" start="41783" end="41800" title="Shanachie Records" label="Shanachie Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="41804" end="41814" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064394" start="41829" end="41839" title="Worldbeat" label="World Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q544440" start="41904" end="41909" title="filmi" label="filmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="41931" end="41944" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="41956" end="41965" title="Electropop" label="Technopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q705221" start="41975" end="41989" title="Haruomi Hosono" label="Haruomi Hosono"/>
<link wikidata="Q345494" start="41994" end="42010" title="Ryuichi Sakamoto" label="Ryuichi Sakamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q854590" start="42018" end="42040" title="Yellow Magic Orchestra" label="Yellow Magic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="42057" end="42067" title="Electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640319" start="42112" end="42124" title="Experimental music" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="42125" end="42131" title="Fusion (music)" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q274096" start="42189" end="42200" title="Truth Hurts (singer)" label="Truth Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681124" start="42223" end="42232" title="Addictive (song)" label="Addictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154246" start="42252" end="42259" title="DJ Quik" label="DJ Quik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="42264" end="42271" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q156347" start="42288" end="42303" title="Lata Mangeshkar" label="Lata Mangeshkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134541" start="42375" end="42394" title="The Black Eyed Peas" label="The Black Eyed Peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="42401" end="42413" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331516" start="42438" end="42468" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Phunk with My Heart" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Phunk with My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942022" start="42501" end="42516" title="Bollywood songs" label="Bollywood songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238847" start="42568" end="42571" title="Don (1978 film)" label="Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781808" start="42631" end="42637" title="Apradh" label="Apradh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723490" start="42680" end="42696" title="Kalyanji Anandji" label="Kalyanji Anandji"/>
<link wikidata="Q38393" start="42706" end="42717" title="Asha Bhosle" label="Asha Bhosle"/>
<link wikidata="Q467223" start="42743" end="42748" title="Helen (actress)" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="42819" end="42834" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754913" start="42843" end="42859" title="Andre de Quadros" label="Andre de Quadros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="42861" end="42870" title="conducting" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q157635" start="42894" end="42905" title="Zubin Mehta" label="Zubin Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985072" start="42919" end="42930" title="Mehli Mehta" label="Mehli Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764674" start="43017" end="43032" title="Anil Srinivasan" label="Anil Srinivasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720141" start="43044" end="43055" title="Ilaiyaraaja" label="Ilaiyaraaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q856125" start="43118" end="43146" title="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965833" start="43188" end="43200" title="Naresh Sohal" label="Naresh Sohal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135098" start="43233" end="43242" title="Param Vir" label="Param Vir"/>
<link wikidata="Q818081" start="43275" end="43279" title="Beno" label="Beno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143951" start="43386" end="43396" title="soft power" label="soft power"/>
<link wikidata="Q471542" start="43756" end="43769" title="Kishore Kumar" label="Kishore Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="43784" end="43789" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="43794" end="43801" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411238" start="43903" end="43915" title="Mother India" label="Mother India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="43957" end="43964" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="44022" end="44027" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509092" start="44206" end="44221" title="Northern Region, Nigeria" label="Northern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="44321" end="44333" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120990" start="44385" end="44391" title="Indian South Africans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123867" start="44495" end="44524" title="Padmashree Laloo Prasad Yadav" label="Padmashree Laloo Prasad Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427552" start="44572" end="44591" title="Dil Jo Bhi Kahey..." label="Dil Jo Bhi Kahey..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="44640" end="44649" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9570" start="44763" end="44779" title="Amitabh Bachchan" label="Amitabh Bachchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025453" start="44947" end="44967" title="Indo-Caribbean music" label="Indo-Caribbean music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025447" start="44971" end="44985" title="Indo-Caribbean" label="Indo-Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="44996" end="45005" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="45024" end="45043" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="45045" end="45051" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="45053" end="45060" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="45066" end="45074" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018395" start="45097" end="45105" title="Music of Bihar" label="Bhojpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269026" start="45141" end="45148" title="dhantal" label="dhantal"/>
<link wikidata="Q936590" start="45170" end="45176" title="dholak" label="dholak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863335" start="45189" end="45200" title="barrel drum" label="barrel drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="45213" end="45218" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q854775" start="45219" end="45225" title="bhajan" label="bhajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018395" start="45251" end="45267" title="Music of Bihar" label="music of Bhojpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="45340" end="45347" title="phagwah" label="phagwah"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="45352" end="45356" title="holi" label="holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090048" start="45474" end="45487" title="chutney music" label="chutney music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848738" start="45594" end="45606" title="Baithak Gana" label="Baithak Gana"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="45648" end="45656" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="45738" end="45746" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="45751" end="45757" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q517398" start="45826" end="45833" title="Dhoom 2" label="Dhoom 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="45886" end="45900" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q26224" start="45936" end="45950" title="new millennium" label="new millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="45961" end="45968" title="hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="46008" end="46015" title="hip-hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="46048" end="46064" title="Bollywood movies" label="Bollywood movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573975" start="46092" end="46106" title="List of Indian artists" label="Indian artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179257" start="46125" end="46134" title="Timbaland" label="Timbaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347285" start="46168" end="46180" title="Erick Sermon" label="Erick Sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313138" start="46185" end="46191" title="Redman (rapper)" label="Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q274096" start="46261" end="46272" title="Truth Hurts (singer)" label="Truth Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q156347" start="46327" end="46342" title="Lata Mangeshkar" label="Lata Mangeshkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134541" start="46353" end="46372" title="The Black Eyed Peas" label="The Black Eyed Peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38393" start="46381" end="46392" title="Asha Bhosle" label="Asha Bhosle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331516" start="46456" end="46486" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Phunk With My Heart" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Phunk With My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134101" start="46520" end="46530" title="Cornershop (band)" label="Cornershop"/>
<link wikidata="Q38393" start="46547" end="46558" title="Asha Bhosle" label="Asha Bhosle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169766" start="46581" end="46596" title="Brimful of Asha" label="Brimful of Asha"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="46639" end="46646" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346896" start="46666" end="46676" title="Panjabi MC" label="Panjabi MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="46768" end="46773" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q727394" start="46775" end="46795" title="Asian Dub Foundation" label="Asian Dub Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="46857" end="46860" title="hip hop music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="46865" end="46874" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="46968" end="46978" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007104" start="47010" end="47024" title="Singh Is Kinng" label="Singh Is Kinng"/>
<link wikidata="Q503031" start="47052" end="47058" title="Madlib" label="Madlib"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47068" end="47113" title="Beat Konducta Vol 3–4: Beat Konducta in India" label="Beat Konducta Vol 3–4: Beat Konducta in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="47323" end="47334" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="47336" end="47344" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="47346" end="47356" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="47362" end="47367" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47471" end="47519" title="#musicsphere" label="Ancient influence on Southeast Asian music genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="47814" end="47828" title="Arab world" label="Arab countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="47940" end="47946" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="48072" end="48079" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021893" start="48081" end="48099" title="Stereotypes of South Asians" label="Indian stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190777" start="48109" end="48121" title="bullock cart" label="bullock cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031253" start="48209" end="48220" title="Information technology in India" label="IT industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976128" start="48368" end="48385" title="Asian Underground" label="Asian Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="48529" end="48551" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641056" start="48679" end="48690" title="Krishna Das (singer)" label="Krishna Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q507662" start="48730" end="48737" title="sadhana" label="sadhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150506" start="48762" end="48775" title="Indo-Canadian" label="Indo-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914355" start="48785" end="48800" title="Vandana Vishwas" label="Vandana Vishwas"/>
<link wikidata="Q236735" start="48935" end="48948" title="Laura Marling" label="Laura Marling"/>
<link wikidata="Q953918" start="48960" end="48976" title="Mumford and Sons" label="Mumford and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q891829" start="49060" end="49079" title="Bombay Bicycle Club" label="Bombay Bicycle Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49108" end="49130" title="Nagin (1954 film)#Soundtrack" label="Man Dole Mera Tan Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726536" start="49160" end="49164" title="So Long, See You Tomorrow (album)" label="Feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="49295" end="49299" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009633" start="49317" end="49329" title="Indo-Fijians" label="Indo-Fijians"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="49332" end="49341" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="49346" end="49357" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606713" start="49568" end="49589" title="Sangeet Natak Akademi" label="Sangeet Natak Akademi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="49624" end="49639" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="49654" end="49673" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417921" start="49697" end="49724" title="Sangeet Natak Akademi Award" label="Sangeet Natak Akademi Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q208097" start="49894" end="49900" title="Imphal" label="Imphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973669" start="49947" end="49960" title="Kathak Kendra" label="Kathak Kendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973669" start="49962" end="49996" title="National Institute of Kathak Dance" label="National Institute of Kathak Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="50001" end="50010" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="50037" end="50055" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q712356" start="50073" end="50081" title="Baripada" label="Baripada"/>
<link wikidata="Q200054" start="50085" end="50095" title="Jamshedpur" label="Jamshedpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="50120" end="50128" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803135" start="50156" end="50202" title="Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal" label="Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="50348" end="50370" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990304" start="50373" end="50395" title="Indian classical dance" label="Indian classical dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083275" start="50398" end="50424" title="Indian musical instruments" label="Indian musical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020997" start="50427" end="50448" title="Indian Music Industry" label="Indian Music Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785493" start="50451" end="50470" title="Military Music Wing" label="Military Music Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q98528267" start="50473" end="50492" title="Music of South Asia" label="Music of South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456252" start="50495" end="50527" title="List of regional genres of music" label="List of regional genres of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q28842507" start="51485" end="51503" title="Emmie te Nijenhuis" label="Emmie te Nijenhuis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14536" wikidata="Q3083275" url="?curid=14536" title="List of Indian musical instruments">
<text>Musical instruments of the [[Indian subcontinent]] can be broadly classified according to the Hornbostel–Sachs system into four categories: chordophones (string instruments), aerophones (wind instruments), membranophones (drums) and idiophones (non-drum percussion instruments).

==Chordophones==

===Plucked strings===
===Bowed strings===
• Chikara
• Dhantara
• Dilruba
• Ektara violin
• Esraj
• Kamaicha
• Kingri (string instrument)
• Mayuri Vina or Taus
• Onavillu
• Behala (violin type)
• Pena (musical instrument)
• Pinaka vina
• Pulluvan Veena - one stringed violin
• Ravanahatha
• Sarangi
• Classical Sarangi
• Sarinda
• Tar Shehnai
• Taus
• Villu Paatu - arched bow instrument

===Other string instruments===
* Gethu or Jhallari – struck tanpura
* Gubguba or Jamuku (khamak)
* Pulluvan kutam
* Santoor – Hammered dulcimer

==Aerophones==

===Single reed===
*Pepa
*Pungi or Been


===Double reed===
* Kuzhal
* Mukhavina 
* Nadaswaram
* Shehnai
* Sundari
* Tangmuri

===Flute===
* Alghoza – double flute
* Bansuri
* Venu (Carnatic flute) Pullanguzhal

===Bagpipes===
*Mashak
*Titti
*Sruti upanga

===Free reed===
* Gogona 
* Morsing

===Free reed and bellows===
* Shruti box
* Harmonium (hand-pumped)

===Brass===
* Bigul – see Bugle
* Ekkalam
* Karnal
* Kombu (instrument)
* Ramsinga
* Kahal
* Nagfani
* Turi
* Tutari

==Membranophones==

===Hand drums===



===Hand frame drums===
* Daf, duf, or dafli – medium or large frame drum without jingles, of Persian origin
* Dubki, dimdi or dimri – small frame drum without jingles
* Kanjira – small frame drum with one jingle
* Kansi – small drum without jingles
* Patayani thappu – medium frame drum played with hands

===Stick and hand drums===
* Chenda
* Davul
* Dhak
* Dhimay
* Dhol
* Dholi
* Dollu
* Idakka
* Thavil
* Udukai
* Urumi (drum)

===Stick drums===

* Chande
* Davul
* Kachhi Dhol
* Nagara – pair of kettledrums
* Pambai – unit of two cylindrical drums
* Parai thappu, halgi – frame drum played with two sticks
* Sambal
* Stick daff or stick duff – daff in a stand played with sticks
* Tamak&#x27;
* Tasha – type of kettledrum
* Timki
* Urumee

==Idiophones==

* Chigggjha – fire tong with brass jingles
* Chengila – metal disc
* Eltathalam
* Gegvrer – brass vessel
* Ghaynti – Northern Indian bell
* Ghatam and Matkam (Earthenware pot drum)
* Ghunyugroo
* Khartal or Chiplya
* Manjira or jhanj or taal
* Nut – clay pot
* Sankarpjlnjang – lithophone
* Thali – metal plate
* Thattukanvjzhi mannai
* Yakshahgana bells

===Melodic===

* Jal tarang, ceramic bowls with water
* Kanch tarang, a type of glass harp
* Loh tarang (लोह तरंग), a set of tuned gongs
* Kashtha tarang, a type of xylophone

==Hand harmonium==
Dwarkanath Ghose (Dwarkin) modified the French pedal harmonium.

==Electronic==
* Roland HandSonic 
* Electronic tanpura
* Electronic (digital) tabla
* Talameter

* Musical instrument of Tamil nadu
* List of Indian dance 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3083275" start="0" end="50" title="List of Indian musical instruments" label="Musical instruments of the [[Indian subcontinent]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q496327" start="94" end="110" title="Hornbostel–Sachs" label="Hornbostel–Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="140" end="151" title="chordophone" label="chordophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q659216" start="175" end="184" title="aerophone" label="aerophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q212892" start="206" end="219" title="membranophone" label="membranophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12639" start="233" end="242" title="idiophone" label="idiophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="282" end="294" title="Chordophones" label="Chordophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q230262" start="301" end="316" title="Plucked string instrument" label="Plucked strings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="728" end="736" title="Jhallari" label="Jhallari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614447" start="756" end="763" title="Gubguba" label="Gubguba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912399" start="802" end="809" title="Santoor" label="Santoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q659216" start="833" end="843" title="Aerophones" label="Aerophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3728958" start="866" end="870" title="Pepa (musical instrument)" label="Pepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q545271" start="872" end="877" title="Pungi" label="Pungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q545271" start="881" end="885" title="Pungi" label="Been"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200735" start="908" end="914" title="Kuzhal" label="Kuzhal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="917" end="926" title="Mukhavina" label="Mukhavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611652" start="930" end="940" title="Nadaswaram" label="Nadaswaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q847911" start="943" end="950" title="Shehnai" label="Shehnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683067" start="963" end="971" title="Tangmuri" label="Tangmuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q568883" start="987" end="994" title="Alghoza" label="Alghoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q960389" start="1012" end="1019" title="Bansuri" label="Bansuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753171" start="1022" end="1026" title="Venu" label="Venu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783062" start="1074" end="1080" title="Mashak" label="Mashak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810254" start="1082" end="1087" title="Titti (bagpipe)" label="Titti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586583" start="1089" end="1101" title="Sruti upanga" label="Sruti upanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913027" start="1121" end="1127" title="Gogona" label="Gogona"/>
<link wikidata="Q13399266" start="1131" end="1138" title="Morsing" label="Morsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q487818" start="1170" end="1180" title="Shruti box" label="Shruti box"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="1183" end="1206" title="Harmonium (hand-pumped)" label="Harmonium (hand-pumped)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628293" start="1234" end="1239" title="Bugle" label="Bugle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1242" end="1249" title="Ekkalam" label="Ekkalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19671148" start="1252" end="1258" title="Karnal (instrument)" label="Karnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779894" start="1261" end="1279" title="Kombu (instrument)" label="Kombu (instrument)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929958" start="1282" end="1290" title="Ramsinga" label="Ramsinga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1301" end="1308" title="Nagfani" label="Nagfani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495190" start="1318" end="1324" title="Tutari" label="Tutari"/>
<link wikidata="Q212892" start="1328" end="1342" title="Membranophones" label="Membranophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="1391" end="1394" title="Daf" label="Daf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997355" start="1535" end="1542" title="Kanjira" label="Kanjira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123295" start="1617" end="1632" title="Patayani thappu" label="Patayani thappu"/>
<link wikidata="Q954983" start="1701" end="1707" title="Chenda" label="Chenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178361" start="1710" end="1715" title="Davul" label="Davul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268703" start="1718" end="1722" title="Dhak (instrument)" label="Dhak"/>
<link wikidata="Q440856" start="1725" end="1731" title="Dhimay" label="Dhimay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="1734" end="1738" title="Dhol" label="Dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="1741" end="1746" title="Dholi" label="Dholi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289312" start="1749" end="1754" title="Dollu" label="Dollu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249186" start="1757" end="1763" title="Idakka" label="Idakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355394" start="1766" end="1772" title="Thavil" label="Thavil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534333" start="1775" end="1781" title="Udukai" label="Udukai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901528" start="1784" end="1796" title="Urumi (drum)" label="Urumi (drum)"/>
<link wikidata="Q584522" start="1819" end="1825" title="Chande" label="Chande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178361" start="1828" end="1833" title="Davul" label="Davul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1836" end="1847" title="Kachhi Dhol" label="Kachhi Dhol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1850" end="1856" title="Naqareh#Indian Nagara" label="Nagara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1881" end="1887" title="Pambai" label="Pambai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710699" start="1928" end="1934" title="thappu" label="thappu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408984" start="1980" end="1986" title="Sambal (drum)" label="Sambal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514627" start="2053" end="2064" title="Tamak&amp;#x27;" label="Tamak&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="2083" end="2093" title="kettledrum" label="kettledrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901528" start="2104" end="2110" title="Urumi (drum)" label="Urumee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2130" end="2139" title="Chigggjha" label="Chigggjha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091360" start="2173" end="2181" title="Chengila" label="Chengila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2197" end="2207" title="Eltathalam" label="Eltathalam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2210" end="2217" title="Gegvrer" label="Gegvrer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2235" end="2242" title="Ghaynti" label="Ghaynti"/>
<link wikidata="Q859091" start="2268" end="2274" title="Ghatam" label="Ghatam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2311" end="2321" title="Ghunyugroo" label="Ghunyugroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193614" start="2324" end="2331" title="Khartal" label="Khartal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672803" start="2345" end="2352" title="Taal (instrument)" label="Manjira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2372" end="2375" title="Nut (musical instrument)" label="Nut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2389" end="2403" title="Sankarpjlnjang" label="Sankarpjlnjang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898611" start="2419" end="2424" title="Thali (percussion)" label="Thali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2465" end="2482" title="Yakshahgana bells" label="Yakshahgana bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233386" start="2501" end="2511" title="Jal tarang" label="Jal tarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q48230" start="2564" end="2574" title="glass harp" label="glass harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="2649" end="2658" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317958" start="2697" end="2704" title="Dwarkin" label="Dwarkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274366" start="2761" end="2777" title="Roland HandSonic" label="Roland HandSonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358437" start="2781" end="2799" title="Electronic tanpura" label="Electronic tanpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q531426" start="2844" end="2876" title="Music of India" label="Musical instrument of Tamil nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069324" start="2879" end="2899" title="List of Indian dances" label="List of Indian dance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14537" wikidata="Q627611" url="?curid=14537" title="IRIX">
<text>IRIX (, ) is a discontinued operating system developed by Silicon Graphics (SGI) to run on the company&#x27;s proprietary MIPS workstations and servers. It is based on UNIX System V with BSD extensions. In IRIX, SGI originated the XFS file system and the industry-standard OpenGL graphics API.

==History==
SGI originated the IRIX name in the 1988 release 3.0 of the operating system for the SGI IRIS 4D series of workstations and servers. Previous releases are identified only by the release number prefixed by &quot;4D1-&quot;, such as &quot;4D1-2.2&quot;. The &quot;4D1-&quot; prefix continued to be used in official documentation to prefix IRIX release numbers. Prior to the IRIS 4D, SGI bundled the GL2 operating system, based on UniSoft UniPlus System V Unix, and using the proprietary MEX (Multiple EXposure) windowing system.

IRIX 3.x is based on UNIX System V Release 3 with 4.3BSD enhancements, and incorporates the 4Sight windowing system, based on NeWS and IRIS GL. SGI&#x27;s own Extent File System (EFS) replaces the System V filesystem.

IRIX 4.0, released in 1991, replaces 4Sight with the X Window System (X11R4), the 4Dwm window manager providing a similar look and feel to 4Sight.

IRIX 5.0, released in 1993, incorporates certain features of UNIX System V Release 4, including ELF executables. IRIX 5.3 introduced the XFS journaling file system.

In 1994, IRIX 6.0 added support for the 64-bit MIPS R8000 processor, but is otherwise similar to IRIX 5.2. Later 6.x releases support other members of the MIPS processor family in 64-bit mode. IRIX 6.3 was released for the SGI O2 workstation only. IRIX 6.4 improved multiprocessor scalability for the Octane, Origin 2000, and Onyx2 systems. The Origin 2000 and Onyx2 IRIX 6.4 was marketed as &quot;Cellular IRIX&quot;, although it only incorporates some features from the original Cellular IRIX distributed operating system project.

The last major version of IRIX is 6.5, released in May 1998. New minor versions of IRIX 6.5 were released every quarter until 2005, and then four minor releases. Through version 6.5.22, there are two branches of each release: a maintenance release (identified by an &quot;m&quot; suffix) that includes only fixes to the original IRIX 6.5 code, and a feature release (with an &quot;f&quot; suffix) that includes improvements and enhancements. An overlay upgrade from 6.5.x to the 6.5.22 maintenance release was available as a free download, whereas versions 6.5.23 and higher required an active Silicon Graphics support contract.

A 2001 &quot;Computerworld&quot; review found IRIX in a &quot;critical&quot; state. SGI had been moving its efforts to Linux and the Windows-based SGI Visual Workstation but MIPS and IRIX customers convinced SGI to continue to support its platform through 2006. On September 6, 2006, an SGI press release announced the end of the MIPS and IRIX product lines. Production ended on December 29, 2006, with final deliveries in March 2007, except by special arrangement. Support for these products ended in December 2013 and they will receive no further updates.

Much of IRIX&#x27;s core technology has been open sourced and ported by SGI to Linux, including XFS.

In 2009, SGI filed for bankruptcy and then was purchased by Rackable Systems, which was later purchased by Hewlett Packard Enterprise in 2016. All SGI hardware produced after 2007 is based on either IA-64 or x86-64 architecture, so it is incapable of running IRIX and is instead intended for Red Hat Enterprise Linux or SUSE Linux Enterprise Server. HPE has not stated any plans for IRIX development or source code release.

==Features==
IRIX 6.5 is compliant with UNIX System V Release 4, UNIX 95, and POSIX (including 1e/2c draft 15 ACLs and Capabilities).

In the early 1990s, IRIX was a leader in Symmetric Multi-Processing (SMP), scalable from 1 to more than 1,024 processors with a single system image. IRIX has strong support for real-time disk and graphics I/O. IRIX was widely used for the 1990s and 2000s in the computer animation and scientific visualization industries, due to its large application base and high performance. It still is relevant in a few legacy applications.

IRIX is one of the first Unix versions to feature a graphical user interface for the main desktop environment. IRIX Interactive Desktop uses the 4Dwm X window manager with a custom look designed using the Motif widget toolkit. IRIX is the originator of the industry standard OpenGL for graphics chips and image processing libraries.&lt;ref name=opengl/overview&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

IRIX uses the MIPSPro compiler for both its front end and back end. The compiler, also known in earlier versions as IDO (IRIS Development Option), was released in many versions, many of which are coupled to the OS version. The last version was 7.4.4m, designed for 6.5.19 or later. The compiler is designed to support parallel POSIX programming in C/C++, Fortran 77/90, and Ada. The Workshop GUI IDE is used for development. Other tools include Speedshop for performance tuning, and Performance Co-Pilot.

==4Dwm==
4Dwm is the window manager component of the IRIX Interactive Desktop normally used on Silicon Graphics workstations running IRIX. 4Dwm is derived from the older Motif Window Manager and uses the Motif widget toolkit on top of the X Window System found on most Unix systems. 4Dwm on IRIX was one of the first default graphical user interface desktops to be standard on a Unix computer system. 4Dwm refers to &quot;Fourth dimension window manager&quot; and has no relation to dwm.

Other X window managers that mimic the 4Dwm look and feel exist, such as 4Dwm theme for IceWM and 5Dwm which is a clone/compatible implementation of 4Dwm based on OpenMotif. 5Dwm support both the classic SGI look and a modern/polished look and feel with anti-aliased fonts and UTF-8 support.

=== Features ===
* A stacking window manager
* Uses the Motif widget library
* Applications can be launched via a menu panel
* Window decorations include borders and a titlebar
* The titlebar provides a meta button and facilities to minimize and maximize windows
* Support for themes

==See also==
* IRIX software
* Silicon Graphics Image format about codice_1

==References==
==External links==
* Technical Publications Mirror
* IRIX Documentation Website &quot;TechPubs&quot;
* Silicon Bunny - IRIX software and information
* IRIX Network - IRIX software, information, forums, and archive
* IRIX Admin: Backup, Security, and Accounting Document Number: 007-2862-004 February 1999
* Silicon Graphics User Group
* Irixium theme for Plasma</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q627611" start="0" end="4" title="IRIX" label="IRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="28" end="44" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="58" end="74" title="Silicon Graphics" label="Silicon Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="122" end="126" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q633192" start="168" end="181" title="UNIX System V" label="UNIX System V"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="187" end="190" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q394011" start="231" end="234" title="XFS" label="XFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="273" end="279" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q337820" start="280" end="292" title="graphics API" label="graphics API"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390074" start="392" end="403" title="SGI IRIS 4D" label="SGI IRIS 4D"/>
<link wikidata="Q386902" start="735" end="742" title="UniSoft" label="UniSoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q633192" start="751" end="764" title="System V Unix" label="System V Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715527" start="792" end="795" title="MEX (windowing system)" label="MEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190017" start="816" end="832" title="windowing system" label="windowing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q633192" start="856" end="869" title="UNIX System V" label="UNIX System V"/>
<link wikidata="Q9133389" start="885" end="891" title="4.3BSD" label="4.3BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190017" start="934" end="950" title="windowing system" label="windowing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582628" start="961" end="965" title="NeWS" label="NeWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654461" start="970" end="977" title="IRIS GL" label="IRIS GL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038462" start="994" end="1012" title="Extent File System" label="Extent File System"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="1107" end="1122" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q627611" start="1136" end="1140" title="4Dwm" label="4Dwm"/>
<link wikidata="Q216653" start="1141" end="1155" title="window manager" label="window manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343830" start="1298" end="1301" title="Executable and Linkable Format" label="ELF"/>
<link wikidata="Q394011" start="1339" end="1342" title="XFS" label="XFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q579047" start="1343" end="1365" title="journaling file system" label="journaling file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047801" start="1420" end="1425" title="R8000" label="R8000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964701" start="1591" end="1597" title="SGI O2" label="SGI O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="1634" end="1648" title="multiprocessor" label="multiprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347238" start="1669" end="1675" title="SGI Octane" label="Octane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030733" start="1677" end="1688" title="SGI Origin 2000" label="Origin 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459527" start="1694" end="1699" title="SGI Onyx2" label="Onyx2"/>
<link wikidata="Q588145" start="1863" end="1891" title="distributed operating system" label="distributed operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736813" start="2130" end="2149" title="maintenance release" label="maintenance release"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755724" start="2545" end="2558" title="Computerworld" label="Computerworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="2651" end="2656" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2665" end="2672" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390075" start="2679" end="2701" title="SGI Visual Workstation" label="SGI Visual Workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080768" start="3253" end="3269" title="Rackable Systems" label="Rackable Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q19923099" start="3300" end="3326" title="Hewlett Packard Enterprise" label="Hewlett Packard Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q916994" start="3392" end="3397" title="IA-64" label="IA-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="3401" end="3407" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q215273" start="3485" end="3509" title="Red Hat Enterprise Linux" label="Red Hat Enterprise Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759786" start="3513" end="3541" title="SUSE Linux Enterprise Server" label="SUSE Linux Enterprise Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q633192" start="3658" end="3671" title="UNIX System V" label="UNIX System V"/>
<link wikidata="Q635130" start="3683" end="3690" title="UNIX 95" label="UNIX 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="3696" end="3701" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q338966" start="3728" end="3731" title="Access Control List" label="ACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q178677" start="3794" end="3826" title="Symmetric multiprocessing" label="Symmetric Multi-Processing (SMP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="4015" end="4033" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737866" start="4038" end="4062" title="scientific visualization" label="scientific visualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="4235" end="4259" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041100" start="4294" end="4318" title="IRIX Interactive Desktop" label="IRIX Interactive Desktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q627611" start="4328" end="4332" title="4Dwm" label="4Dwm"/>
<link wikidata="Q857566" start="4333" end="4349" title="X window manager" label="X window manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136830" start="4388" end="4408" title="Motif (software)" label="Motif widget toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="4458" end="4464" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572180" start="4575" end="4582" title="Open64" label="MIPSPro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="4888" end="4893" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168202" start="5044" end="5064" title="Performance Co-Pilot" label="Performance Co-Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q216653" start="5088" end="5102" title="window manager" label="window manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041100" start="5120" end="5144" title="IRIX Interactive Desktop" label="IRIX Interactive Desktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="5162" end="5178" title="Silicon Graphics" label="Silicon Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866235" start="5237" end="5257" title="Motif Window Manager" label="Motif Window Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136830" start="5271" end="5276" title="Motif (software)" label="Motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193246" start="5277" end="5291" title="widget toolkit" label="widget toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="5306" end="5321" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="5336" end="5340" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="5392" end="5416" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q238125" start="5489" end="5505" title="Four-dimensional space" label="Fourth dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q284200" start="5550" end="5553" title="dwm" label="dwm"/>
<link wikidata="Q857566" start="5562" end="5578" title="X window manager" label="X window manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368336" start="5600" end="5613" title="look and feel" label="look and feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q669886" start="5644" end="5649" title="IceWM" label="IceWM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5654" end="5658" title="5Dwm" label="5Dwm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967650" start="5670" end="5675" title="Clone (computing)" label="clone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5719" end="5728" title="Motif (software)#Open Motif" label="OpenMotif"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="5760" end="5763" title="Silicon Graphics" label="SGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465095" start="5810" end="5828" title="Font rasterization" label="anti-aliased fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="5833" end="5838" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393965" start="5870" end="5893" title="stacking window manager" label="stacking window manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136830" start="5905" end="5910" title="Motif (software)" label="Motif"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5963" end="5973" title="menu panel" label="menu panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q835016" start="5976" end="5993" title="Window decoration" label="Window decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q835016" start="6017" end="6025" title="titlebar" label="titlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045105" start="6052" end="6056" title="Meta (prefix)" label="meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065927" start="6126" end="6132" title="Theme (computing)" label="themes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6149" end="6162" title=":Category:IRIX software" label="IRIX software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514956" start="6165" end="6187" title="Silicon Graphics Image" label="Silicon Graphics Image"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14539" wikidata="Q75" url="?curid=14539" title="Internet">
<text>The Internet (or internet) is the global system of interconnected computer networks that uses the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) to communicate between networks and devices. It is a network of networks that consists of private, public, academic, business, and government networks of local to global scope, linked by a broad array of electronic, wireless, and optical networking technologies. The Internet carries a vast range of information resources and services, such as the interlinked hypertext documents and applications of the World Wide Web (WWW), electronic mail, internet telephony, and file sharing.

The origins of the Internet date back to research that enabled the time-sharing of computer resources, the development of packet switching in the 1960s and the design of computer networks for data communication. The set of rules (communication protocols) to enable internetworking on the Internet arose from research and development commissioned in the 1970s by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the United States Department of Defense in collaboration with universities and researchers across the United States and in the United Kingdom and France. The ARPANET initially served as a backbone for the interconnection of regional academic and military networks in the United States to enable resource sharing. The funding of the National Science Foundation Network as a new backbone in the 1980s, as well as private funding for other commercial extensions, encouraged worldwide participation in the development of new networking technologies and the merger of many networks using DARPA&#x27;s Internet protocol suite. The linking of commercial networks and enterprises by the early 1990s, as well as the advent of the World Wide Web, marked the beginning of the transition to the modern Internet, and generated sustained exponential growth as generations of institutional, personal, and mobile computers were connected to the internetwork. Although the Internet was widely used by academia in the 1980s, the subsequent commercialization of the Internet in the 1990s and beyond incorporated its services and technologies into virtually every aspect of modern life.

Most traditional communication media, including telephone, radio, television, paper mail, and newspapers, are reshaped, redefined, or even bypassed by the Internet, giving birth to new services such as email, Internet telephone, Internet radio, Internet television, online music, digital newspapers, and audio and video streaming websites. Newspapers, books, and other print publishing have adapted to website technology or have been reshaped into blogging, web feeds, and online news aggregators. The Internet has enabled and accelerated new forms of personal interaction through instant messaging, Internet forums, and social networking services. Online shopping has grown exponentially for major retailers, small businesses, and entrepreneurs, as it enables firms to extend their &quot;brick and mortar&quot; presence to serve a larger market or even sell goods and services entirely online. Business-to-business and financial services on the Internet affect supply chains across entire industries.

The Internet has no single centralized governance in either technological implementation or policies for access and usage; each constituent network sets its own policies. The overarching definitions of the two principal name spaces on the Internet, the Internet Protocol address (IP address) space and the Domain Name System (DNS), are directed by a maintainer organization, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise. In November 2006, the Internet was included on &quot;USA Today&quot;″s list of the New Seven Wonders.
== Terminology ==
The word &quot;internetted&quot; was used as early as 1849, meaning &quot;interconnected&quot; or &quot;interwoven&quot;. The word &quot;Internet&quot; was used in 1945 by the United States War Department in a radio operator&#x27;s manual, and in 1974 as the shorthand form of Internetwork. Today, the term &quot;Internet&quot; most commonly refers to the global system of interconnected computer networks, though it may also refer to any group of smaller networks.

When it came into common use, most publications treated the word &quot;Internet&quot; as a capitalized proper noun; this has become less common. This reflects the tendency in English to capitalize new terms and move them to lowercase as they become familiar. The word is sometimes still capitalized to distinguish the global internet from smaller networks, though many publications, including the &quot;AP Stylebook&quot; since 2016, recommend the lowercase form in every case. In 2016, the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; found that, based on a study of around 2.5 billion printed and online sources, &quot;Internet&quot; was capitalized in 54% of cases.

The terms &quot;Internet&quot; and &quot;World Wide Web&quot; are often used interchangeably; it is common to speak of &quot;going on the Internet&quot; when using a web browser to view web pages. However, the World Wide Web, or &quot;the Web&quot;, is only one of a large number of Internet services, a collection of documents (web pages) and other web resources linked by hyperlinks and URLs.

== History ==
In the 1960s, computer scientists began developing systems for time-sharing of computer resources. J. C. R. Licklider proposed the idea of a universal network while working at Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman and, later, leading the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) at the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of Defense (DoD). Research into packet switching, one of the fundamental Internet technologies, started in the work of Paul Baran at RAND in the early 1960s and, independently, Donald Davies at the United Kingdom&#x27;s National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in 1965. After the Symposium on Operating Systems Principles in 1967, packet switching from the proposed NPL network and routing concepts proposed by Baran were incorporated into the design of the ARPANET, an experimental resource sharing network proposed by ARPA.

ARPANET development began with two network nodes which were interconnected between the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and the Stanford Research Institute (now SRI International) on 29 October 1969. The third site was at the University of California, Santa Barbara, followed by the University of Utah. In a sign of future growth, 15 sites were connected to the young ARPANET by the end of 1971. These early years were documented in the 1972 film &quot;Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing&quot;. Thereafter, the ARPANET gradually developed into a decentralized communications network, connecting remote centers and military bases in the United States. Other user networks and research networks, such as the Merit Network and CYCLADES, were developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

Early international collaborations for the ARPANET were rare. Connections were made in 1973 to Norway (NORSAR and NDRE), and to Peter Kirstein&#x27;s research group at University College London (UCL), which provided a gateway to British academic networks, forming the first internetwork for resource sharing. ARPA projects, the International Network Working Group and commercial initiatives led to the development of various protocols and standards by which multiple separate networks could become a single network or &quot;a network of networks&quot;. In 1974, Vint Cerf at Stanford University and Bob Kahn at DARPA published a proposal for &quot;A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication&quot;. They used the term &quot;internet&quot; as a shorthand for &quot;internetwork&quot; in &quot;&quot;, and later RFCs repeated this use. Cerf and Kahn credit Louis Pouzin and others with important influences on the resulting TCP/IP design. National PTTs and commercial providers developed the X.25 standard and deployed it on public data networks.

Access to the ARPANET was expanded in 1981 when the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded the Computer Science Network (CSNET). In 1982, the Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) was standardized, which facilitated worldwide proliferation of interconnected networks. TCP/IP network access expanded again in 1986 when the National Science Foundation Network (NSFNet) provided access to supercomputer sites in the United States for researchers, first at speeds of 56 kbit/s and later at 1.5 Mbit/s and 45 Mbit/s. The NSFNet expanded into academic and research organizations in Europe, Australia, New Zealand and Japan in 1988–89. Although other network protocols such as UUCP and PTT public data networks had global reach well before this time, this marked the beginning of the Internet as an intercontinental network. Commercial Internet service providers (ISPs) emerged in 1989 in the United States and Australia. The ARPANET was decommissioned in 1990.

Steady advances in semiconductor technology and optical networking created new economic opportunities for commercial involvement in the expansion of the network in its core and for delivering services to the public. In mid-1989, MCI Mail and Compuserve established connections to the Internet, delivering email and public access products to the half million users of the Internet. Just months later, on 1 January 1990, PSInet launched an alternate Internet backbone for commercial use; one of the networks that added to the core of the commercial Internet of later years. In March 1990, the first high-speed T1 (1.5 Mbit/s) link between the NSFNET and Europe was installed between Cornell University and CERN, allowing much more robust communications than were capable with satellites.

Later in 1990, Tim Berners-Lee began writing WorldWideWeb, the first web browser, after two years of lobbying CERN management. By Christmas 1990, Berners-Lee had built all the tools necessary for a working Web: the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 0.9, the HyperText Markup Language (HTML), the first Web browser (which was also an HTML editor and could access Usenet newsgroups and FTP files), the first HTTP server software (later known as CERN httpd), the first web server, and the first Web pages that described the project itself. In 1991 the Commercial Internet eXchange was founded, allowing PSInet to communicate with the other commercial networks CERFnet and Alternet. Stanford Federal Credit Union was the first financial institution to offer online Internet banking services to all of its members in October 1994. In 1996, OP Financial Group, also a cooperative bank, became the second online bank in the world and the first in Europe. By 1995, the Internet was fully commercialized in the U.S. when the NSFNet was decommissioned, removing the last restrictions on use of the Internet to carry commercial traffic.

As technology advanced and commercial opportunities fueled reciprocal growth, the volume of Internet traffic started experiencing similar characteristics as that of the scaling of MOS transistors, exemplified by Moore&#x27;s law, doubling every 18 months. This growth, formalized as Edholm&#x27;s law, was catalyzed by advances in MOS technology, laser light wave systems, and noise performance.

Since 1995, the Internet has tremendously impacted culture and commerce, including the rise of near-instant communication by email, instant messaging, telephony (Voice over Internet Protocol or VoIP), two-way interactive video calls, and the World Wide Web with its discussion forums, blogs, social networking services, and online shopping sites. Increasing amounts of data are transmitted at higher and higher speeds over fiber optic networks operating at 1 Gbit/s, 10 Gbit/s, or more. The Internet continues to grow, driven by ever-greater amounts of online information and knowledge, commerce, entertainment and social networking services. During the late 1990s, it was estimated that traffic on the public Internet grew by 100 percent per year, while the mean annual growth in the number of Internet users was thought to be between 20% and 50%. This growth is often attributed to the lack of central administration, which allows organic growth of the network, as well as the non-proprietary nature of the Internet protocols, which encourages vendor interoperability and prevents any one company from exerting too much control over the network. , the estimated total number of Internet users was 2.095 billion (30% of world population). It is estimated that in 1993 the Internet carried only 1% of the information flowing through two-way telecommunication. By 2000 this figure had grown to 51%, and by 2007 more than 97% of all telecommunicated information was carried over the Internet.

== Governance ==

The Internet is a global network that comprises many voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks. It operates without a central governing body. The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols (IPv4 and IPv6) is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise. To maintain interoperability, the principal name spaces of the Internet are administered by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). ICANN is governed by an international board of directors drawn from across the Internet technical, business, academic, and other non-commercial communities. ICANN coordinates the assignment of unique identifiers for use on the Internet, including domain names, IP addresses, application port numbers in the transport protocols, and many other parameters. Globally unified name spaces are essential for maintaining the global reach of the Internet. This role of ICANN distinguishes it as perhaps the only central coordinating body for the global Internet.

Regional Internet registries (RIRs) were established for five regions of the world. The African Network Information Center (AfriNIC) for Africa, the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) for North America, the Asia–Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC) for Asia and the Pacific region, the Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry (LACNIC) for Latin America and the Caribbean region, and the Réseaux IP Européens – Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC) for Europe, the Middle East, and Central Asia were delegated to assign IP address blocks and other Internet parameters to local registries, such as Internet service providers, from a designated pool of addresses set aside for each region.

The National Telecommunications and Information Administration, an agency of the United States Department of Commerce, had final approval over changes to the DNS root zone until the IANA stewardship transition on 1 October 2016. The Internet Society (ISOC) was founded in 1992 with a mission to &quot;assure the open development, evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world&quot;. Its members include individuals (anyone may join) as well as corporations, organizations, governments, and universities. Among other activities ISOC provides an administrative home for a number of less formally organized groups that are involved in developing and managing the Internet, including: the IETF, Internet Architecture Board (IAB), Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), and Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG). On 16 November 2005, the United Nations-sponsored World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis established the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) to discuss Internet-related issues.

== Infrastructure ==
The communications infrastructure of the Internet consists of its hardware components and a system of software layers that control various aspects of the architecture. As with any computer network, the Internet physically consists of routers, media (such as cabling and radio links), repeaters, modems etc. However, as an example of internetworking, many of the network nodes are not necessarily Internet equipment per se. The internet packets are carried by other full-fledged networking protocols with the Internet acting as a homogeneous networking standard, running across heterogeneous hardware, with the packets guided to their destinations by IP routers.

=== Service tiers ===
Internet service providers (ISPs) establish the worldwide connectivity between individual networks at various levels of scope. End-users who only access the Internet when needed to perform a function or obtain information, represent the bottom of the routing hierarchy. At the top of the routing hierarchy are the tier 1 networks, large telecommunication companies that exchange traffic directly with each other via very high speed fiber-optic cables and governed by peering agreements. Tier 2 and lower-level networks buy Internet transit from other providers to reach at least some parties on the global Internet, though they may also engage in peering. An ISP may use a single upstream provider for connectivity, or implement multihoming to achieve redundancy and load balancing. Internet exchange points are major traffic exchanges with physical connections to multiple ISPs. Large organizations, such as academic institutions, large enterprises, and governments, may perform the same function as ISPs, engaging in peering and purchasing transit on behalf of their internal networks. Research networks tend to interconnect with large subnetworks such as GEANT, GLORIAD, Internet2, and the UK&#x27;s national research and education network, JANET.

=== Access ===
Common methods of Internet access by users include dial-up with a computer modem via telephone circuits, broadband over coaxial cable, fiber optics or copper wires, Wi-Fi, satellite, and cellular telephone technology (e.g. 3G, 4G). The Internet may often be accessed from computers in libraries and Internet cafés. Internet access points exist in many public places such as airport halls and coffee shops. Various terms are used, such as &quot;public Internet kiosk&quot;, &quot;public access terminal&quot;, and &quot;Web payphone&quot;. Many hotels also have public terminals that are usually fee-based. These terminals are widely accessed for various usages, such as ticket booking, bank deposit, or online payment. Wi-Fi provides wireless access to the Internet via local computer networks. Hotspots providing such access include Wi-Fi cafés, where users need to bring their own wireless devices, such as a laptop or PDA. These services may be free to all, free to customers only, or fee-based.

Grassroots efforts have led to wireless community networks. Commercial Wi-Fi services that cover large areas are available in many cities, such as New York, London, Vienna, Toronto, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Chicago and Pittsburgh, where the Internet can then be accessed from places such as a park bench. Experiments have also been conducted with proprietary mobile wireless networks like Ricochet, various high-speed data services over cellular networks, and fixed wireless services. Modern smartphones can also access the Internet through the cellular carrier network. For Web browsing, these devices provide applications such as Google Chrome, Safari, and Firefox and a wide variety of other Internet software may be installed from app stores. Internet usage by mobile and tablet devices exceeded desktop worldwide for the first time in October 2016.

====Mobile communication====
 The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) estimated that, by the end of 2017, 48% of individual users regularly connect to the Internet, up from 34% in 2012. Mobile Internet connectivity has played an important role in expanding access in recent years, especially in Asia and the Pacific and in Africa. The number of unique mobile cellular subscriptions increased from 3.9 billion in 2012 to 4.8 billion in 2016, two-thirds of the world&#x27;s population, with more than half of subscriptions located in Asia and the Pacific. The number of subscriptions was predicted to rise to 5.7 billion users in 2020. , 80% of the world&#x27;s population were covered by a 4G network. The limits that users face on accessing information via mobile applications coincide with a broader process of fragmentation of the Internet. Fragmentation restricts access to media content and tends to affect the poorest users the most.

Zero-rating, the practice of Internet service providers allowing users free connectivity to access specific content or applications without cost, has offered opportunities to surmount economic hurdles but has also been accused by its critics as creating a two-tiered Internet. To address the issues with zero-rating, an alternative model has emerged in the concept of &#x27;equal rating&#x27; and is being tested in experiments by Mozilla and Orange in Africa. Equal rating prevents prioritization of one type of content and zero-rates all content up to a specified data cap. In a study published by Chatham House, 15 out of 19 countries researched in Latin America had some kind of hybrid or zero-rated product offered. Some countries in the region had a handful of plans to choose from (across all mobile network operators) while others, such as Colombia, offered as many as 30 pre-paid and 34 post-paid plans.

A study of eight countries in the Global South found that zero-rated data plans exist in every country, although there is a great range in the frequency with which they are offered and actually used in each. The study looked at the top three to five carriers by market share in Bangladesh, Colombia, Ghana, India, Kenya, Nigeria, Peru and Philippines. Across the 181 plans examined, 13 percent were offering zero-rated services. Another study, covering Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa, found Facebook&#x27;s Free Basics and Wikipedia Zero to be the most commonly zero-rated content.

== Internet Protocol Suite ==

The Internet standards describe a framework known as the Internet protocol suite (also called TCP/IP, based on the first two components.) This is a suite of protocols that are ordered into a set of four conceptional layers by the scope of their operation, originally documented in and . At the top is the application layer, where communication is described in terms of the objects or data structures most appropriate for each application. For example, a web browser operates in a client–server application model and exchanges information with the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and an application-germane data structure, such as the HyperText Markup Language (HTML).

Below this top layer, the transport layer connects applications on different hosts with a logical channel through the network. It provides this service with a variety of possible characteristics, such as ordered, reliable delivery (TCP), and an unreliable datagram service (UDP).

Underlying these layers are the networking technologies that interconnect networks at their borders and exchange traffic across them. The Internet layer implements the Internet Protocol (IP) which enables computers to identify and locate each other by IP address and route their traffic via intermediate (transit) networks. The Internet Protocol layer code is independent of the type of network that it is physically running over.

At the bottom of the architecture is the link layer, which connects nodes on the same physical link, and contains protocols that do not require routers for traversal to other links. The protocol suite does not explicitly specify hardware methods to transfer bits, or protocols to manage such hardware, but assumes that appropriate technology is available. Examples of that technology include Wi-Fi, Ethernet, and DSL.

===Internet protocol===

The most prominent component of the Internet model is the Internet Protocol (IP). IP enables internetworking and, in essence, establishes the Internet itself. Two versions of the Internet Protocol exist, IPv4 and IPv6.

====IP Addresses====

For locating individual computers on the network, the Internet provides IP addresses. IP addresses are used by the Internet infrastructure to direct internet packets to their destinations. They consist of fixed-length numbers, which are found within the packet. IP addresses are generally assigned to equipment either automatically via DHCP, or are configured.

However, the network also supports other addressing systems. Users generally enter domain names (e.g. &quot;en.wikipedia.org&quot;) instead of IP addresses because they are easier to remember; they are converted by the Domain Name System (DNS) into IP addresses which are more efficient for routing purposes.

====IPv4====
Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) defines an IP address as a 32-bit number. IPv4 is the initial version used on the first generation of the Internet and is still in dominant use. It was designed in 1981 to address up to ≈4.3 billion (109) hosts. However, the explosive growth of the Internet has led to IPv4 address exhaustion, which entered its final stage in 2011, when the global IPv4 address allocation pool was exhausted.

====IPv6====
Because of the growth of the Internet and the depletion of available IPv4 addresses, a new version of IP IPv6, was developed in the mid-1990s, which provides vastly larger addressing capabilities and more efficient routing of Internet traffic. IPv6 uses 128 bits for the IP address and was standardized in 1998. IPv6 deployment has been ongoing since the mid-2000s and is currently in growing deployment around the world, since Internet address registries (RIRs) began to urge all resource managers to plan rapid adoption and conversion.

IPv6 is not directly interoperable by design with IPv4. In essence, it establishes a parallel version of the Internet not directly accessible with IPv4 software. Thus, translation facilities must exist for internetworking or nodes must have duplicate networking software for both networks. Essentially all modern computer operating systems support both versions of the Internet Protocol. Network infrastructure, however, has been lagging in this development. Aside from the complex array of physical connections that make up its infrastructure, the Internet is facilitated by bi- or multi-lateral commercial contracts, e.g., peering agreements, and by technical specifications or protocols that describe the exchange of data over the network. Indeed, the Internet is defined by its interconnections and routing policies.

====Subnetwork====

A &quot;subnetwork&quot; or &quot;subnet&quot; is a logical subdivision of an IP network. The practice of dividing a network into two or more networks is called &quot;subnetting&quot;. Computers that belong to a subnet are addressed with an identical most-significant bit-group in their IP addresses. This results in the logical division of an IP address into two fields, the &quot;network number&quot; or &quot;routing prefix&quot; and the &quot;rest field&quot; or &quot;host identifier&quot;. The &quot;rest field&quot; is an identifier for a specific host or network interface.

The &quot;routing prefix&quot; may be expressed in Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation written as the first address of a network, followed by a slash character (&quot;/&quot;), and ending with the bit-length of the prefix. For example, is the prefix of the Internet Protocol version 4 network starting at the given address, having 24 bits allocated for the network prefix, and the remaining 8 bits reserved for host addressing. Addresses in the range to belong to this network. The IPv6 address specification is a large address block with 296 addresses, having a 32-bit routing prefix.

For IPv4, a network may also be characterized by its &quot;subnet mask&quot; or &quot;netmask&quot;, which is the bitmask that when applied by a bitwise AND operation to any IP address in the network, yields the routing prefix. Subnet masks are also expressed in dot-decimal notation like an address. For example, is the subnet mask for the prefix .

Traffic is exchanged between subnetworks through routers when the routing prefixes of the source address and the destination address differ. A router serves as a logical or physical boundary between the subnets.

The benefits of subnetting an existing network vary with each deployment scenario. In the address allocation architecture of the Internet using CIDR and in large organizations, it is necessary to allocate address space efficiently. Subnetting may also enhance routing efficiency or have advantages in network management when subnetworks are administratively controlled by different entities in a larger organization. Subnets may be arranged logically in a hierarchical architecture, partitioning an organization&#x27;s network address space into a tree-like routing structure.

====Routing====
Computers and routers use routing tables in their operating system to direct IP packets to reach a node on a different subnetwork. Routing tables are maintained by manual configuration or automatically by routing protocols. End-nodes typically use a default route that points toward an ISP providing transit, while ISP routers use the Border Gateway Protocol to establish the most efficient routing across the complex connections of the global Internet. The default gateway is the node that serves as the forwarding host (router) to other networks when no other route specification matches the destination IP address of a packet.

===IETF===
While the hardware components in the Internet infrastructure can often be used to support other software systems, it is the design and the standardization process of the software that characterizes the Internet and provides the foundation for its scalability and success. The responsibility for the architectural design of the Internet software systems has been assumed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). The IETF conducts standard-setting work groups, open to any individual, about the various aspects of Internet architecture. The resulting contributions and standards are published as &quot;Request for Comments&quot; (RFC) documents on the IETF web site. The principal methods of networking that enable the Internet are contained in specially designated RFCs that constitute the Internet Standards. Other less rigorous documents are simply informative, experimental, or historical, or document the best current practices (BCP) when implementing Internet technologies.

== Applications and services ==
The Internet carries many applications and services, most prominently the World Wide Web, including social media, electronic mail, mobile applications, multiplayer online games, Internet telephony, file sharing, and streaming media services. Most servers that provide these services are today hosted in data centers, and content is often accessed through high-performance content delivery networks.

=== World Wide Web ===

The World Wide Web is a global collection of documents, images, multimedia, applications, and other resources, logically interrelated by hyperlinks and referenced with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs), which provide a global system of named references. URIs symbolically identify services, web servers, databases, and the documents and resources that they can provide. HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the main access protocol of the World Wide Web. Web services also use HTTP for communication between software systems for information transfer, sharing and exchanging business data and logistics and is one of many languages or protocols that can be used for communication on the Internet.

World Wide Web browser software, such as Microsoft&#x27;s Internet Explorer/Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Apple&#x27;s Safari, and Google Chrome, enable users to navigate from one web page to another via the hyperlinks embedded in the documents. These documents may also contain any combination of computer data, including graphics, sounds, text, video, multimedia and interactive content that runs while the user is interacting with the page. Client-side software can include animations, games, office applications and scientific demonstrations. Through keyword-driven Internet research using search engines like Yahoo!, Bing and Google, users worldwide have easy, instant access to a vast and diverse amount of online information. Compared to printed media, books, encyclopedias and traditional libraries, the World Wide Web has enabled the decentralization of information on a large scale.

The Web has enabled individuals and organizations to publish ideas and information to a potentially large audience online at greatly reduced expense and time delay. Publishing a web page, a blog, or building a website involves little initial cost and many cost-free services are available. However, publishing and maintaining large, professional websites with attractive, diverse and up-to-date information is still a difficult and expensive proposition. Many individuals and some companies and groups use &quot;web logs&quot; or blogs, which are largely used as easily being able to update online diaries. Some commercial organizations encourage staff to communicate advice in their areas of specialization in the hope that visitors will be impressed by the expert knowledge and free information and be attracted to the corporation as a result.

Advertising on popular web pages can be lucrative, and e-commerce, which is the sale of products and services directly via the Web, continues to grow. Online advertising is a form of marketing and advertising which uses the Internet to deliver promotional marketing messages to consumers. It includes email marketing, search engine marketing (SEM), social media marketing, many types of display advertising (including web banner advertising), and mobile advertising. In 2011, Internet advertising revenues in the United States surpassed those of cable television and nearly exceeded those of broadcast television. Many common online advertising practices are controversial and increasingly subject to regulation.

When the Web developed in the 1990s, a typical web page was stored in completed form on a web server, formatted in HTML, ready for transmission to a web browser in response to a request. Over time, the process of creating and serving web pages has become dynamic, creating a flexible design, layout, and content. Websites are often created using content management software with, initially, very little content. Contributors to these systems, who may be paid staff, members of an organization or the public, fill underlying databases with content using editing pages designed for that purpose while casual visitors view and read this content in HTML form. There may or may not be editorial, approval and security systems built into the process of taking newly entered content and making it available to the target visitors.

=== Communication ===
Email is an important communications service available via the Internet. The concept of sending electronic text messages between parties, analogous to mailing letters or memos, predates the creation of the Internet. Pictures, documents, and other files are sent as email attachments. Email messages can be cc-ed to multiple email addresses.

Internet telephony is a common communications service realized with the Internet. The name of the principal internetworking protocol, the Internet Protocol, lends its name to voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). The idea began in the early 1990s with walkie-talkie-like voice applications for personal computers. VoIP systems now dominate many markets and are as easy to use and as convenient as a traditional telephone. The benefit has been substantial cost savings over traditional telephone calls, especially over long distances. Cable, ADSL, and mobile data networks provide Internet access in customer premises and inexpensive VoIP network adapters provide the connection for traditional analog telephone sets. The voice quality of VoIP often exceeds that of traditional calls. Remaining problems for VoIP include the situation that emergency services may not be universally available and that devices rely on a local power supply, while older traditional phones are powered from the local loop, and typically operate during a power failure.

=== Data transfer ===
File sharing is an example of transferring large amounts of data across the Internet. A computer file can be emailed to customers, colleagues and friends as an attachment. It can be uploaded to a website or File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server for easy download by others. It can be put into a &quot;shared location&quot; or onto a file server for instant use by colleagues. The load of bulk downloads to many users can be eased by the use of &quot;mirror&quot; servers or peer-to-peer networks. In any of these cases, access to the file may be controlled by user authentication, the transit of the file over the Internet may be obscured by encryption, and money may change hands for access to the file. The price can be paid by the remote charging of funds from, for example, a credit card whose details are also passed—usually fully encrypted—across the Internet. The origin and authenticity of the file received may be checked by digital signatures or by MD5 or other message digests. These simple features of the Internet, over a worldwide basis, are changing the production, sale, and distribution of anything that can be reduced to a computer file for transmission. This includes all manner of print publications, software products, news, music, film, video, photography, graphics and the other arts. This in turn has caused seismic shifts in each of the existing industries that previously controlled the production and distribution of these products.

Streaming media is the real-time delivery of digital media for immediate consumption or enjoyment by end users. Many radio and television broadcasters provide Internet feeds of their live audio and video productions. They may also allow time-shift viewing or listening such as Preview, Classic Clips and Listen Again features. These providers have been joined by a range of pure Internet &quot;broadcasters&quot; who never had on-air licenses. This means that an Internet-connected device, such as a computer or something more specific, can be used to access online media in much the same way as was previously possible only with a television or radio receiver. The range of available types of content is much wider, from specialized technical webcasts to on-demand popular multimedia services. Podcasting is a variation on this theme, where—usually audio—material is downloaded and played back on a computer or shifted to a portable media player to be listened to on the move. These techniques using simple equipment allow anybody, with little censorship or licensing control, to broadcast audio-visual material worldwide. Digital media streaming increases the demand for network bandwidth. For example, standard image quality needs 1 Mbit/s link speed for SD 480p, HD 720p quality requires 2.5 Mbit/s, and the top-of-the-line HDX quality needs 4.5 Mbit/s for 1080p.

Webcams are a low-cost extension of this phenomenon. While some webcams can give full-frame-rate video, the picture either is usually small or updates slowly. Internet users can watch animals around an African waterhole, ships in the Panama Canal, traffic at a local roundabout or monitor their own premises, live and in real time. Video chat rooms and video conferencing are also popular with many uses being found for personal webcams, with and without two-way sound. YouTube was founded on 15 February 2005 and is now the leading website for free streaming video with more than two billion users. It uses an HTML5 based web player by default to stream and show video files. Registered users may upload an unlimited amount of video and build their own personal profile. YouTube claims that its users watch hundreds of millions, and upload hundreds of thousands of videos daily.

== Social impact ==
The Internet has enabled new forms of social interaction, activities, and social associations. This phenomenon has given rise to the scholarly study of the sociology of the Internet. The early Internet left an impact on some writers who used symbolism to write about it, such as describing the Internet as a &quot;means to connect individuals in a vast invisible net over all the earth.&quot;

=== Users ===

Between 2000 and 2009, the number of Internet users globally rose from 390 million to 1.9 billion. By 2010, 22% of the world&#x27;s population had access to computers with 1 billion Google searches every day, 300 million Internet users reading blogs, and 2 billion videos viewed daily on YouTube. In 2014 the world&#x27;s Internet users surpassed 3 billion or 44 percent of world population, but two-thirds came from the richest countries, with 78 percent of Europeans using the Internet, followed by 57 percent of the Americas. However, by 2018, Asia alone accounted for 51% of all Internet users, with 2.2 billion out of the 4.3 billion Internet users in the world. China&#x27;s Internet users surpassed a major milestone in 2018, when the country&#x27;s Internet regulatory authority, China Internet Network Information Centre, announced that China had 802 million users. China was followed by India, with some 700 million users, with the United States third with 275 million users. However, in terms of penetration, in 2022 China had a 70% penetration rate compared to India&#x27;s 60% and the United States&#x27;s 90%. In 2022, 54% of the world&#x27;s Internet users were based in Asia, 14% in Europe, 7% in North America, 10% in Latin America and the Caribbean, 11% in Africa, 4% in the Middle East and 1% in Oceania. In 2019, Kuwait, Qatar, the Falkland Islands, Bermuda and Iceland had the highest Internet penetration by the number of users, with 93% or more of the population with access. As of 2022, it was estimated that 5.4 billion people use the Internet, more than two-thirds of the world&#x27;s population.

The prevalent language for communication via the Internet has always been English. This may be a result of the origin of the Internet, as well as the language&#x27;s role as a lingua franca and as a world language. Early computer systems were limited to the characters in the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), a subset of the Latin alphabet. After English (27%), the most requested languages on the World Wide Web are Chinese (25%), Spanish (8%), Japanese (5%), Portuguese and German (4% each), Arabic, French and Russian (3% each), and Korean (2%). The Internet&#x27;s technologies have developed enough in recent years, especially in the use of Unicode, that good facilities are available for development and communication in the world&#x27;s widely used languages. However, some glitches such as &quot;mojibake&quot; (incorrect display of some languages&#x27; characters) still remain.

In a US study in 2005, the percentage of men using the Internet was very slightly ahead of the percentage of women, although this difference reversed in those under 30. Men logged on more often, spent more time online, and were more likely to be broadband users, whereas women tended to make more use of opportunities to communicate (such as email). Men were more likely to use the Internet to pay bills, participate in auctions, and for recreation such as downloading music and videos. Men and women were equally likely to use the Internet for shopping and banking. In 2008, women significantly outnumbered men on most social networking services, such as Facebook and Myspace, although the ratios varied with age. Women watched more streaming content, whereas men downloaded more. Men were more likely to blog. Among those who blog, men were more likely to have a professional blog, whereas women were more likely to have a personal blog.

Several neologisms exist that refer to Internet users: Netizen (as in &quot;citizen of the net&quot;) refers to those actively involved in improving online communities, the Internet in general or surrounding political affairs and rights such as free speech, Internaut refers to operators or technically highly capable users of the Internet, digital citizen refers to a person using the Internet in order to engage in society, politics, and government participation.

=== Usage ===


The Internet allows greater flexibility in working hours and location, especially with the spread of unmetered high-speed connections. The Internet can be accessed almost anywhere by numerous means, including through mobile Internet devices. Mobile phones, datacards, handheld game consoles and cellular routers allow users to connect to the Internet wirelessly. Within the limitations imposed by small screens and other limited facilities of such pocket-sized devices, the services of the Internet, including email and the web, may be available. Service providers may restrict the services offered and mobile data charges may be significantly higher than other access methods.

Educational material at all levels from pre-school to post-doctoral is available from websites. Examples range from CBeebies, through school and high-school revision guides and virtual universities, to access to top-end scholarly literature through the likes of Google Scholar. For distance education, help with homework and other assignments, self-guided learning, whiling away spare time or just looking up more detail on an interesting fact, it has never been easier for people to access educational information at any level from anywhere. The Internet in general and the World Wide Web in particular are important enablers of both formal and informal education. Further, the Internet allows researchers (especially those from the social and behavioral sciences) to conduct research remotely via virtual laboratories, with profound changes in reach and generalizability of findings as well as in communication between scientists and in the publication of results.

The low cost and nearly instantaneous sharing of ideas, knowledge, and skills have made collaborative work dramatically easier, with the help of collaborative software. Not only can a group cheaply communicate and share ideas but the wide reach of the Internet allows such groups more easily to form. An example of this is the free software movement, which has produced, among other things, Linux, Mozilla Firefox, and OpenOffice.org (later forked into LibreOffice). Internet chat, whether using an IRC chat room, an instant messaging system, or a social networking service, allows colleagues to stay in touch in a very convenient way while working at their computers during the day. Messages can be exchanged even more quickly and conveniently than via email. These systems may allow files to be exchanged, drawings and images to be shared, or voice and video contact between team members.

Content management systems allow collaborating teams to work on shared sets of documents simultaneously without accidentally destroying each other&#x27;s work. Business and project teams can share calendars as well as documents and other information. Such collaboration occurs in a wide variety of areas including scientific research, software development, conference planning, political activism and creative writing. Social and political collaboration is also becoming more widespread as both Internet access and computer literacy spread.

The Internet allows computer users to remotely access other computers and information stores easily from any access point. Access may be with computer security; i.e., authentication and encryption technologies, depending on the requirements. This is encouraging new ways of remote work, collaboration and information sharing in many industries. An accountant sitting at home can audit the books of a company based in another country, on a server situated in a third country that is remotely maintained by IT specialists in a fourth. These accounts could have been created by home-working bookkeepers, in other remote locations, based on information emailed to them from offices all over the world. Some of these things were possible before the widespread use of the Internet, but the cost of private leased lines would have made many of them infeasible in practice. An office worker away from their desk, perhaps on the other side of the world on a business trip or a holiday, can access their emails, access their data using cloud computing, or open a remote desktop session into their office PC using a secure virtual private network (VPN) connection on the Internet. This can give the worker complete access to all of their normal files and data, including email and other applications, while away from the office. It has been referred to among system administrators as the Virtual Private Nightmare, because it extends the secure perimeter of a corporate network into remote locations and its employees&#x27; homes. By the late 2010s the Internet had been described as &quot;the main source of scientific information &quot;for the majority of the global North population&quot;.

=== Social networking and entertainment ===

Many people use the World Wide Web to access news, weather and sports reports, to plan and book vacations and to pursue their personal interests. People use chat, messaging and email to make and stay in touch with friends worldwide, sometimes in the same way as some previously had pen pals. Social networking services such as Facebook have created new ways to socialize and interact. Users of these sites are able to add a wide variety of information to pages, pursue common interests, and connect with others. It is also possible to find existing acquaintances, to allow communication among existing groups of people. Sites like LinkedIn foster commercial and business connections. YouTube and Flickr specialize in users&#x27; videos and photographs. Social networking services are also widely used by businesses and other organizations to promote their brands, to market to their customers and to encourage posts to &quot;go viral&quot;. &quot;Black hat&quot; social media techniques are also employed by some organizations, such as spam accounts and astroturfing.

A risk for both individuals&#x27; and organizations&#x27; writing posts (especially public posts) on social networking services is that especially foolish or controversial posts occasionally lead to an unexpected and possibly large-scale backlash on social media from other Internet users. This is also a risk in relation to controversial &quot;offline&quot; behavior, if it is widely made known. The nature of this backlash can range widely from counter-arguments and public mockery, through insults and hate speech, to, in extreme cases, rape and death threats. The online disinhibition effect describes the tendency of many individuals to behave more stridently or offensively online than they would in person. A significant number of feminist women have been the target of various forms of harassment in response to posts they have made on social media, and Twitter in particular has been criticized in the past for not doing enough to aid victims of online abuse.

For organizations, such a backlash can cause overall brand damage, especially if reported by the media. However, this is not always the case, as any brand damage in the eyes of people with an opposing opinion to that presented by the organization could sometimes be outweighed by strengthening the brand in the eyes of others. Furthermore, if an organization or individual gives in to demands that others perceive as wrong-headed, that can then provoke a counter-backlash.

Some websites, such as Reddit, have rules forbidding the posting of personal information of individuals (also known as doxxing), due to concerns about such postings leading to mobs of large numbers of Internet users directing harassment at the specific individuals thereby identified. In particular, the Reddit rule forbidding the posting of personal information is widely understood to imply that all identifying photos and names must be censored in Facebook screenshots posted to Reddit. However, the interpretation of this rule in relation to public Twitter posts is less clear, and in any case, like-minded people online have many other ways they can use to direct each other&#x27;s attention to public social media posts they disagree with.

Children also face dangers online such as cyberbullying and approaches by sexual predators, who sometimes pose as children themselves. Children may also encounter material that they may find upsetting, or material that their parents consider to be not age-appropriate. Due to naivety, they may also post personal information about themselves online, which could put them or their families at risk unless warned not to do so. Many parents choose to enable Internet filtering or supervise their children&#x27;s online activities in an attempt to protect their children from inappropriate material on the Internet. The most popular social networking services, such as Facebook and Twitter, commonly forbid users under the age of 13. However, these policies are typically trivial to circumvent by registering an account with a false birth date, and a significant number of children aged under 13 join such sites anyway. Social networking services for younger children, which claim to provide better levels of protection for children, also exist.

The Internet has been a major outlet for leisure activity since its inception, with entertaining social experiments such as MUDs and MOOs being conducted on university servers, and humor-related Usenet groups receiving much traffic. Many Internet forums have sections devoted to games and funny videos. The Internet pornography and online gambling industries have taken advantage of the World Wide Web. Although many governments have attempted to restrict both industries&#x27; use of the Internet, in general, this has failed to stop their widespread popularity.

Another area of leisure activity on the Internet is multiplayer gaming. This form of recreation creates communities, where people of all ages and origins enjoy the fast-paced world of multiplayer games. These range from MMORPG to first-person shooters, from role-playing video games to online gambling. While online gaming has been around since the 1970s, modern modes of online gaming began with subscription services such as GameSpy and MPlayer. Non-subscribers were limited to certain types of game play or certain games. Many people use the Internet to access and download music, movies and other works for their enjoyment and relaxation. Free and fee-based services exist for all of these activities, using centralized servers and distributed peer-to-peer technologies. Some of these sources exercise more care with respect to the original artists&#x27; copyrights than others.

Internet usage has been correlated to users&#x27; loneliness. Lonely people tend to use the Internet as an outlet for their feelings and to share their stories with others, such as in the &quot;I am lonely will anyone speak to me&quot; thread. A 2017 book claimed that the Internet consolidates most aspects of human endeavor into singular arenas of which all of humanity are potential members and competitors, with fundamentally negative impacts on mental health as a result. While successes in each field of activity are pervasively visible and trumpeted, they are reserved for an extremely thin sliver of the world&#x27;s most exceptional, leaving everyone else behind. Whereas, before the Internet, expectations of success in any field were supported by reasonable probabilities of achievement at the village, suburb, city or even state level, the same expectations in the Internet world are virtually certain to bring disappointment today: there is always someone else, somewhere on the planet, who can do better and take the now one-and-only top spot.

Cybersectarianism is a new organizational form that involves, &quot;highly dispersed small groups of practitioners that may remain largely anonymous within the larger social context and operate in relative secrecy, while still linked remotely to a larger network of believers who share a set of practices and texts, and often a common devotion to a particular leader. Overseas supporters provide funding and support; domestic practitioners distribute tracts, participate in acts of resistance, and share information on the internal situation with outsiders. Collectively, members and practitioners of such sects construct viable virtual communities of faith, exchanging personal testimonies and engaging in the collective study via email, online chat rooms, and web-based message boards.&quot; In particular, the British government has raised concerns about the prospect of young British Muslims being indoctrinated into Islamic extremism by material on the Internet, being persuaded to join terrorist groups such as the so-called &quot;Islamic State&quot;, and then potentially committing acts of terrorism on returning to Britain after fighting in Syria or Iraq.

Cyberslacking can become a drain on corporate resources; the average UK employee spent 57 minutes a day surfing the Web while at work, according to a 2003 study by Peninsula Business Services. Internet addiction disorder is excessive computer use that interferes with daily life. Nicholas G. Carr believes that Internet use has other effects on individuals, for instance improving skills of scan-reading and interfering with the deep thinking that leads to true creativity.

=== Electronic business ===
Electronic business (&quot;e-business&quot;) encompasses business processes spanning the entire value chain: purchasing, supply chain management, marketing, sales, customer service, and business relationship. E-commerce seeks to add revenue streams using the Internet to build and enhance relationships with clients and partners. According to International Data Corporation, the size of worldwide e-commerce, when global business-to-business and -consumer transactions are combined, equate to $16 trillion for 2013. A report by Oxford Economics added those two together to estimate the total size of the digital economy at $20.4 trillion, equivalent to roughly 13.8% of global sales.

While much has been written of the economic advantages of Internet-enabled commerce, there is also evidence that some aspects of the Internet such as maps and location-aware services may serve to reinforce economic inequality and the digital divide. Electronic commerce may be responsible for consolidation and the decline of mom-and-pop, brick and mortar businesses resulting in increases in income inequality.

Author Andrew Keen, a long-time critic of the social transformations caused by the Internet, has focused on the economic effects of consolidation from Internet businesses. Keen cites a 2013 Institute for Local Self-Reliance report saying brick-and-mortar retailers employ 47 people for every $10 million in sales while Amazon employs only 14. Similarly, the 700-employee room rental start-up Airbnb was valued at $10 billion in 2014, about half as much as Hilton Worldwide, which employs 152,000 people. At that time, Uber employed 1,000 full-time employees and was valued at $18.2 billion, about the same valuation as Avis Rent a Car and The Hertz Corporation combined, which together employed almost 60,000 people.

===Remote work===
Remote work is facilitated by tools such as groupware, virtual private networks, conference calling, videotelephony, and VoIP so that work may be performed from any location, most conveniently the worker&#x27;s home. It can be efficient and useful for companies as it allows workers to communicate over long distances, saving significant amounts of travel time and cost. More workers have adequate bandwidth at home to use these tools to link their home to their corporate intranet and internal communication networks.

=== Collaborative publishing ===
Wikis have also been used in the academic community for sharing and dissemination of information across institutional and international boundaries. In those settings, they have been found useful for collaboration on grant writing, strategic planning, departmental documentation, and committee work. The United States Patent and Trademark Office uses a wiki to allow the public to collaborate on finding prior art relevant to examination of pending patent applications. Queens, New York has used a wiki to allow citizens to collaborate on the design and planning of a local park. The English Wikipedia has the largest user base among wikis on the World Wide Web and ranks in the top 10 among all sites in terms of traffic.

=== Politics and political revolutions ===
The Internet has achieved new relevance as a political tool. The presidential campaign of Howard Dean in 2004 in the United States was notable for its success in soliciting donation via the Internet. Many political groups use the Internet to achieve a new method of organizing for carrying out their mission, having given rise to Internet activism. &quot;The New York Times&quot; suggested that social media websites, such as Facebook and Twitter, helped people organize the political revolutions in Egypt, by helping activists organize protests, communicate grievances, and disseminate information.

Many have understood the Internet as an extension of the Habermasian notion of the &quot;public sphere&quot;, observing how network communication technologies provide something like a global civic forum. However, incidents of politically motivated Internet censorship have now been recorded in many countries, including western democracies.

E-government is the use of technological communications devices, such as the Internet, to provide public services to citizens and other persons in a country or region. E-government offers opportunities for more direct and convenient citizen access to government and for government provision of services directly to citizens.

=== Philanthropy ===
The spread of low-cost Internet access in developing countries has opened up new possibilities for peer-to-peer charities, which allow individuals to contribute small amounts to charitable projects for other individuals. Websites, such as DonorsChoose and GlobalGiving, allow small-scale donors to direct funds to individual projects of their choice. A popular twist on Internet-based philanthropy is the use of peer-to-peer lending for charitable purposes. Kiva pioneered this concept in 2005, offering the first web-based service to publish individual loan profiles for funding. Kiva raises funds for local intermediary microfinance organizations that post stories and updates on behalf of the borrowers. Lenders can contribute as little as $25 to loans of their choice and receive their money back as borrowers repay. Kiva falls short of being a pure peer-to-peer charity, in that loans are disbursed before being funded by lenders and borrowers do not communicate with lenders themselves.

== Security ==

Internet resources, hardware, and software components are the target of criminal or malicious attempts to gain unauthorized control to cause interruptions, commit fraud, engage in blackmail or access private information.

===Malware===
Malware is malicious software used and distributed via the Internet. It includes computer viruses which are copied with the help of humans, computer worms which copy themselves automatically, software for denial of service attacks, ransomware, botnets, and spyware that reports on the activity and typing of users. Usually, these activities constitute cybercrime. Defense theorists have also speculated about the possibilities of hackers using cyber warfare using similar methods on a large scale.

Malware poses serious problems to individuals and businesses on the Internet. According to Symantec&#x27;s 2018 Internet Security Threat Report (ISTR), malware variants number has increased to 669,947,865 in 2017, which is twice as many malware variants as in 2016. Cybercrime, which includes malware attacks as well as other crimes committed by computer, was predicted to cost the world economy US$6 trillion in 2021, and is increasing at a rate of 15% per year. Since 2021, malware has been designed to target computer systems that run critical infrastructure such as the electricity distribution network. Malware can be designed to evade antivirus software detection algorithms.

=== Surveillance ===
The vast majority of computer surveillance involves the monitoring of data and traffic on the Internet. In the United States for example, under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, all phone calls and broadband Internet traffic (emails, web traffic, instant messaging, etc.) are required to be available for unimpeded real-time monitoring by Federal law enforcement agencies. Packet capture is the monitoring of data traffic on a computer network. Computers communicate over the Internet by breaking up messages (emails, images, videos, web pages, files, etc.) into small chunks called &quot;packets&quot;, which are routed through a network of computers, until they reach their destination, where they are assembled back into a complete &quot;message&quot; again. Packet Capture Appliance intercepts these packets as they are traveling through the network, in order to examine their contents using other programs. A packet capture is an information &quot;gathering&quot; tool, but not an &quot;analysis&quot; tool. That is it gathers &quot;messages&quot; but it does not analyze them and figure out what they mean. Other programs are needed to perform traffic analysis and sift through intercepted data looking for important/useful information. Under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act all U.S. telecommunications providers are required to install packet sniffing technology to allow Federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies to intercept all of their customers&#x27; broadband Internet and VoIP traffic.

The large amount of data gathered from packet capture requires surveillance software that filters and reports relevant information, such as the use of certain words or phrases, the access to certain types of web sites, or communicating via email or chat with certain parties. Agencies, such as the Information Awareness Office, NSA, GCHQ and the FBI, spend billions of dollars per year to develop, purchase, implement, and operate systems for interception and analysis of data. Similar systems are operated by Iranian secret police to identify and suppress dissidents. The required hardware and software were allegedly installed by German Siemens AG and Finnish Nokia.

=== Censorship ===


Some governments, such as those of Burma, Iran, North Korea, Mainland China, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, restrict access to content on the Internet within their territories, especially to political and religious content, with domain name and keyword filters.

In Norway, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden, major Internet service providers have voluntarily agreed to restrict access to sites listed by authorities. While this list of forbidden resources is supposed to contain only known child pornography sites, the content of the list is secret. Many countries, including the United States, have enacted laws against the possession or distribution of certain material, such as child pornography, via the Internet but do not mandate filter software. Many free or commercially available software programs, called content-control software are available to users to block offensive websites on individual computers or networks in order to limit access by children to pornographic material or depiction of violence.

== Performance ==
As the Internet is a heterogeneous network, its physical characteristics, including, for example the data transfer rates of connections, vary widely. It exhibits emergent phenomena that depend on its large-scale organization.

===Traffic volume===

The volume of Internet traffic is difficult to measure because no single point of measurement exists in the multi-tiered, non-hierarchical topology. Traffic data may be estimated from the aggregate volume through the peering points of the Tier 1 network providers, but traffic that stays local in large provider networks may not be accounted for.

=== Outages ===
An Internet blackout or outage can be caused by local signaling interruptions. Disruptions of submarine communications cables may cause blackouts or slowdowns to large areas, such as in the 2008 submarine cable disruption. Less-developed countries are more vulnerable due to the small number of high-capacity links. Land cables are also vulnerable, as in 2011 when a woman digging for scrap metal severed most connectivity for the nation of Armenia. Internet blackouts affecting almost entire countries can be achieved by governments as a form of Internet censorship, as in the blockage of the Internet in Egypt, whereby approximately 93% of networks were without access in 2011 in an attempt to stop mobilization for anti-government protests.

=== Energy use ===
Estimates of the Internet&#x27;s electricity usage have been the subject of controversy, according to a 2014 peer-reviewed research paper that found claims differing by a factor of 20,000 published in the literature during the preceding decade, ranging from 0.0064 kilowatt hours per gigabyte transferred (kWh/GB) to 136 kWh/GB. The researchers attributed these discrepancies mainly to the year of reference (i.e. whether efficiency gains over time had been taken into account) and to whether &quot;end devices such as personal computers and servers are included&quot; in the analysis.

In 2011, academic researchers estimated the overall energy used by the Internet to be between 170 and 307 GW, less than two percent of the energy used by humanity. This estimate included the energy needed to build, operate, and periodically replace the estimated 750 million laptops, a billion smart phones and 100 million servers worldwide as well as the energy that routers, cell towers, optical switches, Wi-Fi transmitters and cloud storage devices use when transmitting Internet traffic. According to a non-peer-reviewed study published in 2018 by The Shift Project (a French think tank funded by corporate sponsors), nearly 4% of global CO2 emissions could be attributed to global data transfer and the necessary infrastructure. The study also said that online video streaming alone accounted for 60% of this data transfer and therefore contributed to over 300 million tons of CO2 emission per year, and argued for new &quot;digital sobriety&quot; regulations restricting the use and size of video files.
== See also ==
* Crowdfunding
* Crowdsourcing
* Cyberspace
* Darknet
* Deep web
* Hyphanet
* Internet industry jargon
* Index of Internet-related articles
* Internet metaphors
* Internet video
* &quot;Internets&quot;
* Outline of the Internet
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
*

== Further reading ==
* &quot;First Monday&quot;, a peer-reviewed journal on the Internet by the University Library of the University of Illinois at Chicago, 
* &quot;The Internet Explained&quot;, Vincent Zegna &amp; Mike Pepper, Sonet Digital, November 2005, pp. 1–7.
* 

== External links ==

* The Internet Society
* Living Internet, Internet history and related information, including information from many creators of the Internet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="4" end="12" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="17" end="25" title="Internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570871" start="34" end="47" title="Global network" label="global system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="66" end="82" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="98" end="121" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet protocol suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="184" end="203" title="internetworking" label="network of networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186" start="221" end="228" title="Private network" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q11375" start="347" end="355" title="Wireless network" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098878" start="361" end="379" title="optical networking" label="optical networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q93241" start="491" end="500" title="hypertext" label="hypertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="515" end="527" title="Web application" label="applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="535" end="549" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="557" end="572" title="email" label="electronic mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="574" end="592" title="internet telephony" label="internet telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="598" end="610" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="680" end="692" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="735" end="751" title="packet switching" label="packet switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="805" end="823" title="data communication" label="data communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="843" end="865" title="communication protocol" label="communication protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="878" end="893" title="internetworking" label="internetworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="979" end="1020" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="1036" end="1071" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1134" end="1147" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1159" end="1173" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1178" end="1184" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="1190" end="1197" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172305" start="1327" end="1343" title="resource sharing" label="resource sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="1364" end="1399" title="National Science Foundation Network" label="National Science Foundation Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="1628" end="1651" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet protocol suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="1753" end="1767" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="1908" end="1916" title="personal computer" label="personal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="1922" end="1928" title="mobile device" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="1929" end="1937" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="2016" end="2024" title="academia" label="academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907386" start="2054" end="2087" title="commercialization of the Internet" label="commercialization of the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="2248" end="2257" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="2259" end="2264" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="2266" end="2276" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="2402" end="2407" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="2409" end="2427" title="Internet telephone" label="Internet telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="2429" end="2443" title="Internet radio" label="Internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="2445" end="2464" title="Internet television" label="Internet television"/>
<link wikidata="Q43060" start="2466" end="2478" title="online music" label="online music"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="2504" end="2509" title="Audio stream" label="audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="2514" end="2529" title="video streaming" label="video streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="2602" end="2609" title="Web site" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="2648" end="2656" title="blogging" label="blogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q842397" start="2658" end="2666" title="web feed" label="web feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q498267" start="2680" end="2695" title="news aggregator" label="news aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="2781" end="2798" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="2800" end="2814" title="Internet forum" label="Internet forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="2821" end="2846" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q212930" start="2849" end="2864" title="Online shopping" label="Online shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109680" start="2910" end="2924" title="small business" label="small business"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="2932" end="2944" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q726870" start="2989" end="3005" title="brick and mortar" label="brick and mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212930" start="3054" end="3093" title="Online store" label="sell goods and services entirely online"/>
<link wikidata="Q325421" start="3095" end="3115" title="Business-to-business" label="Business-to-business"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="3120" end="3138" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824206" start="3162" end="3174" title="supply chain" label="supply chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q873636" start="3423" end="3433" title="name space" label="name space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="3456" end="3481" title="IP address" label="Internet Protocol address"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="3509" end="3527" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="3582" end="3633" title="Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers" label="Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="3734" end="3765" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="3970" end="3979" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4000" end="4017" title="Wonders of the World#USA Today&amp;#x27;s New Seven Wonders" label="New Seven Wonders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="4425" end="4441" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q147276" start="4607" end="4618" title="Proper noun and common noun" label="proper noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291321" start="4907" end="4919" title="AP Stylebook" label="AP Stylebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="5001" end="5026" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="5208" end="5222" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="5333" end="5344" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q36774" start="5353" end="5361" title="web page" label="web page"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="5377" end="5391" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427877" start="5517" end="5529" title="web resource" label="web resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q102014" start="5541" end="5550" title="hyperlink" label="hyperlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="5556" end="5560" title="Uniform resource locator" label="URLs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="5591" end="5610" title="computer scientists" label="computer scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="5640" end="5652" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="5676" end="5694" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="5753" end="5778" title="Bolt Beranek &amp;amp; Newman" label="Bolt Beranek &amp;amp; Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030770" start="5803" end="5843" title="Information Processing Techniques Office" label="Information Processing Techniques Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="5858" end="5891" title="Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="5920" end="5941" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="5963" end="5979" title="packet switching" label="packet switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q92617" start="6050" end="6060" title="Paul Baran" label="Paul Baran"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="6064" end="6068" title="RAND" label="RAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240482" start="6108" end="6121" title="Donald Davies" label="Donald Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="6151" end="6179" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661886" start="6205" end="6246" title="Symposium on Operating Systems Principles" label="Symposium on Operating Systems Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907385" start="6291" end="6302" title="NPL network" label="NPL network"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="6383" end="6390" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172305" start="6408" end="6424" title="resource sharing" label="resource sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="6539" end="6576" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="6592" end="6619" title="SRI International" label="Stanford Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="6690" end="6729" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q168515" start="6747" end="6765" title="University of Utah" label="University of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6917" end="6967" title="Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing" label="Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819528" start="7186" end="7199" title="Merit Network" label="Merit Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024621" start="7204" end="7212" title="CYCLADES" label="CYCLADES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037544" start="7368" end="7374" title="NORSAR" label="NORSAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770047" start="7379" end="7383" title="Norwegian Defence Research Establishment" label="NDRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177227" start="7393" end="7414" title="Peter T. Kirstein" label="Peter Kirstein&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="7433" end="7458" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7494" end="7519" title="Internet in the United Kingdom#History" label="British academic networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="7539" end="7551" title="Internetworking" label="internetwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172305" start="7556" end="7572" title="resource sharing" label="resource sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16643941" start="7593" end="7628" title="International Network Working Group" label="International Network Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="7690" end="7699" title="Communication protocol" label="protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q92743" start="7827" end="7836" title="Vint Cerf" label="Vint Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="7840" end="7859" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="7864" end="7872" title="Bob Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="8080" end="8084" title="Request for Comments" label="RFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083180" start="8125" end="8137" title="Louis Pouzin" label="Louis Pouzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="8192" end="8198" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252707" start="8216" end="8220" title="Postal, telegraph and telephone service" label="PTTs"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="8260" end="8264" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498158" start="8293" end="8312" title="public data network" label="public data network"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="8368" end="8395" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357779" start="8413" end="8437" title="CSNET" label="Computer Science Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="8460" end="8483" title="Internet Protocol Suite" label="Internet Protocol Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="8635" end="8670" title="National Science Foundation Network" label="National Science Foundation Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="8699" end="8712" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="8983" end="8987" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="9142" end="9168" title="Internet service providers" label="Internet service providers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="9288" end="9301" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098878" start="9317" end="9335" title="optical networking" label="optical networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881255" start="9498" end="9506" title="MCI Mail" label="MCI Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122074" start="9511" end="9521" title="Compuserve" label="Compuserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="9950" end="9968" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="9973" end="9977" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="10071" end="10086" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q590890" start="10101" end="10113" title="WorldWideWeb" label="WorldWideWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="10125" end="10136" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="10271" end="10298" title="HyperText Transfer Protocol" label="HyperText Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="10315" end="10340" title="HyperText Markup Language" label="HyperText Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q726761" start="10390" end="10401" title="HTML editor" label="HTML editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="10419" end="10425" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="10441" end="10444" title="FTP" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="10468" end="10483" title="server application" label="server software"/>
<link wikidata="Q570945" start="10500" end="10510" title="CERN httpd" label="CERN httpd"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="10523" end="10533" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115373" start="10606" end="10634" title="Commercial Internet eXchange" label="Commercial Internet eXchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715629" start="10714" end="10721" title="CERFnet" label="CERFnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598743" start="10736" end="10765" title="Stanford Federal Credit Union" label="Stanford Federal Credit Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q650241" start="10780" end="10801" title="financial institution" label="financial institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045597" start="10892" end="10910" title="OP Financial Group" label="OP Financial Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277997" start="10919" end="10935" title="cooperative bank" label="cooperative bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536440" start="11276" end="11292" title="Internet traffic" label="Internet traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="11364" end="11378" title="MOS transistor" label="MOS transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="11396" end="11412" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337975" start="11467" end="11484" title="Edholm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Edholm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="11515" end="11529" title="MOS technology" label="MOS technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="11531" end="11536" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104942" start="11561" end="11566" title="Noise (signal processing)" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="11713" end="11730" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="11743" end="11771" title="Voice over Internet Protocol" label="Voice over Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="11782" end="11813" title="Video chat" label="two-way interactive video calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="11847" end="11864" title="discussion forums" label="discussion forums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="11873" end="11898" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q212930" start="11905" end="11920" title="online shopping" label="online shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="12802" end="12818" title="world population" label="world population"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="12922" end="12939" title="telecommunication" label="telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570871" start="13109" end="13123" title="global network" label="global network"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="13308" end="13312" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="13317" end="13321" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="13345" end="13376" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q873636" start="13572" end="13582" title="name space" label="name space"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="13624" end="13675" title="Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers" label="Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="13932" end="13943" title="domain name" label="domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q463080" start="14241" end="14269" title="Regional Internet registry" label="Regional Internet registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q384211" start="14329" end="14363" title="AfriNIC" label="African Network Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="14378" end="14384" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q282503" start="14390" end="14428" title="American Registry for Internet Numbers" label="American Registry for Internet Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="14440" end="14453" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q726801" start="14459" end="14498" title="APNIC" label="Asia–Pacific Network Information Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="14511" end="14515" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="14524" end="14538" title="Pacific region" label="Pacific region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311100" start="14544" end="14600" title="Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry" label="Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="14614" end="14627" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="14636" end="14645" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504968" start="14662" end="14712" title="RIPE NCC" label="Réseaux IP Européens – Network Coordination Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="14728" end="14734" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="14740" end="14751" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="14757" end="14769" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="14872" end="14897" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978888" start="14968" end="15026" title="National Telecommunications and Information Administration" label="National Telecommunications and Information Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="15045" end="15081" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="United States Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q849163" start="15122" end="15135" title="DNS root zone" label="DNS root zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="15197" end="15213" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="15461" end="15474" title="organizations" label="organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="15694" end="15721" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="Internet Architecture Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="15729" end="15764" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="Internet Engineering Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="15773" end="15801" title="Internet Research Task Force" label="Internet Research Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="15814" end="15846" title="Internet Research Steering Group" label="Internet Research Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q689182" start="15905" end="15944" title="World Summit on the Information Society" label="World Summit on the Information Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="15948" end="15953" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354096" start="15970" end="15995" title="Internet Governance Forum" label="Internet Governance Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="16294" end="16300" title="router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="16393" end="16408" title="internetworking" label="internetworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="16637" end="16650" title="heterogeneous" label="heterogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="16745" end="16770" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193193" start="17059" end="17073" title="tier 1 network" label="tier 1 network"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="17177" end="17194" title="fiber-optic cable" label="fiber-optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q772532" start="17212" end="17219" title="peering" label="peering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484317" start="17232" end="17238" title="Tier 2 network" label="Tier 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351533" start="17268" end="17284" title="Internet transit" label="Internet transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662626" start="17474" end="17485" title="multihoming" label="multihoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433061" start="17528" end="17551" title="Internet exchange point" label="Internet exchange point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687864" start="17903" end="17908" title="GEANT" label="GEANT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513648" start="17910" end="17917" title="GLORIAD" label="GLORIAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q873660" start="17919" end="17928" title="Internet2" label="Internet2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746884" start="17948" end="17987" title="national research and education network" label="national research and education network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107679" start="17989" end="17994" title="JANET" label="JANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472399" start="18030" end="18045" title="Internet access" label="Internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="18087" end="18092" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="18117" end="18126" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="18132" end="18145" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="18147" end="18159" title="Optical fiber" label="fiber optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="18177" end="18182" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q877159" start="18184" end="18193" title="Satellite Internet" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="18199" end="18217" title="mobile telephony" label="cellular telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="18235" end="18237" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="18239" end="18241" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q272399" start="18311" end="18324" title="Internet café" label="Internet café"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370241" start="18327" end="18349" title="Internet kiosk" label="Internet access points"/>
<link wikidata="Q900977" start="18535" end="18543" title="payphone" label="payphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q351764" start="18715" end="18729" title="online payment" label="online payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q334765" start="18807" end="18815" title="Wi-Fi hotspot" label="Hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="18933" end="18936" title="Personal Digital Assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="19012" end="19022" title="Grassroots" label="Grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q659541" start="19043" end="19069" title="wireless community network" label="wireless community network"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="19083" end="19088" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19159" end="19167" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="19169" end="19175" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="19177" end="19183" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="19185" end="19192" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="19194" end="19207" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="19209" end="19221" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="19223" end="19230" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="19235" end="19245" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092736" start="19405" end="19413" title="Ricochet (Internet service)" label="Ricochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="19508" end="19518" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="19648" end="19661" title="Google Chrome" label="Google Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35773" start="19663" end="19669" title="Safari (web browser)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="19675" end="19682" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814081" start="19751" end="19760" title="app store" label="app store"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="19905" end="19942" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043805" start="20065" end="20080" title="Mobile Web" label="Mobile Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="20174" end="20194" title="Asia–Pacific" label="Asia and the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="20568" end="20570" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132459" start="20691" end="20720" title="Fragmentation (computing)" label="fragmentation of the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390969" start="20819" end="20830" title="Zero-rating" label="Zero-rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="21250" end="21257" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431486" start="21262" end="21268" title="Orange S.A." label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q263016" start="21419" end="21432" title="Chatham House" label="Chatham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="21667" end="21675" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="21767" end="21779" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="22186" end="22191" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="22193" end="22198" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="22200" end="22207" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="22212" end="22224" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="22232" end="22240" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418780" start="22264" end="22278" title="Wikipedia Zero" label="Wikipedia Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="22412" end="22435" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet protocol suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="22449" end="22455" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22571" end="22577" title="Communication protocol#Layering" label="layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189768" start="22660" end="22677" title="application layer" label="application layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="22835" end="22848" title="client–server model" label="client–server"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="22902" end="22929" title="HyperText Transfer Protocol" label="HyperText Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="22992" end="23017" title="HTML" label="HyperText Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q209372" start="23053" end="23068" title="transport layer" label="transport layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910948" start="23446" end="23460" title="Internet layer" label="Internet layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="23476" end="23493" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="23560" end="23570" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891044" start="23781" end="23791" title="link layer" label="link layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="24132" end="24137" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="24139" end="24147" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="24153" end="24156" title="DSL" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="24388" end="24392" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="24397" end="24401" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="24498" end="24508" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="24762" end="24766" title="DHCP" label="DHCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q849159" start="24871" end="24882" title="fully qualified domain name" label="domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="25007" end="25025" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="25111" end="25138" title="IPv4" label="Internet Protocol version 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="25173" end="25179" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089478" start="25415" end="25438" title="IPv4 address exhaustion" label="IPv4 address exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089478" start="25599" end="25636" title="IPv4 address exhaustion" label="depletion of available IPv4 addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="25658" end="25662" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089" start="25865" end="25880" title="IPv6 deployment" label="IPv6 deployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q463080" start="26010" end="26014" title="Regional Internet registry" label="RIRs"/>
<link wikidata="Q772532" start="26717" end="26734" title="peering agreement" label="peering agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11414" start="26942" end="26952" title="subnetwork" label="subnetwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="27012" end="27022" title="IP network" label="IP network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885225" start="27185" end="27205" title="most-significant bit" label="most-significant bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q829281" start="27489" end="27493" title="Host (network)" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="Q646589" start="27568" end="27598" title="Classless Inter-Domain Routing" label="Classless Inter-Domain Routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="27785" end="27812" title="Internet Protocol version 4" label="Internet Protocol version 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q591605" start="28229" end="28236" title="bitmask" label="bitmask"/>
<link wikidata="Q879126" start="28260" end="28271" title="bitwise AND" label="bitwise AND"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251237" start="28378" end="28398" title="dot-decimal notation" label="dot-decimal notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q290066" start="29299" end="29312" title="routing table" label="routing table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973191" start="29343" end="29360" title="IP forwarding" label="direct IP packets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648707" start="29478" end="29494" title="routing protocol" label="routing protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022120" start="29523" end="29536" title="default route" label="default route"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="29608" end="29631" title="Border Gateway Protocol" label="Border Gateway Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465461" start="29731" end="29746" title="default gateway" label="default gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q173106" start="29754" end="29758" title="Node (networking)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="29879" end="29889" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="30292" end="30323" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="30521" end="30541" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q290378" start="30710" end="30727" title="Internet Standard" label="Internet Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640628" start="30958" end="30983" title="network service" label="applications and services"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="31032" end="31044" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="31046" end="31061" title="electronic mail" label="electronic mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="31063" end="31073" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="31084" end="31107" title="multiplayer online game" label="multiplayer online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="31110" end="31128" title="Internet telephony" label="Internet telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="31130" end="31142" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="31148" end="31163" title="streaming media" label="streaming media"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="31179" end="31186" title="Server (computing)" label="servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q671224" start="31235" end="31246" title="data center" label="data center"/>
<link wikidata="Q72588" start="31304" end="31328" title="content delivery network" label="content delivery network"/>
<link wikidata="Q49848" start="31401" end="31410" title="documents" label="documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="31412" end="31418" title="Computer graphics" label="images"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="31420" end="31430" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102014" start="31493" end="31502" title="hyperlink" label="hyperlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q61694" start="31524" end="31551" title="Uniform Resource Identifier" label="Uniform Resource Identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="31649" end="31660" title="web servers" label="web servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="31728" end="31755" title="HyperText Transfer Protocol" label="HyperText Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193424" start="31814" end="31825" title="Web service" label="Web service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="32097" end="32106" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575" start="32114" end="32131" title="Internet Explorer" label="Internet Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131564503" start="32132" end="32136" title="Microsoft Edge (series of web browsers)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="32138" end="32153" title="Mozilla Firefox" label="Mozilla Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q41242" start="32155" end="32160" title="Opera (web browser)" label="Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="32162" end="32167" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q35773" start="32175" end="32181" title="Safari (web browser)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="32187" end="32200" title="Google Chrome" label="Google Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q494756" start="32354" end="32367" title="computer data" label="computer data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="32397" end="32401" title="Plain text" label="text"/>
<link wikidata="Q677466" start="32403" end="32408" title="web video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="32410" end="32420" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650567" start="32500" end="32520" title="Client-side scripting" label="Client-side software"/>
<link wikidata="Q848991" start="32545" end="32550" title="web game" label="games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="32552" end="32571" title="office applications" label="office applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q180711" start="32611" end="32618" title="keyword (Internet search)" label="keyword"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056040" start="32626" end="32643" title="Internet research" label="Internet research"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="32650" end="32664" title="Web search engine" label="search engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308171" start="32670" end="32676" title="Yahoo! Search" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q182496" start="32678" end="32682" title="Bing (search engine)" label="Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366" start="32687" end="32693" title="Google Search" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="33003" end="33010" title="publish" label="publish"/>
<link wikidata="Q211198" start="33056" end="33064" title="audience" label="audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q240673" start="33192" end="33196" title="cost" label="cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="33597" end="33602" title="employees" label="staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q624902" start="33797" end="33808" title="Online advertising" label="Advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="33852" end="33862" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="33980" end="33989" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q353163" start="34041" end="34052" title="promotion (marketing)" label="promotional"/>
<link wikidata="Q846132" start="34115" end="34138" title="search engine marketing" label="search engine marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399498" start="34184" end="34203" title="display advertising" label="display advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q385354" start="34215" end="34225" title="web banner" label="web banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916781" start="34244" end="34262" title="mobile advertising" label="mobile advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="34343" end="34359" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144899" start="34389" end="34409" title="broadcast television" label="broadcast television"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="34626" end="34630" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q173373" start="34857" end="34875" title="content management" label="content management"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="35358" end="35363" title="Email" label="Email"/>
<link wikidata="Q946144" start="35623" end="35639" title="email attachment" label="email attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q660898" start="35664" end="35669" title="Carbon copy" label="cc-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273217" start="35682" end="35695" title="email address" label="email address"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="35700" end="35718" title="Internet telephony" label="Internet telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="35875" end="35903" title="voice over Internet Protocol" label="voice over Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q938319" start="35951" end="35964" title="walkie-talkie" label="walkie-talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q383978" start="36233" end="36238" title="Cable modem" label="Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="36240" end="36244" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q640394" start="36250" end="36261" title="mobile data" label="mobile data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472399" start="36279" end="36294" title="Internet access" label="Internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="36770" end="36782" title="File sharing" label="File sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="36858" end="36871" title="computer file" label="computer file"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="36977" end="36999" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="File Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q513349" start="37101" end="37112" title="file server" label="file server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938536" start="37218" end="37224" title="Web mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="37242" end="37254" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="37333" end="37347" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="37410" end="37420" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="37702" end="37719" title="digital signature" label="digital signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q185235" start="37727" end="37730" title="MD5" label="MD5"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="38229" end="38244" title="Streaming media" label="Streaming media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109638" start="38973" end="38980" title="webcast" label="webcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="39024" end="39031" title="Podcast" label="Podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="39154" end="39175" title="portable media player" label="portable media player"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576" start="39598" end="39604" title="Webcam" label="Webcam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="39832" end="39844" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="39936" end="39946" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="39951" end="39969" title="video conferencing" label="video conferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="40370" end="40377" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668038" start="40655" end="40680" title="sociology of the Internet" label="sociology of the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36180" start="40724" end="40730" title="writer" label="writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="40741" end="40747" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="40879" end="40884" title="earth" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="41090" end="41096" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="41196" end="41203" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="42165" end="42174" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="42314" end="42357" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet penetration by the number of users"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="42708" end="42721" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q10953859" start="42731" end="42745" title="world language" label="world language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="42808" end="42858" title="ASCII" label="American Standard Code for Information Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="42884" end="42898" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="43205" end="43212" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q152869" start="43363" end="43371" title="mojibake" label="mojibake"/>
<link wikidata="Q167382" start="44444" end="44451" title="Netizen" label="Netizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094107" start="44507" end="44524" title="online participation" label="actively involved"/>
<link wikidata="Q210980" start="44538" end="44556" title="virtual community" label="online communities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44634" end="44645" title="Freedom of speech#The Internet and information society" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44647" end="44656" title="Internaut" label="Internaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426831" start="44730" end="44745" title="digital citizen" label="digital citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140685" start="45089" end="45111" title="mobile Internet device" label="mobile Internet device"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227423" start="45129" end="45137" title="datacard" label="datacard"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="45140" end="45161" title="handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549420" start="45167" end="45182" title="cellular router" label="cellular router"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="45223" end="45231" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q936111" start="45667" end="45675" title="CBeebies" label="CBeebies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273097" start="45728" end="45748" title="Virtual university" label="virtual universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q494817" start="45813" end="45827" title="Google Scholar" label="Google Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="45833" end="45851" title="distance education" label="distance education"/>
<link wikidata="Q753877" start="45863" end="45871" title="homework" label="homework"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="46186" end="46192" title="Education" label="formal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893573" start="46197" end="46215" title="informal education" label="informal education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145523" start="46607" end="46620" title="collaboration" label="collaborative"/>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="46664" end="46686" title="collaborative software" label="collaborative software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076638" start="46846" end="46868" title="free software movement" label="free software movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="46910" end="46915" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="46917" end="46932" title="Mozilla Firefox" label="Mozilla Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q511977" start="46938" end="46952" title="OpenOffice.org" label="OpenOffice.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q10135" start="46972" end="46983" title="LibreOffice" label="LibreOffice"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="47018" end="47021" title="IRC" label="IRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="47036" end="47053" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q173373" start="47411" end="47429" title="Content management" label="Content management"/>
<link wikidata="Q595868" start="47926" end="47943" title="computer literacy" label="computer literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="48095" end="48112" title="computer security" label="computer security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135326" start="48227" end="48238" title="remote work" label="remote work"/>
<link wikidata="Q181487" start="48332" end="48337" title="audit" label="audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071196" start="48753" end="48764" title="leased line" label="leased line"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="48979" end="48994" title="cloud computing" label="cloud computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49150" start="49006" end="49020" title="Remote Desktop Protocol" label="remote desktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="49065" end="49088" title="virtual private network" label="virtual private network"/>
<link wikidata="Q327353" start="49301" end="49321" title="system administrator" label="system administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="49838" end="49842" title="online chat" label="chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q914223" start="49963" end="49970" title="pen pal" label="pen pal"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="50008" end="50016" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q213660" start="50312" end="50320" title="LinkedIn" label="LinkedIn"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="50377" end="50383" title="Flickr" label="Flickr"/>
<link wikidata="Q204255" start="50606" end="50614" title="Viral marketing" label="go viral"/>
<link wikidata="Q83058" start="50717" end="50721" title="Spamming" label="spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q752177" start="50735" end="50747" title="astroturfing" label="astroturfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="51255" end="51266" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51305" end="51312" title="Computer crime#Online harassment" label="threats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353532" start="51318" end="51345" title="online disinhibition effect" label="online disinhibition effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="51488" end="51496" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240539" start="51544" end="51554" title="harassment" label="harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="51773" end="51785" title="public relations" label="brand damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="52217" end="52223" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="52262" end="52282" title="personal information" label="personal information"/>
<link wikidata="Q15901411" start="52313" end="52320" title="doxxing" label="doxxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="52633" end="52641" title="censored" label="censored"/>
<link wikidata="Q208594" start="52654" end="52665" title="screenshots" label="screenshots"/>
<link wikidata="Q494348" start="52983" end="52996" title="cyberbullying" label="cyberbullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147070" start="53001" end="53031" title="Child grooming" label="approaches by sexual predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515741" start="53396" end="53414" title="Content-control software" label="Internet filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388421" start="54081" end="54098" title="social experiment" label="social experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="54108" end="54111" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="MUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252405" start="54117" end="54120" title="MOO" label="MOO"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="54179" end="54185" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="54222" end="54237" title="Internet forums" label="Internet forums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376252" start="54291" end="54311" title="Internet pornography" label="Internet pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550859" start="54316" end="54331" title="online gambling" label="online gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="54601" end="54619" title="multiplayer gaming" label="multiplayer gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="54769" end="54775" title="MMORPG" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="54779" end="54799" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="54807" end="54830" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550859" start="54835" end="54850" title="online gambling" label="online gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412867" start="54976" end="54983" title="GameSpy Arcade" label="GameSpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717370" start="54988" end="54995" title="MPlayer.com" label="MPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980097" start="55627" end="55662" title="I am lonely will anyone speak to me" label="I am lonely will anyone speak to me"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661815" start="55872" end="55896" title="Digital media use and mental health" label="impacts on mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197836" start="56492" end="56509" title="Cybersectarianism" label="Cybersectarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="57484" end="57493" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="57529" end="57542" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579041" start="57658" end="57671" title="Cyberslacking" label="Cyberslacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q831735" start="57851" end="57878" title="Internet addiction disorder" label="Internet addiction disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q137642" start="57938" end="57954" title="Nicholas G. Carr" label="Nicholas G. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256379" start="57992" end="58014" title="Psychological effects of Internet use" label="effects on individuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480151" start="58066" end="58077" title="Interference theory" label="interfering"/>
<link wikidata="Q734253" start="58161" end="58180" title="Electronic business" label="Electronic business"/>
<link wikidata="Q646107" start="58257" end="58268" title="value chain" label="value chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q492886" start="58282" end="58305" title="supply chain management" label="supply chain management"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="58307" end="58316" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="58318" end="58323" title="sales" label="sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q852835" start="58325" end="58333" title="customer" label="customer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="58370" end="58380" title="E-commerce" label="E-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360149" start="58504" end="58534" title="International Data Corporation" label="International Data Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q138461" start="58765" end="58780" title="digital economy" label="digital economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="58904" end="58929" title="electronic commerce" label="Internet-enabled commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="59052" end="59071" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q244752" start="59080" end="59094" title="digital divide" label="digital divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050847" start="59139" end="59152" title="Consolidation (business)" label="consolidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109680" start="59172" end="59183" title="mom-and-pop" label="mom-and-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q726870" start="59185" end="59201" title="brick and mortar" label="brick and mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="59239" end="59256" title="income inequality" label="income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q430276" start="59266" end="59277" title="Andrew Keen" label="Andrew Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997039" start="59449" end="59482" title="Institute for Local Self-Reliance" label="Institute for Local Self-Reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q63327" start="59651" end="59657" title="Airbnb" label="Airbnb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057464" start="59715" end="59731" title="Hilton Worldwide" label="Hilton Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q780442" start="59777" end="59781" title="Uber" label="Uber"/>
<link wikidata="Q791136" start="59878" end="59893" title="Avis Rent a Car" label="Avis Rent a Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543874" start="59898" end="59919" title="The Hertz Corporation" label="The Hertz Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135326" start="59995" end="60006" title="Remote work" label="Remote work"/>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="60039" end="60048" title="groupware" label="groupware"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="60050" end="60074" title="virtual private networks" label="virtual private networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q426394" start="60076" end="60094" title="conference calling" label="conference calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="60096" end="60110" title="videotelephony" label="videotelephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="60468" end="60476" title="intranet" label="intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="60548" end="60552" title="Wiki" label="Wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596608" start="60764" end="60777" title="grant writing" label="grant writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q932522" start="60779" end="60797" title="strategic planning" label="strategic planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="60851" end="60892" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="United States Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q12139145" start="60951" end="60960" title="prior art" label="prior art"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="61017" end="61023" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q328" start="61131" end="61148" title="English Wikipedia" label="English Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337470" start="61404" end="61415" title="Howard Dean" label="Howard Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147114" start="61644" end="61661" title="Internet activism" label="Internet activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="61669" end="61687" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="61709" end="61721" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="61972" end="61983" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Habermasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17945" start="62004" end="62017" title="public sphere" label="public sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="62163" end="62182" title="Internet censorship" label="Internet censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q211017" start="62257" end="62269" title="E-government" label="E-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="62284" end="62312" title="Information and communications technology" label="technological communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="62355" end="62369" title="public service" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="62703" end="62715" title="Social peer-to-peer processes" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296810" start="62843" end="62855" title="DonorsChoose" label="DonorsChoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039485" start="62860" end="62872" title="GlobalGiving" label="GlobalGiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q592614" start="63016" end="63036" title="peer-to-peer lending" label="peer-to-peer lending"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423787" start="63062" end="63066" title="Kiva (organization)" label="Kiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q926217" start="63226" end="63238" title="microfinance" label="microfinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="63850" end="63857" title="Malware" label="Malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="63931" end="63945" title="computer virus" label="computer virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180712" start="63990" end="64003" title="computer worm" label="computer worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406" start="64055" end="64079" title="denial of service attack" label="denial of service attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q926331" start="64082" end="64092" title="ransomware" label="ransomware"/>
<link wikidata="Q317671" start="64094" end="64100" title="botnet" label="botnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="64107" end="64114" title="spyware" label="spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="64202" end="64212" title="cybercrime" label="cybercrime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487" start="64280" end="64287" title="hackers" label="hackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="64294" end="64307" title="cyber warfare" label="cyber warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q677085" start="64440" end="64448" title="NortonLifeLock" label="Symantec"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="64615" end="64625" title="Cybercrime" label="Cybercrime"/>
<link wikidata="Q844861" start="64923" end="64955" title="Electricity infrastructure" label="electricity distribution network"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="65123" end="65127" title="data mining" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="65132" end="65139" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="65201" end="65250" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q54366" start="65447" end="65461" title="Packet capture" label="Packet capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="65501" end="65517" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123000" start="65836" end="65860" title="Packet Capture Appliance" label="Packet Capture Appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="66224" end="66240" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="66327" end="66376" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="66567" end="66585" title="broadband Internet" label="broadband Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="66903" end="66931" title="Information Awareness Office" label="Information Awareness Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="66933" end="66936" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="66938" end="66942" title="GCHQ" label="GCHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="66951" end="66954" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365657" start="67115" end="67136" title="Ministry of Intelligence and National Security of Iran" label="Iranian secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="67244" end="67254" title="Siemens AG" label="Siemens AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="67267" end="67272" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="67331" end="67336" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="67338" end="67342" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148232" start="67344" end="67355" title="Censorship in North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385874" start="67357" end="67371" title="Censorship in China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="67373" end="67385" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="67394" end="67414" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="67984" end="68001" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515741" start="68118" end="68142" title="content-control software" label="content-control software"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="68438" end="68457" title="Bit rate" label="data transfer rates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68499" end="68517" title="Emergence#World Wide Web and the Internet" label="emergent phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536440" start="68600" end="68616" title="Internet traffic" label="Internet traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193193" start="68825" end="68839" title="Tier 1 network" label="Tier 1 network"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096392" start="68953" end="68970" title="Internet blackout" label="Internet blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="69044" end="69074" title="submarine communications cable" label="submarine communications cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610511" start="69140" end="69171" title="2008 submarine cable disruption" label="2008 submarine cable disruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="69497" end="69516" title="Internet censorship" label="Internet censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055895" start="69544" end="69561" title="Internet in Egypt" label="Internet in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="69668" end="69692" title="Egyptian Revolution of 2011" label="anti-government protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q29954" start="69747" end="69764" title="electricity usage" label="electricity usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="69979" end="69992" title="kilowatt hour" label="kilowatt hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="70233" end="70250" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869822" start="70353" end="70363" title="energy use" label="energy use"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="70407" end="70409" title="gigawatt" label="GW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="70576" end="70582" title="laptop" label="laptop"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="70595" end="70606" title="smart phone" label="smart phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332343" start="70678" end="70688" title="cell tower" label="cell tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105111" start="70691" end="70705" title="optical switch" label="optical switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="70709" end="70714" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q914359" start="70732" end="70745" title="cloud storage" label="cloud storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536440" start="70776" end="70792" title="Internet traffic" label="Internet traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21619165" start="70854" end="70871" title="The Shift Project" label="The Shift Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="70944" end="70957" title="carbon dioxide emissions" label="CO2 emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="70988" end="71001" title="data transfer" label="data transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553613" start="71061" end="71083" title="Internet video" label="online video streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q348303" start="71329" end="71341" title="Crowdfunding" label="Crowdfunding"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="71344" end="71357" title="Crowdsourcing" label="Crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="71360" end="71370" title="Cyberspace" label="Cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166273" start="71373" end="71380" title="Darknet" label="Darknet"/>
<link wikidata="Q221989" start="71383" end="71391" title="Deep web" label="Deep web"/>
<link wikidata="Q540" start="71394" end="71402" title="Hyphanet" label="Hyphanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q106742469" start="71405" end="71429" title="Internet industry jargon" label="Internet industry jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732978" start="71432" end="71466" title="Index of Internet-related articles" label="Index of Internet-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153457" start="71469" end="71487" title="Internet metaphors" label="Internet metaphors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553613" start="71490" end="71504" title="Internet video" label="Internet video"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848238" start="71513" end="71522" title="Internets" label="Internets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112764" start="71531" end="71554" title="Outline of the Internet" label="Outline of the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="71724" end="71757" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois at Chicago"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14540" wikidata="Q348768" url="?curid=14540" title="Indo-European (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Indo-European]] is a major language family of Europe, parts of West and Central Asia, and South Asia.

Indo-European may also refer to:
* Proto-Indo-European language, the reconstructed common ancestor of all Indo-European languages
* Proto-Indo-Europeans (or “Indo-Europeans”), a hypothetical prehistoric ethnolinguistic group of Eurasia who spoke Proto-Indo-European
* Indo people (), people of Dutch East Indies and European descent

== See also ==
* Indo-European migrations
* Indo-European studies, an academic field involving linguistics, anthropology, history, archaeology
* Indo-European vocabulary, a table of the most fundamental Proto-Indo-European language words and roots
* Pre-Indo-European (disambiguation)
* Proto-Indo-European religion, the hypothetical religion of the Proto-Indo-Europeans
* Proto-Indo-European society, the hypothetical society of the Proto-Indo-Europeans</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q348768" start="0" end="17" title="Indo-European (disambiguation)" label="[[Indo-European]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q348768" start="105" end="118" title="Indo-European (disambiguation)" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="140" end="168" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="237" end="257" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Proto-Indo-Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116909" start="373" end="384" title="Indo people" label="Indo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q28445743" start="456" end="480" title="Indo-European migrations" label="Indo-European migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413128" start="483" end="504" title="Indo-European studies" label="Indo-European studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862397" start="584" end="608" title="Indo-European vocabulary" label="Indo-European vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q416727" start="689" end="723" title="Pre-Indo-European (disambiguation)" label="Pre-Indo-European (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401124" start="726" end="754" title="Proto-Indo-European religion" label="Proto-Indo-European religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773811" start="812" end="839" title="Proto-Indo-European society" label="Proto-Indo-European society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14541" wikidata="Q33514" url="?curid=14541" title="Indo-Iranian languages">
<text>The Indo-Iranian languages (also known as Indo-Iranic languages or collectively the Aryan languages) constitute the largest branch of the Indo-European language family. They include over 300 languages, spoken by around 1.7 billion speakers worldwide, predominantly in South Asia, West Asia and parts of Central Asia.

Indo-Iranian languages are divided into three major branches: Indo-Aryan, Iranian, and Nuristani languages. The Badeshi language remains unclassified within the Indo-Iranian branch. The largest Indo-Iranian language is the Hindustani language (Hindi-Urdu).

The areas with Indo-Iranian languages stretch from Europe (Romani) and the Caucasus (Ossetian, Tat, Talysh), down to Mesopotamia and eastern Anatolia (Kurdish, Zaza), the Levant and North Africa (Domari), and Iran (Persian), eastward to Xinjiang (Sarikoli) and Assam (Assamese), and south to Sri Lanka (Sinhala) and the Maldives (Maldivian), with branches stretching as far out as Oceania and the Caribbean for Fiji Hindi and Caribbean Hindustani respectively. Furthermore, there are large diaspora communities of Indo-Iranian speakers in Northwestern Europe, North America, Oceania, East Africa, South Africa, the Caribbean, and the Persian Gulf.

==Etymology==
The term &quot;Indo-Iranian languages&quot; refers to the spectrum of Indo-European languages spoken in the Southern Asian region of Eurasia, spanning from the Indian subcontinent (where the Indo-Aryan branch is spoken, also called Indic) up to the Iranian Plateau (where the Iranian branch is spoken, also called Iranic). It was later discovered that the Nuristani languages are also spoken in the isolated region of Nuristan, roughly situated in the intersection of these regions.

This branch is also known as &quot;Aryan languages&quot;, referring to the languages spoken by Aryan peoples, where the term &quot;Aryan&quot; is considered as the ethnocultural self-designation of ancient Indo-Iranians. Today, the term &quot;Aryan&quot; is generally avoided, owing to the perceived negative connotation associated with Aryanism.

==Classification==
Below is an abridged classification scheme of the Indo-Iranian languages. The Badeshi language remains unclassified within the Indo-Iranian branch.
*Proto-Indo-European (reconstructed)
**Proto-Indo-Iranian (reconstructed)
***Proto-Iranian (reconstructed)
****Iranian languages
*****Eastern
*****Western
***Proto-Nuristani (reconstructed)
**** Nuristani languages
***Proto-Indo-Aryan (reconstructed)
****Indo-Aryan languages
*****Dardic
*****Northwestern
*****Northern
*****Western
*****Eastern
*****Southern
***** Chinali-Lahul (unclassified)
***Badeshi (unclassified)

== Origin ==
All Indo-Iranian languages can be traced back to a single hypothetical ancestral language: Proto-Indo-Iranian, which is the reconstructed proto-language to represent the latest point at which all modern-day Indo-Iranian languages were still unified. Proto-Indo-Iranian, in turn, is classified as belonging to the Indo-European language family, ultimately tracing back to the Proto-Indo-European language. 

Historically, the Proto-Indo-Iranian speakers are thought to have originally referred to themselves using the reconstructed Proto-Indo-Iranian root , from which it derives terms like &quot;Aryavarta&quot; (, ), &quot;Airyanem Vaejah&quot; (, ), &quot;Alania&quot; (), &quot;Iran&quot; (), and &quot;Aryan&quot;. 

The Proto-Indo-Iranian-speakers are generally associated with the Sintashta culture, which is thought to represent an eastward migration of peoples from the Corded Ware culture, which, in turn, is believed to represent an earlier westward migration of Yamnaya-related people from the Pontic–Caspian steppe zone into the territory of late Neolithic European cultures, possibly bringing with them the Proto-Indo-European language. However, the exact genetic relationship between the Yamnaya culture, Corded Ware culture and Sinthasta culture remains unclear. 

The earliest known chariots have been found in Sintashta burials, and the culture is considered a strong candidate for the origin of the technology, which spread throughout the Old World and played an important role in ancient warfare. There is almost a general consensus among scholars that the Andronovo culture, the successor of Sintasha culture, was an Indo-Iranian culture. Currently, only two sub-cultures are considered as part of Andronovo culture: Alakul and Fëdorovo cultures. The Andronovo culture is considered as an &quot;Indo-Iranic dialect continuum&quot;, with a later split between Iranian and Indo-Aryan languages. However, according to Hiebert, an expansion of the Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC) into Iran and the margin of the Indus Valley is &quot;the best candidate for an archaeological correlate of the introduction of Indo-Iranian speakers to Iran and South Asia&quot;, despite the absence of the characteristic timber graves of the steppe in the Near East, or south of the region between Kopet Dag and Pamir-Karakorum. J. P. Mallory acknowledges the difficulties of making a case for expansions from Andronovo to northern India, and that attempts to link the Indo-Aryans to such sites as the Beshkent and Vakhsh cultures &quot;only gets the Indo-Iranian to Central Asia, but not as far as the seats of the Medes, Persians or Indo-Aryans&quot;. He has developed the &quot;Kulturkugel&quot; () model that has the Indo-Iranians taking over cultural traits of BMAC, but preserving their language and religion while moving into Iran and India.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Kümmel, Martin. &quot;Substrata of Indo-Iranic and related questions.&quot; Loanwords and substrata: Proceedings of the Colloquium held in Limoges (5th–7th June, 2018). 2020.

==External links==
* Swadesh lists of Indo-Iranian basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary&#x27;s Swadesh-list appendix)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33514" start="4" end="26" title="Indo-Iranian languages" label="Indo-Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33514" start="42" end="63" title="Indo-Iranian languages" label="Indo-Iranic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33514" start="84" end="99" title="Indo-Iranian languages" label="Aryan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="138" end="151" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="268" end="278" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="280" end="289" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="303" end="315" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="380" end="390" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="392" end="399" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q161804" start="405" end="424" title="Nuristani languages" label="Nuristani languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33028" start="430" end="446" title="Badeshi language" label="Badeshi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="541" end="560" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindustani language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="562" end="567" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="568" end="572" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="627" end="633" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="635" end="641" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="651" end="659" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33968" start="661" end="669" title="Ossetian language" label="Ossetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56489" start="671" end="674" title="Tat language (Caucasus)" label="Tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34318" start="676" end="682" title="Talysh language" label="Talysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="693" end="704" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="717" end="725" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="727" end="734" title="Kurdish languages" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10199" start="736" end="740" title="Zaza language" label="Zaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="747" end="753" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="758" end="770" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35394" start="772" end="778" title="Domari language" label="Domari"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="785" end="789" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="791" end="798" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="813" end="821" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q33873" start="823" end="831" title="Sarikoli language" label="Sarikoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="837" end="842" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29401" start="844" end="852" title="Assamese language" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="868" end="877" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="879" end="886" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="896" end="904" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q32656" start="906" end="915" title="Maldivian language" label="Maldivian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46728" start="987" end="997" title="Fiji Hindi" label="Fiji Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843468" start="1002" end="1022" title="Caribbean Hindustani" label="Caribbean Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414323" start="1115" end="1134" title="Northwestern Europe" label="Northwestern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1136" end="1149" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="1151" end="1158" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="1160" end="1171" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1173" end="1185" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1191" end="1200" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="1210" end="1222" title="Persian Gulf Region" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261683" start="1347" end="1361" title="Southern Asian" label="Southern Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="1372" end="1379" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="1399" end="1418" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q237660" start="1488" end="1503" title="Iranian Plateau" label="Iranian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q161804" start="1595" end="1614" title="Nuristani languages" label="Nuristani languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="1657" end="1665" title="Nuristan" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="1818" end="1823" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453813" start="1929" end="1942" title="Indo-Iranians" label="Indo-Iranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q85743247" start="2060" end="2068" title="Aryanism" label="Aryanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33028" start="2168" end="2184" title="Badeshi language" label="Badeshi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2239" end="2258" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q966439" start="2277" end="2295" title="Proto-Indo-Iranian language" label="Proto-Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167865" start="2315" end="2328" title="Proto-Iranian language" label="Proto-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="2349" end="2366" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q391015" start="2372" end="2379" title="Eastern Iranian languages" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q129850" start="2385" end="2392" title="Western Iranian languages" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q116773248" start="2396" end="2411" title="Proto-Nuristani language" label="Proto-Nuristani"/>
<link wikidata="Q161804" start="2433" end="2452" title="Nuristani languages" label="Nuristani languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808344" start="2456" end="2472" title="Proto-Indo-Aryan language" label="Proto-Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="2493" end="2513" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q161101" start="2519" end="2525" title="Dardic languages" label="Dardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="2531" end="2543" title="Northwestern Indo-Aryan languages" label="Northwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q946077" start="2549" end="2557" title="Northern Indo-Aryan languages" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="2563" end="2570" title="Western Indo-Aryan languages" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q12593391" start="2576" end="2583" title="Eastern Indo-Aryan languages" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="2589" end="2597" title="Southern Indo-Aryan languages" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867918" start="2604" end="2617" title="Chinali–Lahul languages" label="Chinali-Lahul"/>
<link wikidata="Q33028" start="2636" end="2643" title="Badeshi language" label="Badeshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q966439" start="2764" end="2782" title="Proto-Indo-Iranian language" label="Proto-Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210319" start="2797" end="2810" title="Linguistic reconstruction" label="reconstructed"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="2811" end="2825" title="proto-language" label="proto-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q966439" start="2923" end="2941" title="Proto-Indo-Iranian language" label="Proto-Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="2986" end="2999" title="Indo-European language family" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="3048" end="3067" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q966439" start="3204" end="3222" title="Proto-Indo-Iranian language" label="Proto-Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428240" start="3263" end="3284" title="Āryāvarta" label="&amp;quot;Aryavarta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q409438" start="3297" end="3312" title="Airyanem Vaejah" label="Airyanem Vaejah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771706" start="3331" end="3337" title="Alania" label="Alania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452112" start="3354" end="3358" title="Iran (word)" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="3379" end="3384" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q966439" start="3398" end="3416" title="Proto-Indo-Iranian language" label="Proto-Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q656393" start="3460" end="3477" title="Sintashta culture" label="Sintashta culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q933996" start="3551" end="3570" title="Corded Ware culture" label="Corded Ware culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q599529" start="3678" end="3699" title="Pontic–Caspian steppe" label="Pontic–Caspian steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275904" start="3732" end="3750" title="Neolithic Europe" label="Neolithic European"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="3793" end="3821" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="3972" end="3980" title="Chariot" label="chariots"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="4130" end="4139" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454921" start="4172" end="4187" title="ancient warfare" label="ancient warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q459376" start="4249" end="4266" title="Andronovo culture" label="Andronovo culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054850" start="4637" end="4676" title="Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex" label="Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q328072" start="4983" end="4992" title="Kopet Dag" label="Kopet Dag"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="4997" end="5002" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q62677" start="5003" end="5012" title="Karakorum" label="Karakorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387544" start="5014" end="5027" title="J. P. Mallory" label="J. P. Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453813" start="5236" end="5248" title="Indo-Iranians" label="Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="5301" end="5306" title="Medes" label="Medes"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="5308" end="5316" title="Persians" label="Persians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14543" wikidata="Q268592" url="?curid=14543" title="Industry (economics)">
<text>In macroeconomics, an industry is a branch of an economy that produces a closely related set of raw materials, goods, or services. For example, one might refer to the wood industry or to the insurance industry.

When evaluating a single group or company, its dominant source of revenue is typically used by industry classifications to classify it within a specific industry. For example the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) – used directly or through derived classifications for the official statistics of most countries worldwide – classifies &quot;statistical units&quot; by the &quot;economic activity in which they mainly engage&quot;. Industry is then defined as &quot;set of statistical units that are classified into the same ISIC category&quot;. However, a single business need not belong just to one industry, such as when a large business (often referred to as a conglomerate) diversifies across separate industries.

Other industry classification systems include the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), which was developed through partnerships with North American countries such as the United States, Canada, and Mexico, in order to standardize the comparison of business activities in North America. There is also the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS), which is used to assign companies to specific economic sectors and industry groups. 

There are many industry classifications in the modern economy, which can be grouped into larger categories called economic sectors. Sectors are broader than industry classifications. For example, the retail trade sector contains industries such as clothing stores, shoe stores, and health and personal care stores. Companies are not limited to one sector or industry. They can reside in multiple sectors and industries.

Industries, though associated with specific products, processes, and consumer markets, can evolve over time. One distinct industry (for example, barrelmaking) may become limited to a tiny niche market and get mostly re-classified into another industry using new techniques. At the same time, entirely new industries may branch off from older ones once a significant market becomes apparent (as an example, the semiconductor industry has become distinguished from the wider electronics industry).

Industry classification is valuable for economic analysis because it leads to largely distinct categories with simple relationships. Through these classifications, economists are able to compare companies within the same industry to evaluate the attractiveness of that industry. Companies within the same industry can also have similar stock price movements due to their similarity and macroeconomic factors that affect all members of an industry. However, more complex cases, such as otherwise different processes yielding similar products, require an element of standardization and prevent any one schema from fitting all possible uses.

==See also==
* Outline of industry
* List of countries by GDP sector composition

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="3" end="17" title="macroeconomics" label="macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="22" end="30" title="Industry (economics)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="49" end="56" title="economy" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="62" end="70" title="Production (economics)" label="produces"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="96" end="108" title="raw material" label="raw material"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877" start="111" end="116" title="Good (economics)" label="goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="121" end="129" title="Service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q995609" start="167" end="180" title="wood industry" label="wood industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="191" end="209" title="insurance industry" label="insurance industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="246" end="253" title="company" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976602" start="307" end="330" title="industry classification" label="industry classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666934" start="391" end="439" title="International Standard Industrial Classification" label="International Standard Industrial Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079603" start="506" end="525" title="official statistics" label="official statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="795" end="803" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="896" end="908" title="conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711935" start="910" end="921" title="Diversification (marketing strategy)" label="diversifies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509282" start="1001" end="1046" title="North American Industry Classification System" label="North American Industry Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628939" start="1272" end="1311" title="Global Industry Classification Standard" label="Global Industry Classification Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976602" start="1421" end="1444" title="industry classification" label="industry classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958441" start="1520" end="1535" title="economic sector" label="economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="1606" end="1612" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="1871" end="1878" title="product (business)" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="1896" end="1911" title="consumer market" label="consumer market"/>
<link wikidata="Q38883" start="1972" end="1984" title="cooper (profession)" label="barrelmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758705" start="2015" end="2027" title="niche market" label="niche market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986369" start="2237" end="2259" title="semiconductor industry" label="semiconductor industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="2300" end="2320" title="electronics industry" label="electronics industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020013" start="2660" end="2671" title="stock price" label="stock price"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="2888" end="2903" title="standardization" label="standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000278" start="2979" end="2998" title="Outline of industry" label="Outline of industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699707" start="3001" end="3044" title="List of countries by GDP sector composition" label="List of countries by GDP sector composition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14544" wikidata="Q175626" url="?curid=14544" title="Indriidae">
<text>The Indriidae (sometimes incorrectly spelled Indridae) are a family of strepsirrhine primates. They are medium- to large-sized lemurs, with only four teeth in the toothcomb instead of the usual six. Indriids, like all lemurs, live exclusively on the island of Madagascar.

==Classification==
The 19 living species in the family are divided into three genera.

Family Indriidae
*Genus &quot;Indri&quot;
**Indri, &quot;Indri indri&quot;
*Genus &quot;Avahi&quot;, woolly lemurs
**Bemaraha woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi cleesei&quot;
**Eastern woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi laniger&quot;
**Moore&#x27;s woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi mooreorum&quot;
**Western woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi occidentalis&quot;
**Sambirano woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi unicolor&quot;
**Peyrieras&#x27;s woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi peyrierasi&quot;
**Southern woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi meridionalis&quot;
**Ramanantsoavana&#x27;s woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi ramanantsoavani&quot;
**Betsileo woolly lemur, &quot;Avahi betsileo&quot;
*Genus &quot;Propithecus&quot;, sifakas
**&quot;Propithecus diadema&quot; group
***Diademed sifaka, &quot;Propithecus diadema&quot;
***Silky sifaka, &quot;Propithecus candidus&quot;
***Milne-Edwards&#x27;s sifaka, &quot;Propithecus edwardsi&quot;
***Perrier&#x27;s sifaka, &quot;Propithecus perrieri&quot;
***Golden-crowned sifaka, &quot;Propithecus tattersalli&quot;
**&quot;Propithecus verreauxi&quot; group
***Verreaux&#x27;s sifaka, &quot;Propithecus verreauxi&quot;
***Coquerel&#x27;s sifaka, &quot;Propithecus coquereli&quot;
***Decken&#x27;s sifaka, &quot;Propithecus deckenii&quot;
***Crowned sifaka, &quot;Propithecus coronatus&quot;

==Characteristics==
The 19 extant Indriidae species vary considerably in size. Not counting the length of their tails, the avahis are only in length, while the indri is the largest extant strepsirrhine. The tail of the indri is only a stub, while avahi and the sifaka tails are as long as their bodies. Their fur is long and mostly from whitish over reddish up to grey. Their black faces, however, are always bald. The hind legs are longer than their fore limbs, their hands are long and thin, and their thumbs cannot be opposed to the other fingers correctly.

All species are arboreal, though they do come to the ground occasionally. When on the ground, they stand upright and move with short hops forward, with their arms held high. In the trees, though, they can make extraordinary leaps and are extremely agile, able to change direction from tree to tree. Like most leaf eaters, they adjust for the low nutrient content of their food by long rests. Often, they can be seen lying stretched on trees sunning themselves. Indriidae live together in family federations up to 15 animals, communicating with roars and facial expressions.

Indriidae are herbivores, eating mostly leaves, fruits, and flowers. Like some other herbivores, they have a large cecum, containing bacteria that ferment cellulose, allowing for more efficient digestion of plant matter. They have fewer premolar teeth than other lemurs, with the dental formula of: 

Females and males usually mate monogamously for many years. Mostly at the end of the dry season, their four- to five-month gestation ends with the birth of a single offspring, which lives in the family for a while after its weaning (at the age of five to six months).

==See also==
* Holocene extinction event

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q175626" start="4" end="13" title="Indriidae" label="Indriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q175626" start="45" end="53" title="Indriidae" label="Indridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="71" end="84" title="strepsirrhine" label="strepsirrhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="85" end="92" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192405" start="127" end="132" title="lemur" label="lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q175626" start="199" end="207" title="Indriidae" label="Indriids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="260" end="270" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="351" end="357" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q203868" start="390" end="395" title="Indri" label="Indri"/>
<link wikidata="Q203868" start="404" end="409" title="Indri" label="Indri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064408" start="448" end="453" title="Avahi (genus)" label="Avahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064408" start="461" end="474" title="Woolly lemur" label="woolly lemurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099688" start="477" end="498" title="Bemaraha woolly lemur" label="Bemaraha woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q307262" start="528" end="548" title="Eastern woolly lemur" label="Eastern woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206238" start="578" end="603" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s woolly lemur" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194866" start="635" end="655" title="Western woolly lemur" label="Western woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365845" start="690" end="712" title="Sambirano woolly lemur" label="Sambirano woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210782" start="743" end="772" title="Peyrieras&amp;#x27;s woolly lemur" label="Peyrieras&amp;#x27;s woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350349" start="805" end="826" title="Southern woolly lemur" label="Southern woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210789" start="861" end="896" title="Ramanantsoavana&amp;#x27;s woolly lemur" label="Ramanantsoavana&amp;#x27;s woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q832240" start="934" end="955" title="Betsileo woolly lemur" label="Betsileo woolly lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q673365" start="997" end="1008" title="Propithecus" label="Propithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q673365" start="1016" end="1023" title="Sifaka" label="sifakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q677608" start="1067" end="1082" title="Diademed sifaka" label="Diademed sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q763853" start="1119" end="1131" title="Silky sifaka" label="Silky sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202844" start="1169" end="1196" title="Milne-Edwards&amp;#x27;s sifaka" label="Milne-Edwards&amp;#x27;s sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350394" start="1234" end="1255" title="Perrier&amp;#x27;s sifaka" label="Perrier&amp;#x27;s sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q775574" start="1293" end="1314" title="Golden-crowned sifaka" label="Golden-crowned sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q913789" start="1397" end="1419" title="Verreaux&amp;#x27;s sifaka" label="Verreaux&amp;#x27;s sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131678" start="1458" end="1480" title="Coquerel&amp;#x27;s sifaka" label="Coquerel&amp;#x27;s sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184997" start="1519" end="1539" title="Decken&amp;#x27;s sifaka" label="Decken&amp;#x27;s sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q179384" start="1577" end="1591" title="Crowned sifaka" label="Crowned sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064408" start="1751" end="1757" title="woolly lemur" label="avahis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203868" start="1788" end="1793" title="indri" label="indri"/>
<link wikidata="Q673365" start="1889" end="1895" title="sifaka" label="sifaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="2206" end="2214" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="2779" end="2788" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q185317" start="2880" end="2885" title="cecum" label="cecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="2898" end="2906" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="2959" end="2968" title="digestion" label="digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q839483" start="3002" end="3010" title="premolar" label="premolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="3045" end="3059" title="dentition" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="3350" end="3375" title="Holocene extinction event" label="Holocene extinction event"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14545" wikidata="Q393018" url="?curid=14545" title="I, Robot">
<text>I, Robot is a fixup collection of science fiction short stories by American writer Isaac Asimov. The stories originally appeared in the American magazines &quot;Super Science Stories&quot; and &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; between 1940 and 1950 and were then compiled into a single publication by Gnome Press in 1950, in an initial edition of 5,000 copies.

==Overview==
The stories are woven together by a framing narrative in which the fictional Dr. Susan Calvin tells each story to a reporter (who serves as the narrator) in the 21st century. Although the stories can be read separately, they share a theme of the interaction of humans, robots, and morality, and when combined they tell a larger story of Asimov&#x27;s fictional history of robotics.

Several of the stories feature the character of Dr. Calvin, chief robopsychologist at U.S. Robots and Mechanical Men, Inc., the major manufacturer of robots. Upon their publication in this collection, Asimov wrote a framing sequence presenting the stories as Calvin&#x27;s reminiscences during an interview with her about her life&#x27;s work, chiefly concerned with aberrant behaviour of robots and the use of &quot;robopsychology&quot; to sort out what is happening in their positronic brain. The book also contains the short story in which Asimov&#x27;s Three Laws of Robotics first appear, which had large influence on later science fiction and had impact on thought on ethics of artificial intelligence as well. Other characters that appear in these short stories are Powell and Donovan, a field-testing team which locates flaws in USRMM&#x27;s prototype models.

The collection shares a title with the then recent short story &quot;I, Robot&quot; (1939) by Eando Binder (pseudonym of Earl and Otto Binder), which greatly influenced Asimov. Asimov had wanted to call his collection &quot;Mind and Iron&quot; and objected when the publisher made the title the same as Binder&#x27;s. In his introduction to the story in &quot;Isaac Asimov Presents the Great SF Stories&quot; (1979), Asimov wrote:

==Contents==
* &quot;Robbie&quot; (1940, revised 1950)
* &quot;Runaround&quot; (1942), (novelette)
* &quot;Reason&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Catch That Rabbit&quot; (1944)
* &quot;Liar!&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Little Lost Robot&quot; (1947) (novelette)
* &quot;Escape!&quot; (1945)
* &quot;Evidence&quot; (1946) (novelette)
* &quot;The Evitable Conflict&quot; (1950) (novelette)

==Reception==
&quot;The New York Times&quot; described &quot;I, Robot&quot; as &quot;an exciting science thriller [which] could be fun for those whose nerves are not already made raw by the potentialities of the atomic age&quot;.

Describing it as &quot;continuously fascinating&quot;, Groff Conklin &quot;unreservedly recommended&quot; the book.

P. Schuyler Miller recommended the collection: &quot;For puzzle situations, for humor, for warm character, [and] for most of the values of plain good writing.&quot;

==Awards==
==Adaptations==
===Television===
At least three of the short stories from &quot;I, Robot&quot; have been adapted for television. The first was a 1962 episode of &quot;Out of this World&quot; hosted by Boris Karloff called &quot;Little Lost Robot&quot; with Maxine Audley as Susan Calvin. Two short stories from the collection were made into episodes of the British series &quot;Out of the Unknown&quot;. These are &quot;The Prophet&quot; (1967), based on &quot;Reason&quot;; and &quot;Liar!&quot; (1969). Both episodes were wiped by the BBC and are no longer thought to exist, although video clips, audio extracts and still photographs have survived. Repurposed robot costumes from the former appeared in the 1968 &quot;Doctor Who&quot; serial &quot;The Mind Robber&quot;. The 12th episode of the USSR science fiction TV series &quot;This Fantastic World&quot;, filmed in 1987 and entitled &quot;Don&#x27;t Joke with Robots&quot;, was based on works by Aleksandr Belyaev and Fredrik Kilander as well as Asimov&#x27;s &quot;Liar!&quot; story.

Both the original and revival series of &quot;The Outer Limits&quot; include episodes named &quot;I, Robot&quot; but these are adaptations of an unrelated work by Earl and Otto Binder under their joint pseudonym &quot;Eando Binder&quot;. The Binders&#x27; story introduced a recurring character, the robot named Adam Link.

In August 2023, David S. Goyer revealed that he had gotten permission from FOX head Lachlan Murdoch, a self-professed fan of Apple TV+&#x27;s &quot;Foundation&quot;, to adapt concepts from &quot;I, Robot&quot; to the series&#x27; 2023 second season, in &quot;tying [Demerzel/Daneel] into the &quot;I, Robot&quot; laws [and] doing a spin-off mini-series that specifically delves into our version of &quot;The Robot Wars&quot;.

===Films===
====Harlan Ellison&#x27;s screenplay (1977–1978)====
During the late 1970s, Warner Bros. acquired the option to make a film based on the book, but no screenplay was ever accepted. The most notable attempt was one by Harlan Ellison, who collaborated with Asimov himself to create a version which captured the spirit of the original. Asimov is quoted as saying that this screenplay would lead to &quot;the first really adult, complex, worthwhile science fiction movie ever made.&quot; Ellison worked on the project from December 1977 to December 1978. Asimov himself advised Ellison as to the scientific validity of some elements of the script.

Ellison&#x27;s script, taking inspiration from &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, began with reporter Robert Bratenahl tracking down information about Susan Calvin&#x27;s alleged former lover Stephen Byerly. This provided for a framing sequence to adaptations of Asimov&#x27;s stories. These differ from the originals in that they more strongly center around Calvin as a character. Ellison placed Calvin into stories in which she had not appeared and amplified her role in ones in which she did.

Although well-regarded by critics, the screenplay is generally considered to have been unfilmable for practical reasons, given the technology and average film budgets of the time. Asimov also believed that the film may have been scrapped owing to a conflict between Ellison and the producers: when the producers suggested changes in the script, instead of being diplomatic as advised by Asimov, Ellison &quot;reacted violently&quot; and offended them.

The script was serialized in &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction&quot; magazine in late 1987, and appeared in book form with illustrations by Mark Zug under the title &quot;I, Robot: The Illustrated Screenplay&quot;, in 1994 (reprinted 2004, ). Both Ellison and Asimov received credits.

====2004 film====

The film &quot;I, Robot&quot;, starring Will Smith, was released by Twentieth Century Fox on July 16, 2004 in the United States. Its plot uses elements of &quot;Little Lost Robot&quot;, a few of Asimov&#x27;s character names and the &quot;Three Laws&quot;. The plot of the movie is original; the screenplay &quot;Hardwired&quot; by Jeff Vintar is not based on Asimov&#x27;s stories. It has been compared to Asimov&#x27;s &quot;The Caves of Steel&quot;, which revolves around the murder of a roboticist. Unlike the works by Asimov, the movie featured hordes of killer robots.

===Radio===
BBC Radio 4 aired an audio drama adaptation of five of the &quot;I, Robot&quot; stories on their 15 Minute Drama in 2017, dramatized by Richard Kurti and starring Hermione Norris.
# &quot;Robbie&quot;
# &quot;Reason&quot;
# &quot;Little Lost Robot&quot;
# &quot;Liar&quot;
# &quot;The Evitable Conflict&quot;
These also aired in a single program on BBC Radio 4 Extra as &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s &#x27;I, Robot&#x27;: Omnibus&quot;.

==Prequels==
The Asimov estate asked Mickey Zucker Reichert (best known for the Norse fantasy &quot;Renshai&quot; series) to write three prequels for &quot;I, Robot&quot;, since she was a science fiction writer with a medical degree who had first met Asimov when she was 23, although she did not know him well. She was the first female writer to be authorized to write stories based on Asimov&#x27;s novels.

The follow-ups to Asimov&#x27;s &quot;Foundation&quot; series had been written by Gregory Benford, Greg Bear, and David Brin.

Berkley Books ordered the &quot;I, Robot&quot; prequels, which included:
* &quot;I, Robot: To Protect&quot; (2011)
* &quot;I, Robot: To Obey&quot; (2013)
* &quot;I, Robot: To Preserve&quot; (2016)

==Popular culture references==
In 2004, &quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot; said that &quot;I, Robot&quot;&#x27;s Three Laws &quot;revolutionized the science fiction genre and made robots far more interesting than they ever had been before.&quot; &quot;I, Robot&quot; has influenced many aspects of modern popular culture, particularly with respect to science fiction and technology. One example of this is in the technology industry. The name of the real-life modem manufacturer named U.S. Robotics was directly inspired by &quot;I, Robot&quot;. The name is taken from the name of a robot manufacturer (&quot;United States Robots and Mechanical Men&quot;) that appears throughout Asimov&#x27;s robot short stories.

Many works in the field of science fiction have also paid homage to Asimov&#x27;s collection.

An episode of the original &quot;Star Trek&quot; series, &quot;I, Mudd&quot; (1967), which depicts a planet of androids in need of humans, references &quot;I, Robot&quot;. Another reference appears in the title of a &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; episode, &quot;I, Borg&quot; (1992), in which Geordi La Forge befriends a lost member of the Borg collective and teaches it a sense of individuality and free will.

A &quot;Doctor Who&quot; story, &quot;The Robots of Death&quot; (1977), references &quot;I, Robot&quot; with the &quot;First Principle&quot;, stating: &quot;It is forbidden for robots to harm humans.&quot;

In the film &quot;Aliens&quot; (1986), the synthetic person Bishop paraphrases Asimov&#x27;s First Law in the line: &quot;It is impossible for me to harm, or by omission of action allow to be harmed, a human being.&quot;

An episode of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; entitled &quot;I D&#x27;oh Bot&quot; (2004) has Professor Frink build a robot named &quot;Smashius Clay&quot; (also named &quot;Killhammad Aieee&quot;) that follows all three of Asimov&#x27;s laws of robotics.

The animated science fiction/comedy &quot;Futurama&quot; makes several references to &quot;I, Robot&quot;. The title of the episode &quot;I, Roommate&quot; (1999) is a spoof on &quot;I, Robot&quot; although the plot of the episode has little to do with the original stories. Additionally, the episode &quot;The Cyber House Rules&quot; included an optician named &quot;Eye Robot&quot; and the episode &quot;Anthology of Interest II&quot; included a segment called &quot;I, Meatbag.&quot; Also in &quot;Bender&#x27;s Game&quot; (2008) the psychiatrist is shown a logical fallacy and explodes when the assistant shouts &quot;Liar!&quot; a la &quot;Liar!&quot;. Leela once told Bender to &quot;cover his ears&quot; so that he would not hear the robot-destroying paradox which she used to destroy Robot Santa (he punishes the bad, he kills people, killing is bad, therefore he must punish himself), causing a total breakdown; additionally, Bender has stated that he is Three Laws Safe.

The positronic brain, which Asimov named his robots&#x27; central processors, is what powers Data from &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;, as well as other Soong type androids. Positronic brains have been referenced in a number of other television shows including &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, &quot;Once Upon a Time... Space&quot;, &quot;Perry Rhodan&quot;, &quot;The Number of the Beast&quot;, and others.

Author Cory Doctorow has written a story called &quot;I, Robot&quot; as homage to and critique of Asimov, as well as &quot;I, Row-Boat&quot;, both released in the 2007 short story collection &quot;&quot;. He has also said, &quot;If I return to this theme, it will be with a story about uplifted cheese sandwiches, called &#x27;I, Rarebit.&#x27;&quot;

Other cultural references to the book are less directly related to science fiction and technology. The album &quot;I Robot&quot; (1977), by The Alan Parsons Project, was inspired by Asimov&#x27;s &quot;I, Robot&quot;. In its original conception, the album was to follow the themes and concepts presented in the short story collection. The Alan Parsons Project were not able to obtain the rights in spite of Asimov&#x27;s enthusiasm; he had already assigned the rights elsewhere. Thus, the album&#x27;s concept was altered slightly although the name was kept (minus comma to avoid copyright infringement). An album, &quot;I, Human&quot; (2009), by Singaporean band Deus Ex Machina, draws heavily upon Asimov&#x27;s principles on robotics and applies it to the concept of cloning.

The Indian science fiction film &quot;Endhiran&quot; (2010) refers to Asimov&#x27;s three laws for artificial intelligence for the fictional character &quot;Chitti: The Robot&quot;. When a scientist takes in the robot for evaluation, the panel inquires whether the robot was built using the Three Laws of Robotics.

The theme for Burning Man 2018 was &quot;I, Robot&quot;.

==See also==
* &quot;I, Robot&quot; (film)

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5456296" start="14" end="19" title="fixup" label="fixup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279564" start="20" end="30" title="short story collection" label="collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="34" end="49" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="83" end="95" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642742" start="161" end="182" title="Super Science Stories" label="Super Science Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="199" end="225" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574338" start="306" end="317" title="Gnome Press" label="Gnome Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="416" end="433" title="framing narrative" label="framing narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073739" start="461" end="473" title="Susan Calvin" label="Susan Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="649" end="654" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="661" end="669" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="752" end="760" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353298" start="829" end="845" title="robopsychology" label="robopsychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q913482" start="849" end="879" title="U.S. Robots and Mechanical Men" label="U.S. Robots and Mechanical Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="979" end="995" title="framing sequence" label="framing sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353298" start="1180" end="1194" title="robopsychology" label="robopsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488408" start="1240" end="1256" title="positronic brain" label="positronic brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758" start="1320" end="1342" title="Three Laws of Robotics" label="Three Laws of Robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727779" start="1437" end="1470" title="ethics of artificial intelligence" label="ethics of artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q432305" start="1536" end="1554" title="Powell and Donovan" label="Powell and Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801041" start="1701" end="1709" title="I, Robot (short story)" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q638055" start="1726" end="1738" title="Eando Binder" label="Eando Binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q350153" start="1762" end="1773" title="Otto Binder" label="Otto Binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q372968" start="2085" end="2091" title="Robbie (short story)" label="Robbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074155" start="2127" end="2136" title="Runaround (story)" label="Runaround"/>
<link wikidata="Q737630" start="2171" end="2177" title="Reason (short story)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q601919" start="2199" end="2216" title="Catch That Rabbit" label="Catch That Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q928354" start="2238" end="2243" title="Liar! (short story)" label="Liar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q785202" start="2265" end="2282" title="Little Lost Robot" label="Little Lost Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q464683" start="2316" end="2323" title="Escape!" label="Escape!"/>
<link wikidata="Q778683" start="2345" end="2353" title="Evidence (short story)" label="Evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q775223" start="2387" end="2408" title="The Evitable Conflict" label="The Evitable Conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2455" end="2473" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610108" start="2721" end="2734" title="Groff Conklin" label="Groff Conklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="2783" end="2801" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111642" start="3127" end="3144" title="Out of This World (UK TV series)" label="Out of this World"/>
<link wikidata="Q203219" start="3161" end="3174" title="Boris Karloff" label="Boris Karloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q785202" start="3188" end="3205" title="Little Lost Robot" label="Little Lost Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q510712" start="3217" end="3230" title="Maxine Audley" label="Maxine Audley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073739" start="3234" end="3246" title="Susan Calvin" label="Susan Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111800" start="3338" end="3356" title="Out of the Unknown" label="Out of the Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q737630" start="3421" end="3427" title="Reason (Asimov)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q928354" start="3445" end="3450" title="Liar! (short story)" label="Liar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026712" start="3484" end="3489" title="Lost television broadcast" label="wiped"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3497" end="3500" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="3680" end="3690" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469100" start="3710" end="3725" title="The Mind Robber" label="The Mind Robber"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3757" end="3761" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3794" end="3814" title="This Fantastic World" label="This Fantastic World"/>
<link wikidata="Q497925" start="3913" end="3930" title="Aleksandr Belyaev" label="Aleksandr Belyaev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3935" end="3951" title="Fredrik Kilander" label="Fredrik Kilander"/>
<link wikidata="Q928354" start="3983" end="3988" title="Liar! (short story)" label="Liar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q839437" start="4012" end="4020" title="The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)" label="original"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621450" start="4025" end="4039" title="The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)" label="revival series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4535634" start="4101" end="4109" title="I, Robot (1964 The Outer Limits)" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801041" start="4145" end="4162" title="I, Robot (short story)" label="an unrelated work"/>
<link wikidata="Q638055" start="4166" end="4186" title="Eando Binder" label="Earl and Otto Binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="4205" end="4214" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604995" start="4315" end="4324" title="Adam Link" label="Adam Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q352010" start="4343" end="4357" title="David S. Goyer" label="David S. Goyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="4402" end="4405" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="FOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215817" start="4411" end="4426" title="Lachlan Murdoch" label="Lachlan Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="4452" end="4461" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q56281007" start="4475" end="4485" title="Foundation (TV series)" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="4659" end="4667" title="Spin-off (media)" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="4668" end="4679" title="Miniseries" label="mini-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="4842" end="4854" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q3884265" start="4868" end="4874" title="option (films)" label="option"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="4982" end="4996" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="5210" end="5231" title="science fiction movie" label="science fiction movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="5463" end="5475" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="5629" end="5645" title="framing sequence" label="framing sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="6386" end="6415" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770495" start="6493" end="6501" title="Mark Zug" label="Mark Zug"/>
<link wikidata="Q200572" start="6667" end="6687" title="I, Robot (film)" label="&amp;quot;I, Robot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="6698" end="6708" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="6726" end="6747" title="Twentieth Century Fox" label="Twentieth Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q785202" start="6819" end="6836" title="Little Lost Robot" label="Little Lost Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175211" start="6990" end="7001" title="Jeff Vintar" label="Jeff Vintar"/>
<link wikidata="Q482085" start="7085" end="7103" title="The Caves of Steel" label="The Caves of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="7246" end="7257" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820287" start="7343" end="7358" title="15 Minute Drama" label="15 Minute Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415881" start="7409" end="7424" title="Hermione Norris" label="Hermione Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="7595" end="7612" title="BBC Radio 4 Extra" label="BBC Radio 4 Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838825" start="7717" end="7739" title="Mickey Zucker Reichert" label="Mickey Zucker Reichert"/>
<link wikidata="Q358312" start="8171" end="8186" title="Gregory Benford" label="Gregory Benford"/>
<link wikidata="Q317491" start="8188" end="8197" title="Greg Bear" label="Greg Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q315069" start="8203" end="8213" title="David Brin" label="David Brin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753848" start="8216" end="8229" title="Berkley Books" label="Berkley Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="8460" end="8485" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758" start="8530" end="8540" title="Three Laws of Robotics" label="Three Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700277" start="8902" end="8915" title="U.S. Robotics" label="U.S. Robotics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9261" end="9270" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488424" start="9291" end="9298" title="I, Mudd" label="I, Mudd"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9450" end="9480" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16743891" start="9502" end="9509" title="I, Borg" label="I, Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="9660" end="9670" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492167" start="9690" end="9709" title="The Robots of Death" label="The Robots of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q104814" start="9877" end="9883" title="Aliens (film)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="10101" end="10113" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633639" start="10135" end="10150" title="I D&amp;#x27;oh Bot" label="I D&amp;#x27;oh Bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458159" start="10168" end="10183" title="Professor Frink" label="Professor Frink"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="10335" end="10343" title="animated series" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="10373" end="10381" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629749" start="10469" end="10480" title="I, Roommate" label="I, Roommate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994115" start="10638" end="10659" title="The Cyber House Rules" label="The Cyber House Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444012" start="10737" end="10761" title="Anthology of Interest II" label="Anthology of Interest II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377330" start="10832" end="10850" title="Bender&amp;#x27;s Game" label="Bender&amp;#x27;s Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q962165" start="10892" end="10907" title="logical fallacy" label="logical fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928354" start="10976" end="10981" title="Liar! (short story)" label="Liar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488408" start="11317" end="11333" title="positronic brain" label="positronic brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22983" start="11406" end="11410" title="Data (Star Trek)" label="Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="11591" end="11601" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366626" start="11615" end="11640" title="Once Upon a Time... Space" label="Once Upon a Time... Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q753209" start="11654" end="11666" title="Perry Rhodan" label="Perry Rhodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703133" start="11680" end="11703" title="The Number of the Beast (novel)" label="The Number of the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q110436" start="11731" end="11744" title="Cory Doctorow" label="Cory Doctorow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967461" start="11778" end="11786" title="I, Robot (Cory Doctorow)" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470689" start="12191" end="12198" title="I Robot (album)" label="I Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q533478" start="12216" end="12240" title="The Alan Parsons Project" label="The Alan Parsons Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967420" start="12697" end="12705" title="I, Human" label="I, Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266184" start="12740" end="12755" title="Deus Ex Machina (Death Metal)" label="Deus Ex Machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q283490" start="12894" end="12902" title="Endhiran" label="Endhiran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13186" end="13202" title="Burning Man#2013 to 2019" label="Burning Man 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q200572" start="13245" end="13272" title="I, Robot (film)" label="&amp;quot;I, Robot&amp;quot; (film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14546" wikidata="Q623508" url="?curid=14546" title="Invictus">
<text>&quot;Invictus&quot; is a short poem by the Victorian era British poet William Ernest Henley (1849–1903). Henley wrote it in 1875, and in 1888 he published it in his first volume of poems, &quot;Book of Verses&quot;, in the section titled &quot;Life and Death (Echoes)&quot;.

== Background ==

When Henley was 16 years old, his left leg required amputation below the knee owing to complications arising from tuberculosis. In the early 1870s, after seeking treatment for problems with his other leg at Margate, he was told that it would require a similar procedure.

He instead chose to travel to Edinburgh in August 1873 to enlist the services of the distinguished English surgeon Joseph Lister, who was able to save Henley&#x27;s remaining leg after multiple surgical interventions on the foot. While recovering in the infirmary, he was moved to write the verses that became the poem &quot;Invictus&quot;. A memorable evocation of Victorian stoicism—the &quot;stiff upper lip&quot; of self-discipline and fortitude in adversity, which popular culture rendered into a British character trait—&quot;Invictus&quot; remains a cultural touchstone.

== Poem ==
INVICTUS

&lt;poem&gt;Out of the night that covers me
Black as the pit from pole to pole,
I thank whatever gods may be
For my unconquerable soul.

In the fell clutch of circumstance,
I have not winced nor cried aloud.
Under the bludgeonings of chance
My head is bloody, but unbowed.

Beyond this place of wrath and tears
Looms but the Horror of the shade,
And yet the menace of the years
Finds, and shall find, me unafraid.

It matters not how strait the gate,
How charged with punishments the scroll, 
I am the master of my fate
I am the captain of my soul.&lt;/poem&gt;

== Analysis ==
Latin for &quot;unconquered&quot;, the poem &quot;Invictus&quot; is a deeply descriptive and motivational work filled with vivid imagery. With four stanzas and sixteen lines, each containing eight syllables, the poem has a rather uncomplicated structure. The poem is most known for its themes of willpower and strength in the face of adversity, much of which is drawn from the horrible fate assigned to many amputees of the day—gangrene and death.

Each stanza takes considerable note of William Ernest Henley&#x27;s perseverance and fearlessness throughout his early life and over twenty months under Lister&#x27;s care. In the second stanza, Henley refers to the strength that helped him through a childhood defined by his struggles with tuberculosis when he says &quot;I have not winced nor cried aloud.&quot; In the fourth stanza, Henley alludes to the fact that each individual&#x27;s destiny is under the jurisdiction of themselves, not at the mercy of the obstacles they face, nor other worldly powers.

Those who have taken time to analyze &quot;Invictus&quot; have also taken notice of religious themes, or the lack thereof, that exist in this piece. There is agreement that much of the dark descriptions in the opening lines make reference to Hell. Later, the fourth stanza of the poem alludes to a phrase from Jesus&#x27;s Sermon on the Mount in the King James Bible, which says, at Matthew 7:14, &quot;Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.&quot;

Despite Henley&#x27;s evocative tellings of perseverance and determination, worry was on his mind; in a letter to a close companion, William Ernest Henley later confided, &quot;I am afeard my marching days are over&quot; when asked about the condition of his leg.

==Publication history==

The second edition of Henley&#x27;s &quot;Book of Verses&quot; added a dedication &quot;To R. T. H. B.&quot;—a reference to Robert Thomas Hamilton Bruce, a successful Scottish flour merchant, baker, and literary patron. The 1900 edition of Henley&#x27;s &quot;Poems&quot;, published after Bruce&#x27;s death, altered the dedication to &quot;I. M. R. T. Hamilton Bruce (1846–1899),&quot; whereby &quot;I. M.&quot; stands for &quot;in memoriam.&quot;
=== Title ===
The poem was published in 1888 in his first volume of poems, &quot;Book of Verses,&quot; with no title, but would later be reprinted in 19th-century newspapers under various titles, including:
* &quot;Myself&quot;
* &quot;Song of a Strong Soul&quot;
* &quot;My Soul&quot;
* &quot;Clear Grit&quot;
* &quot;Master of His Fate&quot;
* &quot;Captain of My Soul&quot;
* &quot;Urbs Fortitudinis&quot;
* &quot;De Profundis&quot;

The established title &quot;Invictus&quot; was added by editor Arthur Quiller-Couch when the poem was included in the &quot;Oxford Book of English Verse&quot; (1900).

==Notable uses==
===History===
* In a speech to the House of Commons on 9 September 1941, Winston Churchill paraphrased the last two lines of the poem, stating &quot;We are still masters of our fate. We still are captains of our souls.&quot;
* Nelson Mandela, while incarcerated at Robben Island prison, recited the poem to other prisoners and was empowered by its message of self-mastery.
* Former State Counsellor of Myanmar and Nobel Peace laureate Aung San Suu Kyi stated: &quot;This poem had inspired my father, Aung San, and his contemporaries during the independence struggle, as it also seemed to have inspired freedom fighters in other places at other times.&quot;
* The poem was read by U.S. prisoners of war during the Vietnam War. James Stockdale recalls being passed the last stanza, written with rat droppings on toilet paper, from fellow prisoner David Hatcher.
* The phrase &quot;bloody, but unbowed&quot; was the headline used by the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; on the day after the 7 July 2005 London bombings.
* The poem&#x27;s last stanza was quoted by U.S. President Barack Obama at the end of his speech at the memorial service of Nelson Mandela in South Africa (10 December 2013), and published on the front cover of the 14 December 2013 issue of &quot;The Economist&quot;.
* The poem was chosen by Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh as his final statement before his execution.
* The perpetrator of the Christchurch mosque shootings in New Zealand in 2019 cited &quot;Invictus&quot;&quot;.&quot;
* According to his sister, before becoming a civil rights leader, Congressman John Lewis used to recite the poem as a teenager and continued to refer to it for inspiration throughout his life.
* Verse &quot;Out of the night that covers me&quot; and phrases &quot;Bloody, but unbowed&quot; and &quot;Captain of my soul&quot; are used as titles of all three parts of Prince Harry&#x27;s memoir &quot;Spare&quot; (published in 2023). The poem is also mentioned as the author reminisces his involvement in the Invictus Games.

=== Literature ===
* In Oscar Wilde&#x27;s &quot;De Profundis&quot; letter in 1897, he reminisces that &quot;I was no longer the Captain of my soul.&quot;
* In Book Five, chapter III (&quot;The Self-Sufficiency of Vertue&quot;) of his early autobiographical work, &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Regress&quot; (1933), C. S. Lewis included a quote from the last two lines (paraphrased by the character Vertue): &quot;I cannot put myself under anyone&#x27;s orders. I must be the captain of my soul and the master of my fate. But thank you for your offer.&quot;
* In W. E. B. Du Bois&#x27; &quot;The Quest of the Silver Fleece&quot;, the last stanza is sent anonymously from one character to another to encourage him to stay strong in the face of tests to his manhood.
* The phrase &quot;bloody, but unbowed&quot; was quoted by Lord Peter Wimsey in Dorothy Sayers&#x27; novel &quot;Clouds of Witness&quot; (1926), referring to his (temporary) failure to exonerate his brother of the charge of murder.
* In Huey Long’s 1935 book ‘’My First Days in the White House,’’ Huey Long fantasizes about a speculative cartoon published in the newspapers in which an unflattering image of himself among the words “Invictus.”
* The last line in the poem is used as the title for Gwen Harwood&#x27;s 1960 poem &quot;I am the Captain of My Soul&quot;, which presents a different view of the titular captain.

=== Film ===
* In &quot;Casablanca&quot; (1942), Captain Renault (played by Claude Rains) recites the last two lines of the poem when talking to Rick Blaine (played by Humphrey Bogart), referring to his power in Casablanca. While delivering the last line, he is called away by an aide to Gestapo officer Major Strasser.
* In &quot;Kings Row&quot; (1942), psychiatrist Parris Mitchell (played by Robert Cummings) recites the first two stanzas of &quot;Invictus&quot; to his friend Drake McHugh (played by Ronald Reagan) before revealing to Drake that his legs were unnecessarily amputated by a cruel doctor.
* In &quot;Sunrise at Campobello&quot; (1960), the character Louis Howe (played by Hume Cronyn) reads the poem to Franklin D. Roosevelt (played by Ralph Bellamy). The recitation is at first light-hearted and partially in jest, but as it continues both men appear to realize the significance of the poem to Roosevelt&#x27;s fight against his paralytic illness.
* Nelson Mandela is depicted in &quot;Invictus&quot; (2009) presenting a copy of the poem to Francois Pienaar, captain of the national South African rugby team, for inspiration during the Rugby World Cup—though at the actual event he gave Pienaar a text of &quot;The Man in the Arena&quot; passage from Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s &quot;Citizenship in a Republic&quot; speech delivered in France in 1910.
* The last two lines &quot;I am the master of my fate: I am the captain of my soul&quot; are shown in a picture during the 25th minute of the film &quot;The Big Short&quot; (2015)&quot;.&quot;
* &quot;Star Trek: Renegades&quot; (2015) opens with Lexxa Singh reciting the poem and writing it on the wall of her prison cell.

=== Television ===
* In the 5th episode of the 2nd season of &quot;Archer&quot;, &quot;The Double Deuce&quot; (2011), Woodhouse describes Reggie as &quot;in the words of Henley, &#x27;bloody, but unbowed&#x27;&quot;.
* In the 8th episode of the 5th season of TV series &quot;The Blacklist&quot;, &quot;Ian Garvey&quot;, Raymond &#x27;Red&#x27; Reddington (played by James Spader) reads the poem to Elizabeth Keen when she wakes up from a ten-month coma.
* In the 6th episode of the third season of &quot;One Tree Hill&quot;, &quot;Locked Hearts &amp; Hand Grenades&quot; (2006), Lucas Scott (played by Chad Michael Murray) references the poem in an argument with Haley James Scott (played by Bethany Joy Lenz) over his heart condition and playing basketball. The episode ends with Lucas reading the whole poem over a series of images that link the various characters to the themes of the poem.
* In season 1, episode 2 of &quot;New Amsterdam&quot;, &quot;Ritual&quot;, Dr. Floyd Reynolds (played by Jocko Sims) references the poem while prepping hands for surgery prior to a conversation with his fellow doctor Dr. Lauren Bloom (played by Janet Montgomery).
* In the episode &quot;Interlude&quot; of the series &quot;The Lieutenant&quot;, the lead character and the woman he is infatuated with jointly recite the poem after she has said it is her favorite poem. His reciting is flawed by lapses, which she fills in.
* In season 4, episode 14 of &quot;New Amsterdam&quot;, &quot;...Unto the Breach&quot;, Dr. Floyd Reynolds (played by Jocko Sims) recites the poem while prepping for surgery.
* In season 1, episode 3 of Hulu&#x27;s &quot;Nine Perfect Strangers&quot;, Napoleon Marconi (played by Michael Shannon) references the poem in his one-on-one with Masha (played by Nicole Kidman) when referring to his son who died by suicide. Napoleon states, &quot;Zach chose to be the master of his fate&quot; referencing the line &quot;I am the master of my fate; I am the captain of my soul&quot; by Henley.
* In episode 22, season 5 of &quot;30 Rock&quot;, “Everything Sunny All the Time Always”, Jack Donaghy quotes the last two lines of the poem in to Liz Lemon.

=== Sports ===
* Jerry Kramer recited the poem during his NFL Pro Football Hall of Fame induction speech.
* The Invictus Games—The Invictus games were founded by Prince Harry, the Ministry of Defense, and Sir Keith Mills. Prior to the inaugural games in London in 2014, entertainers including Daniel Craig and Tom Hardy, and athletes including Louis Smith and Iwan Thomas, read the poem in a promotional video.

=== Video games ===
* The second stanza is recited by Lieutenant-Commander Ashley Williams in the 2012 video game &quot;Mass Effect 3&quot;
* The game &quot;Sunless Sea&quot; features an &quot;Invictus Token&quot; for players who forgo the right to create backups of their current game state. The item text includes the last two lines of the poem.
* The poem was recited in an early commercial for the Microsoft Xbox One.
* The game &quot;Robotics;Notes&quot; features the last two lines of the poem in its epigraph.

=== Music ===
* The lines &quot;I am the master of my fate... I am the captain of my soul&quot; are paraphrased in Lana Del Rey&#x27;s song &quot;Lust for Life&quot; featuring The Weeknd. The lyrics are changed from &quot;I&quot; to &quot;we,&quot; alluding to a relationship.
* Belgian Black / Folk Metal band Ancient Rites use the poem as a song on their album &quot;Rvbicon&quot; (Latin form of Rubicon)
* The prominent classical contemporary Indonesian composer Ananda Sukarlan (b. 1968) made a song for soprano, cello and piano in 2023. It was premiered by the soprano Ratnaganadi Paramita in Jakarta, Indonesia.
* The Canadian punk band D.O.A. released a record entitled &quot;Bloodied but Unbowed (The Damage to Date 1978-83)&quot; in 1983.

== See also ==

* &quot;If—&quot;, Rudyard Kipling
* &quot;The Man in the Arena&quot;, Theodore Roosevelt
* &quot;Let No Charitable Hope,&quot; Elinor Wylie
* Agency (philosophy)

== References ==
==External links==
* The original untitled poem in Henley&#x27;s &quot;A Book of Verses &quot; at Google Books.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q623508" start="6" end="14" title="Invictus" label="Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="32" end="36" title="Poetry" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="44" end="57" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q552617" start="71" end="92" title="William Ernest Henley" label="William Ernest Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="347" end="357" title="amputation" label="amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="409" end="421" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q618045" start="502" end="509" title="Margate" label="Margate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="597" end="606" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="682" end="695" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="933" end="942" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616407" start="962" end="977" title="stiff upper lip" label="stiff upper lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="2173" end="2181" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="2347" end="2353" title="Joseph Lister" label="Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="2998" end="3002" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3066" end="3071" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51640" start="3079" end="3098" title="Sermon on the Mount" label="Sermon on the Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="3106" end="3122" title="King James Bible" label="King James Bible"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3139" end="3151" title="Matthew 7:14" label="Matthew 7:14"/>
<link wikidata="Q322871" start="4512" end="4532" title="Arthur Quiller-Couch" label="Arthur Quiller-Couch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115248" start="4573" end="4601" title="Oxford Book of English Verse" label="Oxford Book of English Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="4669" end="4685" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="4707" end="4724" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="4861" end="4875" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q55819532" start="4899" end="4919" title="Maximum Security Prison, Robben Island" label="Robben Island prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q23747483" start="5016" end="5043" title="State Counsellor of Myanmar" label="State Counsellor of Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="5048" end="5059" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q36740" start="5069" end="5085" title="Aung San Suu Kyi" label="Aung San Suu Kyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198546" start="5314" end="5358" title="U.S. prisoners of war during the Vietnam War" label="U.S. prisoners of war during the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q496264" start="5360" end="5375" title="James Stockdale" label="James Stockdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="5574" end="5586" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="5614" end="5641" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="7 July 2005 London bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="5702" end="5714" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="5890" end="5903" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="5936" end="5956" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q220850" start="5957" end="5972" title="Timothy McVeigh" label="Timothy McVeigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066211" start="6043" end="6072" title="Christchurch mosque shootings" label="Christchurch mosque shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q45380" start="6214" end="6224" title="John Lewis" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="6501" end="6520" title="Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex" label="Prince Harry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q114892138" start="6528" end="6545" title="Spare (memoir)" label="&amp;quot;Spare&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987323" start="6642" end="6656" title="Invictus Games" label="Invictus Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="6683" end="6694" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249459" start="6708" end="6720" title="De Profundis (letter)" label="De Profundis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757110" start="6929" end="6955" title="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Regress" label="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Regress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="6970" end="6981" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="7217" end="7233" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538721" start="7478" end="7495" title="Lord Peter Wimsey" label="Lord Peter Wimsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q106740" start="7499" end="7513" title="Dorothy Sayers" label="Dorothy Sayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228867" start="7532" end="7549" title="Clouds of Witness" label="Clouds of Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q314384" start="7656" end="7665" title="Huey Long" label="Huey Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945463" start="7680" end="7712" title="My First Days in the White House" label="My First Days in the White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557822" start="7916" end="7935" title="Gwen Harwood" label="Gwen Harwood&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="8068" end="8078" title="Casablanca (film)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q318734" start="8120" end="8132" title="Claude Rains" label="Claude Rains"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="8212" end="8227" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="8256" end="8266" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="8332" end="8339" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620416" start="8375" end="8384" title="Kings Row" label="Kings Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q366678" start="8439" end="8454" title="Robert Cummings" label="Robert Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="8548" end="8561" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569632" start="8662" end="8683" title="Sunrise at Campobello" label="Sunrise at Campobello"/>
<link wikidata="Q395205" start="8734" end="8745" title="Hume Cronyn" label="Hume Cronyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q364135" start="8798" end="8811" title="Ralph Bellamy" label="Ralph Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="9013" end="9027" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q689842" start="9049" end="9057" title="Invictus (film)" label="Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168675" start="9104" end="9120" title="Francois Pienaar" label="Francois Pienaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="9146" end="9159" title="Springboks" label="South African"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="9199" end="9214" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122791" start="9274" end="9294" title="The Man in the Arena" label="The Man in the Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="9314" end="9332" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122791" start="9346" end="9371" title="Citizenship in a Republic" label="Citizenship in a Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19850715" start="9561" end="9586" title="The Big Short (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Big Short&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9615" end="9635" title="Star Trek: Renegades" label="Star Trek: Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q632670" start="9805" end="9811" title="Archer (2009 TV series)" label="Archer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9825" end="9841" title="List of Archer episodes#Season 2 (2011)" label="The Double Deuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071468" start="9983" end="9993" title="The Blacklist season 5" label="5th season"/>
<link wikidata="Q13148212" start="10013" end="10026" title="The Blacklist" label="The Blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q296928" start="10104" end="10116" title="James Spader" label="James Spader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553517" start="10220" end="10232" title="One Tree Hill season 3" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q203385" start="10242" end="10255" title="One Tree Hill (TV series)" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q929801" start="10269" end="10302" title="Locked Hearts and Hand Grenades" label="Locked Hearts &amp;amp; Hand Grenades"/>
<link wikidata="Q202313" start="10340" end="10359" title="Chad Michael Murray" label="Chad Michael Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q230424" start="10430" end="10446" title="Bethany Joy Lenz" label="Bethany Joy Lenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q53582170" start="10666" end="10679" title="New Amsterdam (2018 TV series)" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207594" start="10737" end="10747" title="Jocko Sims" label="Jocko Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q271121" start="10877" end="10893" title="Janet Montgomery" label="Janet Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987993" start="10955" end="10969" title="The Lieutenant" label="The Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q53582170" start="11189" end="11202" title="New Amsterdam (2018 TV series)" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207594" start="11272" end="11282" title="Jocko Sims" label="Jocko Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q98315446" start="11369" end="11403" title="Nine Perfect Strangers (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Nine Perfect Strangers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41449" start="11433" end="11448" title="Michael Shannon" label="Michael Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="11510" end="11523" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189350" start="11776" end="11783" title="30 Rock" label="30 Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q547622" start="11917" end="11929" title="Jerry Kramer" label="Jerry Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851500" start="11962" end="11987" title="List of Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987323" start="12012" end="12026" title="Invictus Games" label="Invictus Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547" start="12193" end="12205" title="Daniel Craig" label="Daniel Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q208026" start="12210" end="12219" title="Tom Hardy" label="Tom Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q639998" start="12244" end="12255" title="Louis Smith (gymnast)" label="Louis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q725530" start="12260" end="12271" title="Iwan Thomas" label="Iwan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528918" start="12387" end="12402" title="Ashley Williams (Mass Effect)" label="Ashley Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q753511" start="12432" end="12445" title="Mass Effect 3" label="Mass Effect 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q19745067" start="12469" end="12480" title="Sunless Sea" label="Sunless Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="12714" end="12723" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="12724" end="12732" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701391" start="12751" end="12765" title="Robotics;Notes" label="Robotics;Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37150" start="12945" end="12957" title="Lana Del Rey" label="Lana Del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29508190" start="12976" end="12989" title="Lust for Life (Lana Del Rey song)" label="Lust for Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121062" start="13006" end="13016" title="The Weeknd" label="The Weeknd"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="13109" end="13116" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q489338" start="13141" end="13154" title="Ancient Rites" label="Ancient Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q172572" start="13228" end="13235" title="Rubicon" label="Rubicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q485788" start="13296" end="13311" title="Ananda Sukarlan" label="Ananda Sukarlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="13454" end="13462" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="13463" end="13467" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q923253" start="13473" end="13479" title="D.O.A. (band)" label="D.O.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="13572" end="13576" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419321" start="13603" end="13606" title="If—" label="If—"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122791" start="13638" end="13658" title="Citizenship in a Republic" label="The Man in the Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q460055" start="13723" end="13735" title="Elinor Wylie" label="Elinor Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951828" start="13738" end="13757" title="Agency (philosophy)" label="Agency (philosophy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="13874" end="13886" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14551" wikidata="Q55638" url="?curid=14551" title="Tertiary sector of the economy">
<text>The tertiary sector of the economy, generally known as the service sector, is the third of the three economic sectors in the three-sector model (also known as the economic cycle). The others are the primary sector (raw materials) and the secondary sector (manufacturing).

The tertiary sector consists of the provision of services instead of end products. Services (also known as &quot;intangible goods&quot;) include attention, advice, access, experience and affective labour. 

The tertiary sector involves the provision of services to other businesses as well as to final consumers. Services may involve the transport, distribution and sale of goods from a producer to a consumer, as may happen in wholesaling and retailing, pest control or financial services. The goods may be transformed in the process of providing the service, as happens in the restaurant industry. However, the focus is on people by interacting with them and serving the customers rather than transforming the physical goods. The production of information has been long regarded as a service, but some economists now attribute it to a fourth sector, called the quaternary sector.

== Difficulty of definition ==
It is sometimes hard to determine whether a given company is part of the secondary or the tertiary sector. It is not only companies that have been classified as part of a sector in some schemes, since governments and their services (such as the police or military), as well as nonprofit organizations (such as charities or research associations), can also be seen as part of that sector.

To classify a business as a service, one can use classification systems such as the United Nations&#x27; International Standard Industrial Classification standard, the United States&#x27; Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code system and its new replacement, the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), the Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community (NACE) in the EU and similar systems elsewhere. These governmental classification systems have a first-level of hierarchy that reflects whether the economic goods are tangible or intangible.

For purposes of finance and market research, market-based classification systems such as the Global Industry Classification Standard and the Industry Classification Benchmark are used to classify businesses that participate in the service sector. Unlike governmental classification systems, the first level of market-based classification systems divides the economy into functionally related markets or industries. The second or third level of these hierarchies then reflects whether goods or services are produced.

== Theory of progression ==
For the last 100 years, there has been a substantial shift from the primary and secondary sectors to the tertiary sector in industrialized countries. This shift is called tertiarisation. The tertiary sector is now the largest sector of the economy in the Western world, and is also the fastest-growing sector.
In examining the growth of the service sector in the early nineties, the globalist Kenichi Ohmae noted that:

Economies tend to follow a developmental progression that takes them from heavy reliance on agriculture and mining, toward the development of manufacturing (e.g. automobiles, textiles, shipbuilding, steel) and finally toward a more service-based structure. The first economy to follow this path in the modern world was the United Kingdom. The speed at which other economies have made the transition to service-based (or &quot;post-industrial&quot;) economies has increased over time.

Historically, manufacturing tended to be more open to international trade and competition than services. However, with dramatic cost reduction and speed and reliability improvements in the transportation of people and the communication of information, the service sector now includes some of the most intensive international competition, despite residual protectionism.

== Issues for service providers ==
Service providers face obstacles selling services that goods-sellers rarely face. Services are intangible, making it difficult for potential customers to understand what they will receive and what value it will hold for them. Indeed, some, such as consultants and providers of investment services, offer no guarantees of the value for the price paid.

Since the quality of most services depends largely on the quality of the individuals providing the services, &quot;people costs&quot; are usually a high fraction of service costs. Whereas a manufacturer may use technology, simplification, and other techniques to lower the cost of goods sold, the service provider often faces an unrelenting pattern of increasing costs.

Product differentiation is often difficult. For example, how does one choose one investment adviser over another, since they are often seen to provide identical services.
Charging a premium for services is usually an option only for the most established firms, who charge extra based upon brand recognition.

== List of countries by tertiary output ==

== See also ==

* Economic sector
* Indigo Era
* Post-industrial society
* Outline of consulting
* Quaternary sector of the economy
* Voluntary sector

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="4" end="34" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="59" end="73" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958441" start="101" end="116" title="economic sector" label="economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256893" start="125" end="143" title="three-sector model" label="three-sector model"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="199" end="213" title="primary sector" label="primary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="215" end="227" title="raw material" label="raw material"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="238" end="254" title="secondary sector" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="256" end="269" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="322" end="330" title="Service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="342" end="354" title="Product (business)" label="end products"/>
<link wikidata="Q194980" start="386" end="402" title="Intangible good" label="intangible goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044045" start="460" end="476" title="affective labour" label="affective labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="611" end="620" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q989018" start="622" end="634" title="distribution (economics)" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q220695" start="701" end="712" title="wholesaler" label="wholesaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="717" end="726" title="retailer" label="retailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306047" start="728" end="740" title="pest control" label="pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="744" end="762" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="852" end="862" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q871337" start="1005" end="1030" title="information economy" label="production of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200977" start="1136" end="1153" title="quaternary sector" label="quaternary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="1464" end="1486" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1660" end="1674" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666934" start="1681" end="1729" title="International Standard Industrial Classification" label="International Standard Industrial Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1744" end="1757" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760251" start="1764" end="1798" title="Standard Industrial Classification" label="Standard Industrial Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509282" start="1846" end="1893" title="North American Industrial Classification System" label="North American Industrial Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q100231013" start="1907" end="1982" title="Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community" label="Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="2191" end="2198" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q913709" start="2203" end="2218" title="market research" label="market research"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="2220" end="2226" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628939" start="2268" end="2307" title="Global Industry Classification Standard" label="Global Industry Classification Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317652" start="2316" end="2349" title="Industry Classification Benchmark" label="Industry Classification Benchmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2975" end="2988" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167348" start="3103" end="3112" title="Globalism" label="globalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q725049" start="3113" end="3126" title="Kenichi Ohmae" label="Kenichi Ohmae"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="3282" end="3295" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="3325" end="3337" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3463" end="3477" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233552" start="3566" end="3581" title="Post-industrial economy" label="post-industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="3679" end="3698" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="3980" end="3993" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978655" start="4279" end="4290" title="consultants" label="consultants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="4308" end="4318" title="investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200129" start="4754" end="4777" title="Product differentiation" label="Product differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q683476" start="4835" end="4853" title="investment adviser" label="investment adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900597" start="5043" end="5060" title="brand recognition" label="brand recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958441" start="5125" end="5140" title="Economic sector" label="Economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q48729717" start="5143" end="5153" title="Indigo Era" label="Indigo Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q824362" start="5156" end="5179" title="Post-industrial society" label="Post-industrial society"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904143" start="5182" end="5203" title="Outline of consulting" label="Outline of consulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200977" start="5206" end="5238" title="Quaternary sector of the economy" label="Quaternary sector of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063076" start="5241" end="5257" title="Voluntary sector" label="Voluntary sector"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14552" wikidata="Q55640" url="?curid=14552" title="Primary sector of the economy">
<text>The primary sector of the economy includes any industry involved in the extraction and production of raw materials, such as farming, logging, fishing, forestry and mining.

The primary sector tends to make up a larger portion of the economy in developing countries than it does in developed countries. For example, in 2018, agriculture, forestry, and fishing comprised more than 15% of GDP in sub-Saharan Africa but less than 1% of GDP in North America.

In developed countries the primary sector has become more technologically advanced, enabling for example the mechanization of farming, as compared with lower-tech methods in poorer countries. More developed economies may invest additional capital in primary means of production: for example, in the United States corn belt, combine harvesters pick the corn, and sprayers spray large amounts of insecticides, herbicides and fungicides, producing a higher yield than is possible using less capital-intensive techniques. These technological advances and investment allow the primary sector to employ a smaller workforce, so developed countries tend to have a smaller percentage of their workforce involved in primary activities, instead having a higher percentage involved in the secondary and tertiary sectors.

== List of countries by agricultural output ==

== See also ==

* Resource curse
* Three-sector model

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;Dwight H. Perkins: Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science, Vol. 31, No. 1, China&#x27;s Developmental Experience (Mar., 1973)&quot;
* &quot;Cameron: General Economic and Social History&quot;
* &quot;Historia Económica y Social General, by Maria Inés Barbero, Rubén L. Berenblum, Fernando R. García Molina, Jorge Saborido&quot;

== External links ==
* Economy101.net: &quot;The Nature of Wealth&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="4" end="33" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary sector of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="47" end="55" title="Industry (economics)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="101" end="114" title="raw materials" label="raw materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="124" end="131" title="farming" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="133" end="140" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="142" end="149" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="151" end="159" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="164" end="170" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="244" end="264" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="281" end="300" title="developed countries" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="393" end="411" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="439" end="452" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133130" start="768" end="777" title="corn belt" label="corn belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26886" start="779" end="796" title="combine harvester" label="combine harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="849" end="860" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="863" end="872" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="878" end="887" title="fungicide" label="fungicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="1232" end="1241" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="1246" end="1254" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q72596" start="1331" end="1345" title="Resource curse" label="Resource curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256893" start="1348" end="1366" title="Three-sector model" label="Three-sector model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14553" wikidata="Q55639" url="?curid=14553" title="Secondary sector of the economy">
<text>In macroeconomics, the secondary sector of the economy is an economic sector in the three-sector theory that describes the role of manufacturing. It encompasses industries that produce a finished, usable product or are involved in construction.

This sector generally takes the output of the primary sector (i.e. raw materials like metals, wood) and creates finished goods suitable for sale to domestic businesses or consumers and for export (via distribution through the tertiary sector). Many of these industries consume large quantities of energy, require factories and use machinery; they are often classified as light or heavy based on such quantities. This also produces waste materials and waste heat that may cause environmental problems or pollution (see negative externalities). Examples include textile production, car manufacturing, and handicraft.

Manufacturing is an important activity in promoting economic growth and development. Nations that export manufactured products tend to generate higher marginal GDP growth, which supports higher incomes and therefore marginal tax revenue needed to fund such government expenditures as health care and infrastructure. Among developed countries, it is an important source of well-paying jobs for the middle class (e.g., engineering) to facilitate greater social mobility for successive generations on the economy. Currently, an estimated 20% of the labor force in the United States is involved in the secondary industry.

The secondary sector depends on the primary sector for the raw materials necessary for production. Countries that primarily produce agricultural and other raw materials (i.e., primary sector) tend to grow slowly and remain either under-developed or developing economies. The value added through the transformation of raw materials into finished goods reliably generates greater profitability, which underlies the faster growth of developed economies.

== See also ==
*List of countries by manufacturing output
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="3" end="17" title="macroeconomics" label="macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="23" end="54" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958441" start="61" end="76" title="economic sector" label="economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256893" start="84" end="103" title="Three-sector model" label="three-sector theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="131" end="144" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="161" end="171" title="Industry (economics)" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="177" end="184" title="Production (economics)" label="produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="204" end="211" title="Product (business)" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="231" end="243" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="292" end="306" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="313" end="325" title="raw material" label="raw material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408229" start="358" end="372" title="finished goods" label="finished goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="403" end="411" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="417" end="425" title="consumer" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="435" end="441" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="472" end="487" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="559" end="568" title="Factory" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q770899" start="617" end="622" title="light industry" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="626" end="631" title="heavy industry" label="heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="677" end="682" title="waste" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q288706" start="697" end="707" title="waste heat" label="waste heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="749" end="758" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="764" end="786" title="Externality" label="negative externalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q607081" start="806" end="824" title="Textile industry" label="textile production"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="826" end="843" title="Automotive industry" label="car manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="849" end="859" title="handicraft" label="handicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="914" end="929" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="934" end="945" title="Economic development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1022" end="1025" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="1056" end="1062" title="income" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q385503" start="1087" end="1098" title="tax revenue" label="tax revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="1146" end="1157" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="1162" end="1176" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="1184" end="1203" title="Developed country" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="1259" end="1271" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q194417" start="1314" end="1329" title="social mobility" label="social mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="1408" end="1419" title="labor force" label="labor force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1613" end="1625" title="agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="1657" end="1671" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476047" start="1711" end="1726" title="under-developed" label="under-developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="1730" end="1750" title="developing economies" label="developing economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q26911" start="1859" end="1872" title="profitability" label="profitability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="1911" end="1930" title="developed economies" label="developed economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="1949" end="1990" title="List of countries by manufacturing output" label="List of countries by manufacturing output"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14554" wikidata="Q9165172" url="?curid=14554" title="Imaginary number">
<text>An imaginary number is the product of a real number and the imaginary unit , which is defined by its property . The square of an imaginary number is . For example, is an imaginary number, and its square is . The number zero is considered to be both real and imaginary.

Originally coined in the 17th century by René Descartes as a derogatory term and regarded as fictitious or useless, the concept gained wide acceptance following the work of Leonhard Euler (in the 18th century) and Augustin-Louis Cauchy and Carl Friedrich Gauss (in the early 19th century).

An imaginary number can be added to a real number to form a complex number of the form , where the real numbers and are called, respectively, the &quot;real part&quot; and the &quot;imaginary part&quot; of the complex number.

==History==
Although the Greek mathematician and engineer Heron of Alexandria is noted as the first to present a calculation involving the square root of a negative number, it was Rafael Bombelli who first set down the rules for multiplication of complex numbers in 1572. The concept had appeared in print earlier, such as in work by Gerolamo Cardano. At the time, imaginary numbers and negative numbers were poorly understood and were regarded by some as fictitious or useless, much as zero once was. Many other mathematicians were slow to adopt the use of imaginary numbers, including René Descartes, who wrote about them in his &quot;La Géométrie&quot; in which he coined the term &quot;imaginary&quot; and meant it to be derogatory. The use of imaginary numbers was not widely accepted until the work of Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) and Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855). The geometric significance of complex numbers as points in a plane was first described by Caspar Wessel (1745–1818).

In 1843, William Rowan Hamilton extended the idea of an axis of imaginary numbers in the plane to a four-dimensional space of quaternion imaginaries in which three of the dimensions are analogous to the imaginary numbers in the complex field.

==Geometric interpretation==
Geometrically, imaginary numbers are found on the vertical axis of the complex number plane, which allows them to be presented perpendicular to the real axis. One way of viewing imaginary numbers is to consider a standard number line positively increasing in magnitude to the right and negatively increasing in magnitude to the left. At 0 on the -axis, a -axis can be drawn with &quot;positive&quot; direction going up; &quot;positive&quot; imaginary numbers then increase in magnitude upwards, and &quot;negative&quot; imaginary numbers increase in magnitude downwards. This vertical axis is often called the &quot;imaginary axis&quot; and is denoted formula_1 formula_2 or .

In this representation, multiplication by  corresponds to a counterclockwise rotation of 90 degrees about the origin, which is a quarter of a circle. Multiplication by  corresponds to a clockwise rotation of 90 degrees about the origin. Similarly, multiplying by a purely imaginary number , with a real number, both causes a counterclockwise rotation about the origin by 90 degrees and scales the answer by a factor of . When , this can instead be described as a clockwise rotation by 90 degrees and a scaling by .

==Square roots of negative numbers==
Care must be used when working with imaginary numbers that are expressed as the principal values of the square roots of negative numbers. For example, if and are both positive real numbers, the following chain of equalities appears reasonable at first glance:
: formula_3

But the result is clearly nonsense. The step where the square root was broken apart was illegitimate. (See Mathematical fallacy.)

==See also==
* −1
* Dual number
* Split-complex number
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* , explains many applications of imaginary expressions.

==External links==

* How can one show that imaginary numbers really do exist? – an article that discusses the existence of imaginary numbers.
* 5Numbers programme 4 BBC Radio 4 programme
* Why Use Imaginary Numbers? Basic Explanation and Uses of Imaginary Numbers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="3" end="19" title="Imaginary number" label="imaginary number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="40" end="51" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="60" end="74" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q111124" start="116" end="122" title="square (algebra)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="219" end="223" title="0" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="311" end="325" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="443" end="457" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8814" start="484" end="505" title="Augustin-Louis Cauchy" label="Augustin-Louis Cauchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="510" end="530" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="621" end="635" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="819" end="832" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="837" end="845" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161853" start="846" end="865" title="Heron of Alexandria" label="Heron of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q358547" start="968" end="983" title="Rafael Bombelli" label="Rafael Bombelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1035" end="1049" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q184530" start="1122" end="1138" title="Gerolamo Cardano" label="Gerolamo Cardano"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="1375" end="1389" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210113" start="1425" end="1437" title="La Géométrie" label="La Géométrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="1596" end="1610" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="1627" end="1647" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q372017" start="1751" end="1764" title="Caspar Wessel" label="Caspar Wessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11887" start="1788" end="1810" title="William Rowan Hamilton" label="William Rowan Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1905" end="1927" title="quaternion#Definition" label="quaternion imaginaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="2123" end="2143" title="Complex plane" label="complex number plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="2179" end="2192" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="2274" end="2285" title="number line" label="number line"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="2807" end="2815" title="rotation" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126499" start="3363" end="3378" title="principal value" label="principal value"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="3387" end="3398" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q200227" start="3403" end="3418" title="negative number" label="negative number"/>
<link wikidata="Q387855" start="3663" end="3683" title="Mathematical fallacy" label="Mathematical fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310395" start="3702" end="3704" title="−1" label="−1"/>
<link wikidata="Q751048" start="3707" end="3718" title="Dual number" label="Dual number"/>
<link wikidata="Q864145" start="3721" end="3741" title="Split-complex number" label="Split-complex number"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14559" wikidata="Q17310301" url="?curid=14559" title="Indictment">
<text>An indictment ( ) is a formal accusation that a person has committed a crime. In jurisdictions that use the concept of felonies, the most serious criminal offense is a felony; jurisdictions that do not use that concept often use that of an indictable offence, an offence that requires an indictment.

==Australia==
Section 80 of the Constitution of Australia provides that &quot;the trial on indictment of any offence against any law of the Commonwealth shall be by jury&quot;. The High Court of Australia has consistently used a narrow interpretation of this clause, allowing the Parliament of Australia to define which offences proceed on indictment rather than conferring a universal right to a jury trial. Section 4G of the &quot;Crimes Act 1914&quot; provides that &quot;offences against a law of the Commonwealth punishable by imprisonment for a period exceeding 12 months are indictable offences, unless the contrary intention appears&quot;.

==Canada==
A direct indictment is one in which the case is sent directly to trial before a preliminary inquiry is completed or when the accused has been discharged by a preliminary inquiry. It is meant to be an extraordinary, rarely used power to ensure that those who should be brought to trial are in a timely manner or where an error of judgment is seen to have been made in the preliminary inquiry. In the aftermath of the 2016 Jordan decision, in which the Supreme Court of Canada imposed time limits on the Crown to bring criminal cases to trial, the Crown has started to use the procedure more frequently.

== United Kingdom ==
=== England and Wales ===
In England and Wales (except in private prosecutions by individuals) an indictment is issued by the public prosecutor (in most cases this will be the Crown Prosecution Service) on behalf of the Crown, which is the nominal plaintiff in all public prosecutions under English law.
This is why a public prosecution of a person whose surname is Smith would be referred to in writing as &quot;R v Smith&quot; (or alternatively as &quot;Regina v Smith&quot; or &quot;Rex v Smith&quot; depending on the sex of the Sovereign, &quot;Regina&quot; and &quot;Rex&quot; being Latin for &quot;Queen&quot; and &quot;King&quot; and in either case may informally be pronounced as such) and when cited orally in court would be pronounced &quot;the Crown against Smith&quot;.

All proceedings on indictment must be brought before the Crown Court. By virtue of practice directions issued under section 75(1) of the Senior Courts Act 1981, an indictment must be tried by a High Court judge, a circuit judge or a recorder (which of these depends on the offence).

As to the form of an indictment, see the Indictments Act 1915 and the Indictment Rules 1971 made thereunder.

The Indictment Rules 1971 were revoked by the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Rules 2007 (on the whole) incorporated into the Criminal Procedure Rules 2010. The form and content and the service of an indictment are governed by Rule 14 of the CPR 2012. Additional guidance is contained in the Consolidated Criminal Practice Direction Part IV.34.

As to the preferring of a bill of indictment and the signing of an indictment, see section 2 of the Administration of Justice (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1933 and the Indictments (Procedure) Rules 1971 (S.I. 1971/2084) made thereunder, as amended and modified by the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1983 (S.I. 1983/284), the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1988 (S.I. 1988/1783), the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1992 (S.I. 1992/284), the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1997 (S.I. 1997/711), the Indictments (Procedure) (Modification) Rules 1998 (S.I. 1998/3045) and the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 2000 (S.I. 2000/3360).

=== Northern Ireland ===
See the Indictments Act (Northern Ireland) 1945.

=== Scotland ===
In Scotland, all of these cases brought in the High Court of Justiciary are brought in the name of the Lord Advocate and will be tried on indictment. In a sheriff court where trials proceed using the solemn proceedings they will also be tried on indictment and are brought in the name of the Lord Advocate. All solemn indictments are designed in the manner Her (or His) Majesty&#x27;s Advocate v Smith, or, more frequently HMA v Smith.

== United States ==
The Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution states in part: &quot;No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia when in actual service in time of War or public danger.&quot; The requirement of an indictment has not been incorporated against the states; therefore, even though the federal government uses grand juries and indictments, not all states do. As of 2019, all states besides Pennsylvania and Connecticut still use grand juries to indict suspects for some offenses.

In many jurisdictions that use grand juries, prosecutors often have a choice between seeking an indictment from a grand jury and filing a charging document directly with the court. Such a document is usually called an &quot;information&quot;, &quot;accusation&quot;, or &quot;complaint&quot;, to distinguish it from a grand-jury indictment. To protect the suspect&#x27;s due process rights in felony cases (where the suspect&#x27;s interest in liberty is at stake), there is usually a preliminary hearing, at which a judge determines whether there was probable cause to arrest the suspect who is in custody. If the judge finds such probable cause, they bind, or hold over, the suspect for trial.

The substance of an indictment or other charging instrument is usually the same, regardless of the jurisdiction: it consists of a short and plain statement of where, when, and how the defendant allegedly committed the offense. Each offense is usually set out in a separate &quot;count&quot;. Indictments for complex crimes, particularly those involving conspiracy or numerous counts, may run to hundreds of pages. In other cases, however, an indictment for a crime as serious as murder may consist of a single sheet of paper.

Indictable offenses are tried by jury, unless the accused waives the right to a jury trial. Even though the Sixth Amendment of the Constitution mandates the right to a jury trial in any criminal prosecution, the vast majority of criminal cases in the US are resolved by the plea-bargaining process.

==Types==
A sealed indictment stays non-public, for various reasons, until it is unsealed (for example, once the indicted is arrested or notified by police). A superseding indictment takes the place of the previously active one. A speaking indictment goes beyond the legally required statement of the elements of the charged crime(s) and also includes a narrative of the alleged underlying acts in more detail.

== See also ==
*
*

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="3" end="13" title="Indictment" label="indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="48" end="54" title="legal person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="71" end="76" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="81" end="93" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="146" end="162" title="criminal offense" label="criminal offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="168" end="174" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q763407" start="240" end="258" title="indictable offence" label="indictable offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073483" start="315" end="358" title="Section 80 of the Constitution of Australia" label="Section 80 of the Constitution of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="482" end="505" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="581" end="604" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185486" start="734" end="749" title="Crimes Act 1914" label="Crimes Act 1914"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1041" end="1060" title="Preliminary hearing#Canada" label="preliminary inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q30506160" start="1377" end="1397" title="R v Jordan (2016)" label="2016 Jordan decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="1412" end="1435" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="1614" end="1631" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q564163" start="1643" end="1662" title="private prosecution" label="private prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="1761" end="1786" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="1805" end="1810" title="The Crown" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="1833" end="1842" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="1876" end="1887" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="1910" end="1921" title="prosecution" label="prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q203895" start="2425" end="2436" title="Crown Court" label="Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450672" start="2505" end="2527" title="Senior Courts Act 1981" label="Senior Courts Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755201" start="2562" end="2578" title="High Court judge (England and Wales)" label="High Court judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121607" start="2582" end="2595" title="Circuit judge (UK)" label="circuit judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135808" start="2601" end="2609" title="recorder (judge)" label="recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994903" start="2693" end="2713" title="Indictments Act 1915" label="Indictments Act 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994903" start="2722" end="2743" title="Indictment Rules 1971" label="Indictment Rules 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128540" start="3930" end="3954" title="High Court of Justiciary" label="High Court of Justiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="3986" end="3999" title="Lord Advocate" label="Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494979" start="4038" end="4051" title="sheriff court" label="sheriff court"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163581" start="4083" end="4101" title="solemn proceedings" label="solemn proceedings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="4175" end="4188" title="Lord Advocate" label="Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="4344" end="4359" title="Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="4367" end="4393" title="Constitution of the United States" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4456" end="4463" title="Capital punishment in the United States#Capital crimes" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595259" start="4537" end="4547" title="Grand juries in the United States" label="Grand Jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="4728" end="4740" title="incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="5097" end="5107" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252442" start="5207" end="5218" title="Information (formal criminal charge)" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="5354" end="5365" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q18536127" start="5468" end="5487" title="preliminary hearing" label="preliminary hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="6033" end="6043" title="conspiracy (criminal)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="6159" end="6165" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="6240" end="6244" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="6315" end="6330" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="6481" end="6496" title="Plea bargain" label="plea-bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754927" start="6738" end="6757" title="speaking indictment" label="speaking indictment"/>
</links>
</doc>
